ms. shamp: thank you, your honor. good morning, ladies and gentlemen of the jury. the jury: good morning. ms. shamp: first i want to thank you. i know that there has been a lot of evidence that has been presented, a lot of documents, and a lot of testimony, and i know that you were paying attention. i saw you taking notes. and so i want to thank you for your attention throughout this process on behalf of myself and my client and my entire team. when we started this case two and-a-half weeks ago i told you that this story had two parts, if you will, two chapters. the first is the way r.j. reynolds acted, its conduct, what they knew, what they did(sic), and what they did. and it is also the story about ethel hazouri, a good women who bought the defendant's cigarettes for decades, how she became addicted, and how eventually that product took her life, how she struggled with that addiction, as so many others have. but this is not two stories. it is one story. it is the story of how one company's actions and decisions and choices have impacted the life of one woman, and the life of millions of americans. it is a story about their conduct that started in 1953 and continues up until today. so let me take you back again. ethel hazouri was a good woman. she was born in alabama on a farm, she married a soldier, she followed him to jacksonville, which was his home. together they had a child. they worked hard to make a good life. she was faithful to her church, she was faithful to her family, and she was a good cook. and she smoked. we know she started smoking when she was a young girl, when she was 13 years old. we know she smoked through the 40's, the 50's, the 60's, the 70's, and 80's. and she finally quit when she was diagnosed with lung cancer and was put on oxygen that she had to take home. we know she then suffered through a terrible illness. you heard testimony about how awful the last days of her life were. and we know that her daughter nursed her through that. this case is about ethel hazouri, but it is also about r.j. reynolds. it is about the company; what they knew, what they told people, and what they hid. it is the story of both. how they are interchanged, how they are inextricably linked together. this is my closing statement. it is my opportunity to talk to you about what the evidence that was put on proved. i'm not going to rehash what all the evidence was over the last two and-a-half weeks because i know you were paying attention, but what i do want to do is talk about how that evidence that we have put on proves what we said on the first day of trial, and how it proves the things that you are going to be called upon to decide. so when i was thinking about how i would, you know, sort of summarize or put together all of this evidence and talk to you about it, and how to make it simple and easy for you to understand, i decided the easiest thing to do was to use the verdict form, because the judge is going to give you a verdict form at the end of this case which has questions on it that you are going to have to go through and answer. so what i want to do is talk about that verdict form and how the evidence in this case proves what you need to respond to on that verdict form. the first issue you are going to have to decide on the verdict form is whether ethel hazouri was a member of the engle class. and the judge will instruct you about that. and y'all will remember what the engle class is. the engle class is the class action that we talked about in the very beginning of the case where this information was tried for a year, and documents and testimony was put on, and at the end of that case the jury decided certain things. and you remember what a class action is. a class action is when a few people are able to pursue a claim on behalf of a large group. so the first question you have to decide is, is ethel hazouri part of the group? is she one of those people that the class action was pursued on behalf of? that is the first question that you have to decide. and the judge is going to instruct you what class membership is. okay. and this is what it is, and it is very simple really: to prove ethelene hazouri was a member of the engle class plaintiff must prove by the greater weight of the evidence that ethelene hazouri was addicted to smoking cigarettes containing nicotine, and if so, was such addiction a legal cause of her lung cancer? that is the class membership question, and it will be the first question on the verdict form. if the plaintiff is a member of the engle class then she is entitled to the benefits of the engle findings. now, i'm not going to go through all of these right now. we are going to through them later, but i wanted to remind you what the engle findings were: that cigarettes cause lung cancer; that the nicotine in cigarettes is addictive; that r.j. reynolds placed cigarettes on the market that were defective and unreasonably dangerous. you remember what the judge instructed you about those findings. and, in fact, those will be in the instructions that he hands back to you. the six engle findings will actually be in that paper so that you will have them to look at. so the verdict form that you have, question 1: was ethelene hazouri addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine, and if so, was such addiction a legal cause of her cancer? now i want to talk for a minute about the burden of proof, because the burden of proof is what the judge instructed you at the beginning, he will instruct you again, means the greater weight of the evidence. so when the judge says the plaintiff has to prove by the greater weight of the evidence, that means simply if you take all of the evidence that was put in during this trial and put that on one side of the scale, and the evidence to the other contrary position on the other side of the scale, which one is heavier, which side has the greater weight of the evidence? so when i talk about the issues that you are going to be called upon to decide what i'm going to try to do throughout this process is talk to you about what the evidence is that proves the things that you are going to be called upon to decide. now, one important thing is, that everything that you have been told is evidence from the stand, and all of the documents that you will have back there are evidence. if the judge let it in, if the judge allowed the witness to talk about it, and if the documents come back, then you are entitled to consider that as evidence. and you are going to have basically three categories of evidence in this case. you are going to have a lot of internal r.j. reynolds documents. they are important, and we will talk about later some of the reasons, some of the things that are in there that are important. but those things are evidence which you can utilize in order to decide whether plaintiff has proven by the greater weight of the evidence the things that she is called upon to decide. second, governmental documents and other documents. you will have -- i know you have seen me many, many times throughout the trial look at this document, which is the surgeon general's report from 2010. this is evidence. all right. and you can look when you go back there at the number of scientists who are on the front pages of it, the number of the people who contributed to putting this together. and the judge has let it back because it is evidence for you to consider. and it is a governmental publication. not all documents get to go back, but documents that have weight of the kind that these documents do, this kind of evidence, is allowed to go back in court. you will also have more surgeon general's reports. you will have monographs. you will have important monographs which talk about things like advertising, talk about things like marketing towards youth. and all of that is evidence which you are entitled to consider when rendering your opinion in this case, rendering your decision. and then finally, you have the testimony from the stand. and those three things make up what the evidence is that you are to consider when looking at the verdict form. all right. so now let us talk about what question 1 one asks, because it actually has three parts that i need to talk about. all right. the first part: was ethelene hazouri addicted to cigarettes containing cigarettes? that is part 1. the second is: was such addiction a legal cause -- that is part 2 -- of her lung cancer? that is part 3. so i want to talk about what the evidence is with respect to each of those three things. i think the first one is fairly simple, and you have heard a lot of testimony about that. so let us talk about some of the testimony that you heard. first, you heard a lot of testimony, and you will have back with you a lot of documents which talk about the nature of nicotine and the nature of addiction in general. and you heard a lot about that. the first thing, and nobody disputes that nicotine is a drug, and it is a potent drug, and everybody agreed with that. nicotine is addictive. nobody disagreed with that. that is undisputed. it is a drug and it is addictive. nicotine changes the brain. everybody talked about that. it is an actual change in the brain structure. you will remember the pet scan that dr. werner talked to you about, how the actual nicotine receptors in the brain change when the brain is exposed to nicotine. you also know that 40 to 45 percent of smokers try to quit every year. that was the testimony from the stand, and it was also the testimony in the surgeon general's report, that 40 to 45 percent of smokers try to quit every year, and less than 5 percent are successful. the very first witness in this case was dr. burns. that was a long time ago, but he was the doctor, you remember, that we put on by videotape, and he was the one who had written some of the surgeon general's reports, and he talked about what the surgeon general had done when they investigated this, and the number of studies that go into this, that 45 percent of the people who smoke try to quit every year, but only 5 percent are successful. the relapses rates are discussed in there. how many times -- you will remember dr. werner said that it typically takes between five and seven attempts before somebody is able to quit. 5. the longer you smoke, the more you smoke, the greater your likelihood is that you are addicted. everybody agreed to that. even dr. barnett, when i put her on the -- when i cross-examined her agreed to that, that the longer you smoke and the more you smoke the greater your likelihood is that you will be addicted. and finally: beginning smoking in the early teens increases the likelihood of addiction. now, that is not only discussed by both of the witnesses on the stand -- and you will remember, dr. barnett admitted that as well from the stand -- but it is also discussed in detail in the surgeon general's report, that early initiation changes the brain. you will have this document back with you as well, which is a picture of the brain in early adolescence, and how it is not fully formed, and the fact that they are studying and knowing is, is that when you change the brain while it is still developing, that the strength of those changes is greater, and the risk of addiction is greater. so what do we know about ethelene hazouri's smoking? what is the evidence with respect to whether she was addicted? what we know about addiction is part of that evidence, but also we look at what her smoking history was. the evidence is that she smoked between 15 and 30 cigarettes a day for 48 years. now, you heard the testimony about that, and nobody has disputed that testimony, that it was between 15 and 30. you remember the medical record i showed many times that says she reported 15 cigarettes day. then her daughter's testimony that she bought a carton a week continually throughout her life. 15 to 13 -- 30 cigarettes a day for more than 48 years. and the reason i used 48 years, that was if we start at 13 and stop in 1983. the evidence was she smoked all the way to 1993. but even if you give the earliest quit date that somebody testified to, 48 years of smoking. second, we know she began when she was 13 years old. she was in that period of early adolescence which makes stronger brain changes. that is part of the evidence that you have, and she was one of those whose brain was changed early and stronger. and the surgeon general's reports, and you heard dr. werner talk about from the stand, their relapse rates are greater, their difficulty in quitting is greater if they start in early adolescence and continue to smoke. we know that she was unable after multiple attempts to quit, that she tried, that she was consistently telling people she wanted to quit and she was trying to quit. you heard reverend gore, you will remember his testimony from the stand, who counseled her. you will remember that she tried hypnosis over time, that she tried prayer, that she used gum, that she was continually trying and battling and losing. battling and losing. now, importantly the question of addiction is not about whether you think she tried hard enough, whether you think that she should have, you know, thrown away her ashtray, whether you think -- that is not the question of addiction. because you remember i asked everybody, the ability to quit has really nothing to do with addiction, but it is everyone who is addicted, everyone who is addicted to anything has the ability to quit. so the question on addiction is not whether you think she tried hard enough. you can think about that and deliberate about that later on in the jury select- -- in the verdict form when it comes to comparative fault, when it comes to when you have to say what was her fault versus what -- then that is when you can look at that, not here, because the issue is whether she was physically addicted. that is it. that is the only question. you remember i asked dr. barnett that. i said, not a question of whether she could have quit. that is not part of addiction. not the question of whether she wanted to quit or how bad. the question is whether she was addicted, whether she was physically addicted. remember i asked dr. barnett, when i was asking her questions, i had an uncle who never wanted to quit, but he was addicted to alcohol. so the question you have to decide is whether she was physically addicted, and that is a simple question in this case. that is not a hard question in this case. the evidence is clear that she was physically addicted. the evidence is clear and undisputed. remember i asked dr. barnett -- i was surprised she did volunteer this. i said, was ethelene hazouri's brain changed? she said yes. she said, yes, her brain was changed. her brain was changed, and it was changed in adolescence, and there is no real question but that ethelene hazouri was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine. now, you have the testimony from dr. werner. and you will remember dr. werner from the stand. dr. werner is a professor at the university of florida. she is vice-chairman of the department of psychiatry at the university of florida. she is assistant professor and director of the forensic psychiatric division at the university of florida. she runs the forensic -- along with a codirector she runs the forensic psychiatric division at the university of florida. she is a highly-credentialed psychiatrist. she is at the spring hill health center at the university of florida in gainesville. you remember me asking her if she has published articles in journals. remember me asking her if she teaches. and she does. she teaches addiction. you remember she talked about she has fellows who are studying addiction who shadow her while she is treating, because she is instructing at the university of florida future psychiatrists doing what they do. she is actually authored a chapter in a textbook on drugs, alcohol and disorders, in a textbook. she is written a book that is published, and they use that textbook in order to teach. and you will recall she testified that just right before she came to testify she had been appointed by the governor to go out and interview an inmate to decide if he was mentally competent to face execution. dr. werner is a highly-qualified psychiatrist who came in to talk to you about addiction and about what we know about addiction. and what she told you was, is that ethel hazouri met the dsm-iv for addiction. and she talked to you about the strength of the association and how -- she talked to you about how the fact that she was addicted for -- i mean, how the fact that she used nicotine for so long, how that impacted addiction. and she talked about the changes in the brain, and she told you that ethel hazouri, based upon her medical judgment, was addicted to the nicotine in cigarettes. and she talked to you about those things, and that was her opinion. now, the defendants brought in -- oh, i do want to mention. she also talked about three ways that she looked at in order to make her determination. she talked about the fagerstrom and the cage test. and you will remember her talking about that. and i think there was a juror question about the fagerstrom. and both witnesses, even dr. barnett, said that the fagerstrom is a screening instrument, not a diagnosing instrument. and because somebody was not in front of her she could not answer all the questions on the screening instrument. but when she looked at the dsm-iv categories, she met them. right. and you will remember what the dsm-iv categories were. tolerance. and we talked about that, and i showed dr. barnett tolerance, and how the dsm-iv actually talks about nicotine tolerance. and what that means is that you do not throw up, you do not have that noxious reaction which you would have if you tried to smoke 15 cigarettes the very first time you smoked. that is tolerance to nicotine. and she met that. whether she had withdrawal symptoms. and she talked about what those withdrawal symptoms are: anxiety, restlessness, a feeling of agitation, and that if you smoke then you feel calm, that you feel relaxed, that it takes the edge off. and that is not a -- in some ways it is a subjective thing, but it is actually a physical thing that is going on in the body. and you will remember dr. werner talked about that physical thing that is going. what is happening is those receptors are empty and they need to get filled by dopamine, and so the body is saying fill them. and it is very basic to limbic system of the brain. she also said that persons use larger amounts over time than intended, and that has to do with whether she was trying to quit and could not. trying to quit and could not. a persistent desire or unsuccessful efforts to cut down or control use. important social, occupational, recreational activities given up. and use is continued despite knowledge of physical or psychological problems caused or exacerbated by the substance. now, what did the defendants put up? they put up dr. barnett. that is the witness that they brought to you to talk -- to say that dr. werner is wrong, that dr. werner is incorrect that she is addicted. now, what are the qualifications of dr. barnett? she is a sole practitioner. i'm sorry? (off the record.) the court: i'm sorry. i hit the button by mistake and he could not get in. ms. shamp: all right. what did the defendants put up in contrast to dr. werner? they brought you dr. deborah barnett. you will remember dr. barnett is a sole practitioner. she works in a little office in tampa. she is never taught anywhere, she is never written anything for publication, she is never taught anybody else, she is never even worked with anybody else. she is never taught, she is never lectured, she is never written. she is a little solo shop. and that is who they brought in to tell people that ethelene hazouri was not addicted. and the judge is going to instruct you about the believability of witnesses. and i think you are entitled to consider the testimony from the stand with respect to whether what dr. barnett said is believable, whether she is credible. and you will remember my cross-examination of her and how she put up the slides about dopamine, and how she testified that the dopamine in cocaine was so much higher. but then when we asked her about the dosage levels of those she said those were dosage levels that would kill a person. and then we asked her questions that i found to be incredible answers. like for example, if someone is addicted to crack cocaine does that influence their choice to use it? no. if someone is addicted to nicotine does that influ- -- no. very interesting what dr. barnett said. and i think we have to consider what -- the -- the -- the sort of implication of what her testimony is. because you remember what she talked about a lot was that ethel hazouri could quit. ethel hazouri could quit, right, and therefore she was not addicted. but when i pressed her on that she agreed that every single person can quit, and certainly she has to agree based on statistics that there are people who are addicted. but this is what the implication of her testimony is. well, if she can quit -- if she had quit back in the 60's or 50's then she was not addicted, right, because she quit. but if she did not quit, if she did not quit, well, then she just wanted to. right. she just wanted to keep smoking. think about it. under dr. barnett's theory nobody would be addicted, that nobody is addicted. and in fact, you heard dr. barnett say of the 19 time she is been asked by the tobacco companies she cannot remember a one where she said the person was addicted. she talked a lot about the maladaptive pattern, but she refused to read the words that are written in english and how this is supposed to be said. the words written in english say: the maladaptive pattern of substance use leading to clinically significant impairment or distress as manifested by three or more of the following. remember we talked about what the word manifested by -- that means that you have to look at the criteria. you do not just look at this in a vacuum and say, well, did she have clinically significant? clinically significant means that she has three or more of the following criteria. she refused to read that sentence as it is written in english. but if you remember what she said, in her mind -- the only example she gave you of somebody who would be addicted, remember the only example she gave you was somebody who needed medicine, and instead bought their cigarettes instead of buying medicine. that is it? that is the only person in america who is addicted to nicotine in cigarettes? not believable. it is estimated that 80 to ninety percent of regular smokers have nicotine dependence. 80 to ninety percent have nicotine dependence. that is what the statistics show. 80 to ninety percent of regular smokers have nicotine dependence, and in fact, up to 25 percent of the united states population have nicotine dependence. but we do not just have dr. werner and dr. barnett. we also have the company's own internal documents in addition to the scientific stuff. we have their own documents that tell you that nicotine is a potent drug. they know more about nicotine than anybody. they know it is a potent drug. their own internal confidential documents say that the tobacco industry may be thought of as being a specialized, highly ritualized, and stylized segment of the pharmaceutical industry. they are a drug company. tobacco products uniquely contain and deliver nicotine, a potent drug. this is exhibit 302, which you will have back with you, where they talk about what they know about nicotine. they also talk about it being the sine qua non. remember that testimony? sine qua non is latin for without which it is nothing. that is the latin, without which it is nothing. and nicotine in a cigarette, without that the cigarette is nothing. nicotine is the sine qua non of smoking. it is the reason people smoke. that is undisputed in their own documents. you will also have back with you this nida document which talks about, very interesting, how what we know about addiction has changed over time, that it is a fundamental change in the brain. as result of scientific research we know that addiction is a disease that affects both brain and behavior. both brain and behavior. you have all of these things back there which go to the question of whether ethel hazouri was addicted. put all of that together, put all of that evidence over here that ethel hazouri was addicted. and like i said, remember, this question is not about whether she could have quit, how hard she tried, whether she chose to smoke, none of that. it is simply a question of was she addicted, was she addicted to the substance? the all of the evidence supports that decision. the next question that you have to say is, was her addiction a legal cause of cancer? the surgeon general has told us that nicotine addiction is the fundamental reason that individuals persist in using tobacco products. this comes from exhibit 487. now, it will not look like this back there because we had to copy it for you, but you will have 487 back with you. and this is the 2010 surgeon general's report. this is the fourth chapter, which talks about nicotine addiction is the fundamental reason that people persist in smoking tobacco. but we know even more than that. we know that the tobacco company itself knows that addiction is the reason people smoke. in a 1980 document they say: we cannot defend continued smoking as free choice if the person was addicted. that is important. their own document knows that. they cannot say this is free choice. and i expect steve geise to get up and talk about this being a choice, this was her choice. they cannot defend it as free choice if the person was addicted. remember, this part is not about whether she chose to smoke, whether she could have quit earlier. this is about whether she was addicted, and whether that addiction compelled her to smoke. now, importantly the jury -- the judge is going to instruct you in the charges you will have back, in order to be regarded as a legal cause of death addiction to smoking cigarettes need not be the only cause. need not be the only cause. now, i suspect the defendants will put on evidence that said that in addition to addiction that she might have smoked because -- i do not know why -- she chose to, she wanted to. that does not matter. we do not have to prove that addiction is the only cause, just that it was a cause. just that it was a cause. if it operated in conjunction with other causes it is still a cause, still a cause of cancer, the addiction. right. and we believe based upon the surgeon general's report, which i do not believe they have any evidence to dispute, nicotine addiction is the primary reason, the fundamental reason that individuals persist in using tobacco products. addiction is, as discussed, a need over and over. it is a huge problem. it is the addiction that is the problem. far worse than the lung cancer, addiction is the continued use of this product. and finally the last question is about -- for question 1 -- is lung cancer. i'll talk about this briefly, ladies and gentlemen, because i think the evidence on this is undisputed that she had lung cancer. i think the defense will try to tell you that there is no proof or evidence that she had lung cancer. the evidence of lung cancer is enormous in this case. everything points to this being primary lung cancer. first we have the physician's attestation from the physician who was taking care of her at the time she was hospitalized who says this was primary lung cancer. you also have the medical records. you have the medical records from dr. prokes, who diagnoses it as primary lung cancer, adenocarcinoma of the lung. you have the death certificate, a certification from the state of florida that says that it was primary lung cancer. and you also have dr. stephen bagnoli, a local pulmonologist who practices in this community, who looked at all the evidence that was given to him with respect to all the medical records from her primary practice doctor, all the chest x-rays, everything, and said -- he said, i do not have any doubt, there is no question this was a primary lung cancer. the attestation is in es -- not es -- this is exhibit 4. this is a page of exhibit 4 that you will have back, p4. primary lung cancer. three places in exhibit 4, the medical records of dr. prokes. diagnosis of lung cancer is one. the patient has poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma of the lung. 3. 1 with a little 0, which means primary. you can put a 2 with a little 0 means secondary. 3 with a little 0 means tertiary. 1 with a little 0 means primary. mr. geise: objection, your honor. there is been no testimony on that. the court: i think the jury can make that determination, whether or not -- okay. ms. shamp: you will remember that dr. okun said from the stand that a 1 with a little circle next to it means primary. remember his testimony. mr. geise: same objection. the court: all right. i'll overrule the objection. ms. shamp: thank you. you will also have the death certificate. that is plaintiff's exhibit 1, the death certificate which says metastatic lung carcinoma. and that means that it was lung carcinoma that spread, spread throughout her body, and that is why she died. lung carcinoma that spread. now, dr. okun came in and said -- y'all remember dr. okun. he was the defendant's expert who came in and said, i just cannot tell. i just -- i cannot tell. it is very important to say what he did not say. he did not say it was not lung cancer. he did not say this is not lung cancer. he did not say i disagree with dr. prokes. i asked him that specific question. i said, do you disagree, and he said, if somebody else made that diagnosis decades ago with information i do not have, i cannot disagree with that. that is what he said. he did not have the same information that dr. prokes had. now, remember he fought me on that. he fought me on whether dr. prokes had the patient and he did not. and you know that dr. prokes had the patient, to do an examination of the patient, and dr. prokes diagnosed lung cancer. he had a long-term relationship with the patient. this was not somebody he just saw in the hospital. dr. prokes was ethel hazouri's doctor. and you will have the medical records where he was the one who had been doing her primary care, who did her pap smear for her, sent her to get her mammograms, who did her checkups, who did her physicals. he is the guy. he is had a long-term relationship with her. we also know he had a biopsy of the lung, of the left lung. and you will remember dr. okun saying, i cannot dispute that it was an adenocarcinoma, because there was a biopsy done. he said, i do not dispute that she had cancer and that it was an adenocarcinoma. he said, i cannot dispute that, because there was a biopsy that was done. but importantly she also she had a nine-day workup. remember, she was not just somebody who went in the hospital and came back out. she was in there for nine days getting tests done, getting a workup done, and when she was finally discharged she had the diagnosis of lung cancer. no question about it. not we are not sure. in fact, not only a diagnosis of lung cancer, but a prognosis that she only had six months to live. and she had a team working with her. that is what the evidence is. this was not dr. prokes working alone. dr. prokes had a team. and dr. okun said that is how it should be done. that is how it was done. she had a team. she had a board certified pulmonologist working with her and a board certified oncologist that worked with dr. prokes as a team and diagnosed lung cancer. ladies and gentlemen, that is what dr. prokes had. the chest x-rays. now, i guess i have to address this because i think the defendants will about the chest x-ray, and the fact that the last chest x-ray did not show acute changes, though it shows chronic changes. and you will have all the chest x-rays back there, and you can look for yourself, and you will see that for months going back that there were problems in the left lung, that they are noting something going on in the left lung. they are not diagnosing it as a mass, but they go back and say something is there in the left lung. and this is very important. you will remember the testimony from dr. burns, which i found really interesting, that how cancer is caused in the lungs, that when the substance goes into the lung it actually paralyzes the cilia, the little things that clean your lung, they keep your lung clean, and when it is paralyzed then carcinogens are able to deposit onto the cells, and instead of being cleaned out, because they have been paralyzed the bad stuff lays there, and when it lays there it causes changes in the cells, eventually the cells become precancerous, and then they become cancerous, and then they break off. they get into the bloodstream and that is how they start to spread. and that is a cancerous invasion. and the reason i put up these slides again and talked to you about it was is because it is indisputable that cancer grows. cancer grows. dr. okun said that. everybody said cancer grows. all right. so assuming that you feel like you are not sure whether it was primary lung cancer, then this is what their theory has to be, is that there was a cancer somewhere else in her body, somewhere else in her body, and that it was growing, and a piece of it broke off. those pieces are microscopic, teeny tiny tiny tiny, because they travel through the blood system. he put up that exhibit. they travel through the blood system. then this theory would be it traveled through the blood system and landed in her lung, and then it started growing in her lung. okay. so it had to be somewhere else first, break off, travel somewhere else, land in her lung, and then grow that big in her lung. grow so big in the lung that it was inoperable, that she had six months to live. it is not possible that it could be somewhere else and nobody see it, because it is the same cell type. it will grow at the same rate. so if it was in her colon it would be as big as it would be in her lung. bigger, because it started there first. if it was in her stomach, if it was in somewhere else it would be bigger; within her breast, it would be bigger. it was nowhere else. it was only in her lung. that is important. that throws their theory out of the water that it could have been somewhere. besides the theory, nobody even testified it was somewhere else. the evidence is undisputed with respect to that. it was there in the left lung earlier, they just missed it. they did not see it. it was there. it had to be there. they just did not see it. it is not possible that it could have been somewhere else, come up there, land there, and just appeared. it had to grow. right. so it was there three months earlier, and the x-ray is going to show you it was there. they just did not see it. question 1. was ethelene hazouri addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine, and if so, was such addiction a legal cause of her cancer? it has three parts, and the evidence, the evidence, when you put it all over here, stack it all up, overwhelming and clear she is a member of the engle class. those three things, the evidence is clear, she is a member of the engle class. knowing she is a member of the engle class, then she is entitled to the findings of engle class. and now let us talk about what they are. cigarettes cause lung cancer. that is finding 1. she is entitled to that finding. nicotine in cigarettes is addictive. r.j. reynolds placed cigarettes on the market that were defective and unreasonably dangerous. dr. proctor talked to you a lot about this. the fact that makes them defective is that they can be inhaled. that is a new thing. not true of pipes. mr. geise: your honor, i object. this is with regard to what the findings -- the court: let us come to the sidebar. (sidebar outside the hearing of the jury.) mr. geise: first of all, i apologize, i do not mean to interrupt, but when she says -- puts up the finding and starts saying what the defect is, i believe it is reproving the findings or talking about the findings, and there is no burden of proof what the defect is or an issue in this case to say dr. proctor said the defect is inhalability. ms. shamp: he did talk about what the defect was, your honor. mr. geise: no. we came to sidebar. ms. shamp: we did talk about what the defect is in cigarettes. mr. geise: i objected and we came to sidebar, and talked about this is starting to reprove the findings. ms. shamp: your honor, i'll move on. the court: i think his objection is relating the findings to the evidence in this case. okay. mr. geise: thank you, your honor. (following the sidebar the following further proceedings were had before the jury.) ms. shamp: the third finding, product defect. r.j. reynolds placed cigarettes on the market that were defective and unreasonably dangerous. fraud. we all know what the word fraud means. fraud by concealment. r.j. reynolds concealed or omitted material information not otherwise known or available, knowing that the material was false and misleading, or failed to disclose a material fact concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes, or both. finding 5. conspiracy. r.j. reynolds agreed with other tobacco companies to conceal or omit information regarding the health effects of cigarettes or their addictive nature with the intention that smokers and the public would rely on this information to their detriment. 6. that r.j. reynolds was negligent. the judge will instruct you that the findings may not be denied or questioned, that they must carry the same weight they would have if you had determined them yourself. if she is a member of the class the defendants cannot deny it and they cannot question it. it is proven, and it carries the same weight as if you had found it yourself. so let us turn to what the next question is on the jury form -- the verdict form, and this is an important one. state whether r.j. reynolds' concealment or omission of a material fact about the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes, or both, were a legal cause of ethelene hazouri's death. now, the two next questions go together. okay. we are going to talk about question 3. question 4 -- i mean, question 2 is fraudulent concealment, did they conceal, and 3, conspiracy to conceal. okay. state whether r.j. reynolds' agreement to conceal or omit a material fact regarding the health effects of cigarette smoking or the addictive nature was a legal cause of ethelene hazouri's death. now, this is a very important finding, and i expect the defendants to talk a lot about this one. and i call their defense the it-does not-matter defense. it does not matter. what i expect them to come up and talk about and say is that it does not matter what we said, it does not matter that we lied, because it did not hurt ethelene hazouri. it did not impact her in particular, so it does not matter what we said. it does not matter. now, i think this is important because you, when thinking about question 2, have the benefit of finding 4. now, they are going to debate heatedly whether what they did made any difference. they are going to talk about whether ethel hazouri already knew, or everybody knew. but the finding you have is binding, and that is that reynolds' concealed or omitted material information that was not otherwise known. now, think about that when they put up all the reader's digest articles, and newsweek, and all the other things which they say everybody knew. you are bound by this though, which said that they hid stuff that was not otherwise known. that is important, because i think reynolds' defense is going to be everybody knew. everybody knew that smoking caused cancer, that it was dangerous, that it was hazardous, and that ethel hazouri knew. so let us talk about what the evidence is, about what it was they knew, okay, because it is not just the question of is it bad for you, you know, is it -- is it harmful. that is not the question. there are a lot of things that are bad for you, that are harmful. right. it is bad for you to eat that extra piece of cake, or not get you exercise, or, you know, have a glass of whiskey at night. you know, that is not -- we know that is proof for it, that it is bad. this is very different from what they knew. they knew that smoking their product caused cancer. they knew it in 1953. the teague survey: tend to confirm the relationship between heavy and prolonged tobacco smoking and cancer of the lung. they knew it in 1953. they knew that in their smoke were carcinogens, cancer-causing agents. cancer- causing agents in their smoke. in 1962, this is their own internal scientist wrote: obviously, obviously the amount of evidence accumulated to indict cigarette smoke as a health hazard is overwhelming, the evidence challenging this indictment is scant. i will point out, these are internal documents, not documents that were shared with the public. this is an internal document on what they said. not just about health effects, but the addictive nature of their product. this is in 1953: it is fortunate for us that cigarettes are a habit they cannot break. they knew that. they knew that. fortunate for us. and you will have this document back with you. this is document 168 called the forwarding memorandum. they also knew, 1963: moreover, nicotine is addictive. we are then in the business of selling nicotine, an addictive drug. this is what they knew. and i used this just recently: we cannot ever be comfortable selling a product which most of our customers would stop using if they could. these are the things they knew. what did they say? they issued the frank statement: there is no proof that cigarette smoking is one of the causes of cancer. this is what they were telling people after the teague memorandum: we believe the products we make are not injurious to health. you remember what the circulation was of the frank statement. it was in every single newspaper that had more than 50,000 people. every single newspaper with a circulation of more than 50,000, this was in. millions of copies. they engaged in a campaign of doubt and denial. we showed all of these during the case at one point or another, and you will remember all of them testifying. these are representatives and what they say: howard cullman saying, we are just not sure, and if there is anything injurious, if we ever find it, we will take it out. after they knew there were carcinogens. bill dwyer, ed horrigan, joseph cullman, robert heimann. i'm going to play one of them. (the video clip was played for the jury, and was interpreted and transcribed to the best of the reporter's ability as follows.) now throughout your tenure at american, and it was not only american's position, but your position, that cigarettes were not injurious to health. is that accurate? through my tenure? yes. yes, that is so. that is something american tobacco led the public to believe; is that correct? yes. it is a statement that american tobacco puts great reliance on. we issued that statement, yes, and we believe. as far as you are concerned a person is justified in relying on that statement? yes. (at the conclusion the following video clip was played for the jury, and was interpreted and transcribed to the best of the reporter's ability as follows.) (inaudible)american disagrees with the warning, does not it? we certainly do. you do not think it harms smokers or (inaudible) do you? we believe our product is not injurious to health. as far as you are concerned is the surgeon general simply wrong in concluding that cigarette smoking causes lung cancer? i would use the term misguided. misguided. then i take it that your opinion is he is wrong. i'm simply trying to be polite about it. okay. but not being polite about it, in your opinion he is wrong; correct? dead wrong. congress is wrong requiring these warnings; correct? we do not think they are justified. so they are wrong? they are wrong. (the video clips concluded.) ms. shamp: this is what they said. and then you remember they testified in front of congress. all seven heads of the major tobacco companies raised their hand up in front of congress under oath and said that their products were not addictive, that cigarettes are not addictive. this is what they were putting out in press releases to the american public: some governmental officials maintain -- and you have seen what they maintain -- that cigarette smoking is the number one public health problem. still is. we believe the number one problem is the extent to which these officials knowingly mislead the american public. that is what they were saying about the government officials who were trying to get the word out. in addition they are putting out these documents. and these are important, ladies and gentlemen. you will have all of these back there. the scientific perspective of the cigarette controversy. smoking and health, the continuing controversy. they are creating a false controversy that does not exist in 1984. and where are they sending these? to doctors. to doctors. remember in 1960, fifty percent of doctors in america smoked cigarettes. fifty percent. doctors are the place where people -- you heard dr. barnett say on the stand that is one place where people can have a difference in smoking cessation. it is not an accident they were focussed on doctors. it is not an accident that they were sending these to doctors, not because they wanted to keep those, you know, small percentage of doctors smoking. it is because the enormous impact doctors have on peoples' knowledge about their health. and they put that campaign out to peoples' doctors. and the campaign up until -- why more research is needed. and it worked. it worked. this is the distribution of that document. you will have this out which says where that went. the scientific perspective on the cigarette controversy was released. 205,000 copies were printed. it was sent to 176,000 doctors across the country. it went to press releases, to newspapers. everywhere they were getting out this scientific controversy that did not exist. this is what their theme was. this is what they were trying to do. they are trying to create doubt. now, at this time people are hearing it might be hazardous, it might be a problem, but they are also hearing the other message, which is nobody has proven it. and you know what? keep smoking, because -- and you will see these document. remember i showed you. keep smoking, because if we find something hazardous we will just pull it on out. you will be find. they knew they could not pull it out. they knew they could not. but keep smoking. keep smoking. and people who are addicted want that, they want that crutch, that -- that reason to -- to -- you know, it is not been proven, it is still a controversy, it is open, they do not know for sure. they marketed while they were doing that. now remember the enormous budget spent on advertising, on making it look attractive and normal, happy and fun. right. enormous amounts of money. enormous amounts of money making it look harmless. harmless. cigarette advertising reaches virtually all americans who can either read or understand the spoken word. and we put a lot of documents in -- i'm not going to go through all of them -- about the amount of money that they spent on advertising. we put in a lot of the advertisements themselves. you will have those back with you. enormous amounts of money on marketing and advertising, on bombarding the american public. cigarettes are the -- the most heavily advertising product in america. it is been estimated that the six major cigarette companies spent a billion dollars in 1980 to sell their product. enormous amounts spent. now, in 1967 the warning labels go on. and you will remember about -- this testimony about that. the warning label has not succeeded in overcoming the prevalent attitude towards cigarette smoking created and maintained by the cigarette companies through their advertising, particularly the barrage of commercials on television which portray smoking as harmless, enjoyable activity which is not habit forming, and involves no hazards to health. this is what they were putting out to the american public, and this is from the ftc, document 269. you will have this back with you. this is what they are saying, we cannot compete. you will remember, i do not think i put it up here, but -- the court: excuse me. go ahead and finish that. ms. shamp: i can stop, your honor. the court: all right. i think we need to take a break, a restroom break. ms. shamp: okay. the court: step back in the jury room, please. (the jury withdrew to the jury room.) the court: ms. shamp, i'm sorry to interrupt you, but mr. dean indicated that one of the jurors signaled for a break. ms. shamp: sure. that is fine. the court: we will take a quick break ourselves. (short break.) the court: all right. are you ready to proceed now that mr. kalil is back, ms. shamp? see if they are ready. if they are, bring them in, please. the bailiff: jurors entering. (the jury returned to the courtroom, was seated in the jury box, and the following further proceedings were had.) the court: all right. ms. shamp, you may proceed. ms. shamp: thank you. the ftc report, as i was discussing, talks about whether the warnings were working. but we also have, and you will have back there whether the public was confused, whether it was working. not only dr. proctor's testimony about that, but you will also have documents that say the data indicates that substantial numbers of consumers seriously misunderstand and underestimate the risk of suffering these health problems as a result of smoking. that is exhibit p367 that you will have back with you. this is a document from their own internal files dated 1978, that says: very few consumers are aware -- in 1978, very few consumers are aware of the effects of nicotine, i.e., its addictive nature and that nicotine is a poison. this is their own internal document saying what very few people are aware of. this is their public relations effort. you will remember that they hired that company, hill & knowlton, to do the public relations campaign. the first big scare continues on the wane. meaning that it is going down, that the effects are going down. but there is also important things that they put out, the evidence that they were putting out. you will remember the true article. i just have to talk to you about it, because the true article was written by one of their own people, an internal person that says: to smoke or not to smoke, that is still the question. are cigarettes really hazardous to your health like the package says? nobody knows. in any case, americans are smoking more than ever and curiously worrying less. you will remember what dr. proctor said, that stanley frank, the person who wrote it, was paid by the tobacco companies to write this, and how many millions it was. now, i expect this to be a big point for the defense, that they want to hold the line right here, because this is really critical. they want you to check no, that this was not a cause of ethel hazouri's death. what they want you to say is it did not matter. what we did, the lies we told, all these advertisements, it did not matter, because everybody knew. everybody knew. they really want to hold the line on there. this is a difficult one for us, because our client is dead, so she cannot come -- she cannot come in here and testify about what she relied upon and what you heard. this is why i put up this jury instruction that you will have back there, okay, because it is important. and the judge will instruct you, right after you hear the claims about concealment and fraudulent concealment that we have been talking about: as to each of the plaintiff's claims of concealment and conspiracy to conceal i hereby instruct you that you may consider all of the evidence in this case in determining whether plaintiff has satisfied the reliance requirement of those. all right. so you are allowed to use your common sense. and this is another instruction you will have: you may draw reasonable inferences from the evidence. now, what the defendants are going to say i expect is that there is no evidence that she heard any of these statements, there is no evidence that those scientific papers had any impact on her. they are going to say that nothing we said, all the lies we told, all -- all the advertisements we did when we knew that did not make a difference because they cannot prove it caused her to smoke one more cigarette. but you are entitled to consider all of the evidence and to draw the reasonable inferences. and the reasonable inferences are that she was a part of the american public, that she was watching television, reading the newspaper. you heard evidence about that. you even heard evidence that she was singing a winston jingle: winston tastes good like a cigarette should. you will hear -- you have heard that evidence, and you are entitled to infer from that that just like the majority of the american public she was confused or in doubt, or it just caused her to smoke a little bit longer. you know, a very important little piece of evidence that came in today, that came in during the testimony, came from the reading. you remember when jimmy, her grandson, was read? do you remember what he said? 2013. it has not been proven that cigarettes cause lung cancer. it has not been proven. their campaign has worked. this is a member of her own family. it has not been proved, not a hundred percent. this is a very important piece of the case, ladies and gentlemen. number 3 and 4. they are going to try and say that everybody knew, everybody knew, when what they were selling was doubt. and they were spending a lot of money to say that. doubt is our product. whether r.j. reynolds' concealment or omission of a material fact about the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes, or both, were a legal cause of ethelene hazouri's death. they want to hold the line on that one. ladies and gentlemen, the evidence is that she was a part of the american public during this period of time. now, what they are going to try and talk about is that not only did everybody know, but that ethel hazouri knew. and i expect them to talk about it like they did in opening, maybe even put up their chart, that in 1957 she had a conversation with her minister, reverend gore, and that reverend gore said it is not good for you, and that subsequently other people in her life said -- and i think she said right on after one of his sermons in 1962. right on. but, ladies and gentlemen, does that prove that she knew that there were carcinogens in smoke? is what their defense really going to be that the ama, the american medical association -- remember them saying they did not come out with a position on it, that the national cancer institute did not come out with a position on it, and finding 4 four, that their concealing material information about the addictive nature of their cigarettes. but that terry gore knew. that because terry gore, a minister, that he knew everything, and so she was fully informed. take a moment to think about it for just one minute. this is their product. not terry gore's product. this is their responsibility to tell people what is in their product, what they knew. they are literally going to stand up you here and say that they have no obligation to be truthful to the american public because if reverend gore told her that is good enough. she knew, she well knew. the facts just do not support that. the facts and the evidence that you have. and that is what you have to decide by the greater weight of the evidence the facts and the evidence show, and not just about the health risks. a lot -- you know, when we start these cases out sometimes we think they are about the health risks, lung cancer, but as the cases go on you really begin to see that they are a lot more about addiction, about the way in which the products are designed to stimulate addiction. and you remember there was a lot of testimony about that. and fraudulent concealment is not just that they concealed the health effects, but the addictive nature, that they concealed the way they design their cigarettes. remember the addition of the ammonia. there were a lot of documents about how they added ammonia so that it can freebase and get the higher hit of nicotine. the fact that you inhale the substance makes it far more addictive. remember dr. werner talked about the difference between powder cocaine and crack cocaine, and how much more addictive crack is because you inhale it so you get the hit quickly, and got more repeated and repeated doses. this is all information that they knew and used in order to create and sustain addiction. but their formulation begs the question. the question is not whether everybody knew this was harmful, or whether ethel hazouri -- the question is whether their actions -- what they said or did not say kept her smoking even a little bit longer. there is one more really important piece of evidence about that. what did she do in the 1960's? she switched to filters. remember, she switched to filters. and they were putting out evidence -- they were putting out advertising, a campaign that filters were safer, when they knew that they were not. and you will have the evidence back there that they knew they were not, because people compensate. and you will remember the testimony about compensation, and that is that they draw harder on a cigarette in order to get the nicotine hit that they need. and they knew that. they knew that. and she switched to filters. and the american public was mislead into believing that filters were safer, that they were a less hazardous product. and they knew they were not. remember i read that with dr. figlar from the surgeon general's report, that the industry knew and misled the american public, and misled public health community, how they had designed their cigarettes specifically to trick the smoking machine. the smoking machine said there would be less tar, but they knew that the way that they were smoked it did not deliver less tar. ladies and gentlemen, i think this is probably the most important question that you have to answer, because if you check no here, if you check no, then they get away with it. if you check no here then that means it did not matter, it does not matter all those lies we told, because it did not cause her cancer, or the 12 million deaths that it is caused since 1964 in this country. this is important, the fraudulent concealment. the evidence is that it does matter, and what they said did matter. the one thing i want to ask you, when you hear mr. geise stand up and talk about the reader's digest and what reader's digest was saying, what newsweek was saying about cancer, while all of that was being said what were they saying? ask yourself that. when all that was being said, what were they saying? because it is their product, not reader's digest product. whether r.j. reynolds' agreement to conceal or omit a material fact regarding the health effects of cigarette smoking or addictive nature of cigarette smoking was a legal cause of ethelene hazouri's death. one other piece -- i'll put it back -- i did not talk about it. the plaintiff does not have to prove that it was the only cause. i have to go way back. i'm sorry. just that it was a cause. that is important. sorry i had to go all the way back to find it. it is important. we do not have to prove that what they did was the only cause. but all you have to say is that was a cause, a contributing factor. and if you believe it was a contributing factor then you can check yes. go back to where we were. now, i talked -- i told you that i would get here, and this is the comparative fault. and we talked about that in the beginning of this trial, about it is not all or nothing. and remember when they talk about choice, or whether she chose, or whether she tried hard enough to quit, that does not go to the addiction issue, it just goes to this area, whether there is comparative fault here. and the operative word here is compare. and i bet some of you might be wondering if the engle findings apply why did she spend all that time putting on all this evidence about their conduct? why do we have those boxes of exhibits. if the findings bind us that they did fraudulently conceal, why do we have to put on all this? and it is for this piece. because you have to compare their conduct to ethel hazouri. so let us talk about what the evidence is with respect to comparing their conduct. and the word that i like to say, is which conduct is more culpable. and that is a fancy word for saying blameworthy. whose conduct is more blameworthy? i want to talk about some of the things they did that i think are particularly blameworthy, that you will have evidence of. in addition to what we already talked about, what they knew and what they hid, now it is this one, what they did. they marketed their product to kids. manufacturers have studied the 14- to 20-year- old market. creating a fad in this market may be a great bonanza. i will not show you all the youth marketing documents. you have seen them all before. they are overwhelming. current youth jargon in high school american history books might be a good start at finding a good brand name, an imaging theme for us. this is in a r.j. reynolds confidential memorandum. let us get in there to the high school kids. this is 309. 309. really important document. this is page 3 of it, and you will have this back there. this is where claude teague talks about how do we get that vulnerable teenager to want to smoke cigarettes. he literally talks about it. we need to make sure we appeal to his self image. we need to make sure he keeps smoking even if he finds it unpleasant, because he will find it unpleasant. the -- and then this part i've underlined, which is on page 3. the expected or derived psychological effects are largely responsible for influencing the presmoker to try smoking, and provide sufficient motivation during the learning period to keep the learner going despite the physical unpleasantness and awkwardness of the period. this is also in the same document. this is their own words. this is when the labels were being put on. finally, if the older establishment is preaching against smoking, the antiestablishment sentiment discussed above would cause the young to want to be defiant and smoke. thus, a new brand aimed at the young group should not be in any way promoted as a health brand, and perhaps should carry some implied risk. in this sense the warning on the label might be a plus for us. they are marketing their products to our children. might be a plus for us. and, second, what they did. nicotine manipulation. we discussed in detail that they knew that this was a delivery mechanism to deliver nicotine, a potent drug, and that their cigarette smokers had a certain necessary requirement of nicotine, a dosage. and you will see documents in there where they talk about what is our target dose, what is the amount of nicotine we have to get to them. and then you remember the fda document, the patent document that i discussed with dr. figlar about all those patent documents, about how we put additional nicotine into the product. this document that you will have back there, which talks about the manipulation of the nicotine levels in order to get the target dose and keep people addicted. this document you will have back, 240: certainly the nicotine level of b&w, brown & williamson, cigarettes given in the above table was not obtained by accident. they have a certain amount of nicotine that they put in order to create and sustain addiction. the way they use additives, the way they use paper in order to create and sustain addiction. this is critical for them. so let us talk about what r.j. reynolds knew. let us compare the fault. r.j. reynolds concealed or omitted with the intention that smokers would rely. i did not make that up. that is from the finding. that is from the finding, is that they did it with the intention to rely, the intention that smokers would rely on it. now, two things i'm going back to. i'm going back to reliance. you remember the video clip we just watched. do you want smokers to rely upon it? yes, we expected them to rely. the finding. did you do it with the intention that they would rely on it? yes, we did it with the intention that they would rely to their detriment. and they manipulated the level of nicotine to keep people smoking. and all the other things. i did not have enough room to put all the other things on the r.j. reynolds comparative fault side. but then compare it to what ethelene hazouri did. she did not quit soon enough. that is right, she did not. she tried. she started smoking when she was a kid, when her brain was not fully formed. she tried to quit. the statistics are that every year 40 to 45 percent of smokers try to quit. less than 5 percent are successful. she did not make is. she was not one of the 5 percent. and you wonder when you look at that statistic, 5 percent, how long have they been smoking. are those the ones that started when they were 13? what if we looked at the statistics for the ones who were 13 who had been smoking for 20, 30 years, how successful are they in being able to quit? that is her bad conduct. she did not make it. compare that to what you know r.j. reynolds did. you have to put on the form what percentage of fault that you find was a legal cause of ethelene's hazouri's death. and you are given a blank for r.j. reynolds tobacco company and a blank for ethel hazouri. we do not believe that when you compare those faults that her fault is any. but if -- if you believe that it should be attributed we will accept your determination and your collective consciences as you are required to do in your deliberations. but we think that number has got to be small when you compare. and that is what you have to do. do not look at her conduct in isolation. that is not permissible. it is a comparison of her conduct to their conduct. and when you compare intentional conduct to what she did when she was addicted by a substance that they knew, we think that number has to be small on her and large on them. the next question that you have to address on the verdict form -- there are six questions. this is number 5. this is damages. what is the amount of damages, if any, which sharon odum sustain for her mental pain and suffering as a result of her mother's injuries and death? now, i've talked a little bit about what the evidence will show, how she was a good woman, how she loved her daughter, loved her family, and her daughter loved her, that they were very close. you remember mr. kalil reading you the death tables, the mortality tables. and the judge will tell you that you are to consider, you may consider those death tables in considering the length of time that ethel hazouri would have lived. 12 more years. you remember that. y'all probably wrote it down. 12 more years that she would have had with her mother. that would have been the normal life expectancy. 12 more christmases, holiday dinners, parties, 12 more years of her cooking, 12 more years of their society and friendship. 12 more years. now, there is two blanks on this form, and i want to talk about each one of them individually. the first one is her mental pain and suffering as the result of her mother's injury and death. and you had evidence about that. you had evidence about how she watched her mother die and how awful that period of time was. you heard testimony not only from her, but from bobby. you remember what he said. he said, i'll never forget that picture. it is the worst thing i ever saw. you also heard from nell nelson. remember, she is the one that carried her in the car, and how she was picking up kleenexes and sticking them in different places. how she was in enormous pain, had to take morphine. the loss of dignity in the final days, not knowing where she was, and suffering. the enormous suffering that sharon had to watch her mother go through during that period of time. this first blank is that sort of suffering that sharon odum observed with respect to watching her mother die and the pain she had as a result of her mother's death, the loss and the pain that she felt. then the second blank is the loss of her mother's companionship, instruction, and guidance for next 12 years. now, always when i have to talk about something like this it is very difficult. how do you talk about what that is worth? how do you put a number on that? you cannot. i mean, it is very difficult to talk about it. but we do those kind of things all the time. we put numbers on things that are difficult to put numbers on. right. we do that all the time, and the jury is required to do that. so there are some things i try and think about when i say, well, how do i assess whether this is a serious harm or a small harm? obviously the loss of your mother, an only child, has got to fall in a category of a serious harm. it is a real long- lasting continuous loss. 12 years of normal life expectancy loss. so when i try to think about how to put a number on this it is very difficult, but i think you have to be able to pick a number that says to the defendant this is serious loss. the loss of life in someone -- mr. geise: your honor, i object with regard to -- the court: wait a minute. (sidebar outside the hearing of the jury.) mr. geise: your honor, argument and statements with regard to damages for pain and suffering have nothing to do with sending a message to a defendant and telling the defendant that this is serious. that is not the purpose of these damages. it is absolutely improper. punitive damages punish and deter, but you cannot say -- ms. shamp: no. mr. geise: that is what you just said. ms. shamp: i know. i can say that the damage number ought to say to send a message that this is serious and real harm to her. not send a message about this conduct, not send a message -- send a message that this harm is real. that is what it is. this harm is real. this is a serious harm, and the number has to say that. it has to say that. mr. geise: she said send a message to the defendant. ms. shamp: to the defendant. mr. geise: it is appropriate for these damages. it is grounds for a mistrial, and i'm moving for one. the court: i'll deny your motion. mr. geise: okay. the court: i'd be very careful where you go with that, because that -- you know, if you connect it directly to the defendant, you know, you may have a problem with that on compensatory damages. mr. michael kalil: just for record purposes, your honor, i think that mr. -- that the sentence was interrupted at the time of his objection, so the full context was not even being realized to be able to pars out on any particular issue later on. the issue i think is difficult because the sentence was interrupted. the court: okay. so what you are saying is if it is done it is already done and there is no way to correct it. mr. michael kalil: well, i think the sentence can potentially be taken out of context because the objection was at the time that it was done. mr. geise: the objection was immediately. the court: what does that matter, is what i'm saying? okay. ms. shamp: he is pointing out for the record that it was not a complete sentence whereas it might appear on the record that it was. that is what he is pointing out. the court: i understand. i think the record would be clear. we know you did not finish the sentence. ms. shamp: if defendants want a curative instruction they ought to request a curative instruction. mr. geise: i've made my motion for mistrial. the court: okay. (following the sidebar.) the court: okay. ms. shamp. ms. shamp: the number that you put in these lines needs to say that this is a real and significant problem, that she is not a statistic, she is a person that had a family, that had loved ones, and that this loss is a real and serious loss to that family. and the number you need to put -- you put there needs to say that. it needs to reflect the seriousness and the realness of it. the judge will instruct you that your collective conscience as a jury should come up with that number. there is not a chart we can go to. there is not a table that you look for. the 12 years is in a table, but this number is one that you collectively come up with. i'm going to suggest that a fair number would be to put $3 million on the first line and $3 million on the second line. that is a total of $6 million, which is a total of $1 million for every two years of life that was lost. we think that is a fair number to reflect the seriousness of the harm. we think that is the number of the range in which you as a jury ought to collectively decide. that is obviously a picture of sharon and her mother. and you are to consider the relationship between them and what was lost when you come up with that number. now i want to turn finally to the last question on the verdict form, and that is punitive damages. and this is probably the most important question on the verdict form. now, the question is: whether under the circumstances of the case state whether by clear and convincing evidence punitive damages are warranted against r.j. reynolds tobacco company. and the judge will instruct you what kind of conduct merits the award of punitive damages. punitive damages are warranted if you find by clear and convincing evidence that the conduct causing loss to the plaintiff was so gross and flagrant as to show a reckless disregard of human life or of the safety of persons exposed to the effects of such conduct, or the conduct showed an entire lack of care that r.j. reynolds must have been consciously indifferent to the consequences of what they were doing, or the conduct showed an entire lack of care that r.j. reynolds must have wantonly or recklessly disregarded the safety and welfare of the public; the conduct showed such reckless indifference to the rights of others as to be equivalent to an intentional violation of those rights. now, all you have to decide in this part of the trial is whether plaintiff is entitled to punitive damages, not the amount. as you can see the last question is yes or no. under the circumstances of the case are -- is plaintiff entitled to punitive damages? and the judge will instruct you that if you check yes then there will be a very short phase where you will have more information about punitive damages in order to reach the second part, and that will be a very short process. and we still expect and anticipate that you will get out of here within the three weeks that you have been told that you will. but this is a very important part of this case. very important question. now, this is the reason why you heard so much testimony about what r.j. reynolds did, about their conduct, because you are going to be asked to decide whether their conduct satisfies the requirements for punitive damages. really the evidence is an unprecedented amount of lies and deception. and the scale of it is unprecedented. and the harm that was caused by it. and you are going to have back there the surgeon general's report, and i encourage you to read them, because they talk about the scale of this deception, and they talk about the harm that the deception caused. and not just small amounts of harm, but enormous harm in human life. and so i could stand up here and talk for another three days about why we believe that punitive damages are warranted, but i'm not going to do that. i'm going to limit it to three things, three things that i think show that their conduct is reprehensible, and that the impact of their conduct is staggering. you heard yesterday that the surgeon general's report said that over 12 million lives have been lost since the 1964 surgeon general's report came out, and no witness they put on has disputed those numbers. remember, i asked every one of their witnesses how many deaths have been caused in the united states. 443,000 a year. 443000 a year. staggering, the amount. but also that was intentional. so there are three things that i think based on the evidence that require you checking yes to the punitive damages. the first, that they marketed to kids. that conduct is reprehensible. and you as a jury have to decide if that conduct is reprehensible. and i suggest just read exhibit 309 to decide whether that conduct in your opinion is reprehensible. they intentionally marketed to kids. 2. oh, i wanted to show you some of the testimony that you will have in the surgeon general's report, the major conclusions that are listed. this is a report that is called preventing tobacco use among young people. page 5 of this report, the major conclusion, and you will have this report back there: most adolescent smokers are addicted to nicotine, and report that they want to quit, but are unable to do so. they experience relapse rates and withdrawal symptoms similar to those reported by adults. you are also going to have the surgeon general's report. and i ask you to look on page 10 of that report with what they talk about with respect to kids. they talk about in here -- just a minute. oh, i'm in the wrong thing. i apologize for that. conclusion 1 in the 2012 surgeon general's report. in 2008 tobacco companies spent $9.94 billion on marketing of cigarettes and 547 million on marketing smokeless tobacco. spending on cigarette marketing is 48 percent higher now in 2012 than it was in 1998, the year of the master settlement agreement. expenditures for marketing smokeless tobacco are 277 percent higher. tobacco company expenditures have become increasingly concentrated on marketing efforts. the evidence is sufficient to conclude that there is a causal relationship between advertising and promotional efforts of tobacco companies and the initiation and progression of tobacco use among. their marketing efforts are making young people start smoking. that is what the evidence shows that you have. the money that they are spending, millions and billions, is making our kids smoke and continuing to make our kids smoke. and they know it and they are doing it on purpose. mr. geise: your honor, i object. this is -- (sidebar outside the hearing of the jury.) mr. geise: your honor, i object to this line of argument talking about advertising and youth advertising as a basis for punitive damages. it violates not only state farm and williams, but also violates the instructions that you are going to provide where you say you may not seek to punish reynolds for any harm suffered by any person other than plaintiff as a result of ethelene hazouri's death, and you are to punish reynolds only for those harms suffered by plaintiff. youth marketing in '98 and 2003 is completely irrelevant to those harms suffered by the plaintiff. ms. shamp: your honor, the language before the ones he is quoting is what i'm referring to. right before where he quoted says that the jury may consider the harm that is inflicted upon everyone else. mr. geise: you can consider similar harms. youth marketing is not a similar harm. if she wants to talk lung cancer or addiction, or something like that, youth marketing -- ms. shamp: the harm -- the court: i'm going to deny your -- mr. geise: again i would move for mistrial. the court: i'll overrule objection. wait a minute. he is moved for a mistrial. mr. geise: and just for the record -- the court: i'm denying your motion for mistrial. mr. geise: thank you. (following sidebar.) ms. shamp: ladies and gentlemen, it is an epidemic that will not go away. the reason that they market to children and the reason that they try and keep people smoking is very clear from the records and the documents, and they know they have to get replacement smokers. for the ones who die or the ones who quit they have got to fill up. and that is what the documents will show. look at the documents. we have to get replacement smokers. and where are they going to get them from? young people and people who are trying to quit. point 2. in addition to marketing towards kids they manipulate the level of nicotine in their product in order to keep people addicted, in order to keep people who want to quit from quitting. the use of ammonia in their product so it freebases the nicotine, where you saw just a minute ago that the level of nicotine in their products is not by accident, that they manipulate and keep the nicotine in their products in order to keep people smoking who want to quit, to keep people smoking who do not want to use their product any longer. and third, migration. the third reason that you should award punitive damages, migration. what they talked about. and you remember dr. figlar getting up and saying, we are a new company now, we produce all of these products that have less risk. migration. what they are trying to do is keep people smoking who want to quit. change into a different cigarette, move down the line, get the snus, keep people smoking who want to quit. the epidemic will not abate. they know that the products they are selling are not safer, that there is not a safer cigarette. when i cross examined dr. figlar about that, from the surgeon general's report, there is no proof that any of their products are safer. think about it. all those charts that he put up. i kept saying in the back of my mind, so what you are saying is you have a little less cancer- causing agent in your product? has anyone proven that slightly less carcinogens in your lungs is going to reduce the chance that you are going to get lung cancer? it is a carcinogen. in fact, eclipse had more carbon dioxide in it than any other product. it is a carcinogen in your product that you are encouraging youth to smoke. the 2010 report. i was shocked that he did not know about the study that i read to him from the 2010 report that said a thousand people were surveyed and after they were told about the eclipse product the people who were interested in quitting were less interested in quitting. people who were interested in quitting were less interested in quitting. that is their marketing product. the reprehensibility of what they have done. it is all about profit. all about profit. intentionally marketing to our kids. intentionally keeping people smoking who want to quit. and then migration. you know, you have heard a lot of things in trial, but one thing was said in mr. geise's opening that almost made me throw up. when he said that ethel hazouri, when she was 13 was making adult choices. remember him saying that? i almost threw up. that is what they are doing. they are calling those kids adults. they are saying to them, come on, make an adult choice. come on, smoke our product. you are an adult. you are making big-boy decisions. it is reprehensible. it merits you saying punitive damages for that. but it has not stopped the lying. the lying has not stopped. yesterday on the stand dr. figlar told you three lies. on the stand. 2013. one, that eclipse was a safer product. remember? remember all the slides he put up and how this was safer? and then i cross-examined him by showing the reports from labstat, which you will have back there as an exhibit. labstat is their lab. remember when i asked him that? that is a lab you use. remember all those purple bars? that was eclipse that showed more benzopyrene, that showed more nmk, that showed more carbon monoxide. not safer. remember i said we disagree with the surgeon general's report, 1964 all the way up. 2. i was shocked. he put up a chart there that shows tars and nicotine going down over time. i guess he thought we could not read; that he stopped his chart in 1998. i was literally shocked. why did you in 2013 stop your chart in 1998? because he knew what i showed him, which the study show that the nicotine content has increased over the last ten years. he stopped his chart in 1998, but you will have back the trends article which i showed him that says actually the nicotine contents increasing over time. and, third, we talked about y1, the high- content nicotine tobacco, and i asked him about that. and you remember on redirect when it was put back up and he said that was developed by the agriculture department. do you remember that? you have this document, 122 -- i mean 693. you have it. look at it. y1 is a high-nicotine strain developed at b&w's experimental farm in north carolina. three lies in 2013. reprehensible. ladies and gentlemen, we believe that the evidence strongly says this conduct deserves punishment. you know, i love that this case took place over memorial day, one of my favorite holidays, because what memorial day celebrates is the service of our armed services who gave their lives to protect our country and to protect this process. this is an extremely important process. mr. geise talked about that. this process, beautiful. it is a chance for the peers, for people to sit in that box and say what we find to be acceptable conduct and what we do not. when you walk in this room every single day we stand up, when you leave we stand up, because you are the judges under our system. memorial day. those people died to protect at least partly this system, for you to be able to come in and say it is not okay, that conduct is not okay. conversely, ladies and gentlemen, if you check no to punitive damages you are saying that it is. you are saying that it is okay. we contend the evidence strongly says you should check yes. i'll have an opportunity to talk again after mr. geise gets a chance to talk, and then i'll try to rebut some of the things. but let me thank you for your attention throughout the trial and for your attention this morning. ms. shamp: good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen. the jury: good afternoon. ms. shamp: i did take some time over the break to go through my notes, and i'm not going to talk for very long. there are a few points i think it is important for me to make and a couple of overall points that i wanted to address. the first was i was very troubled by mr. geise's analogy at the beginning of this, about his remarks about this being a game, about this being the bottom of the inning. and then the last thing he said was this is a cool thing we get to do. i do not think it is a cool thing. i think it is a very serious thing. i think the allegations that have been made are very serious. i do not think it is cool at all. i want you to recognize one thing about mr. geise's presentation. he did not put up a single r. j. reynolds document, not one about all this talk and all the testimony. nothing from the company. and remember what he said? he said there are some documents that say some stupid things. they are not stupid things. they are very, very smart. they are intentional things. they are aimed at specific markets. they are not stupid at all. they are very smart. as is the whole argument where they try and do, again and again, to say that their conduct does not matter. what they did does not matter. remember what he said? this is not a -- this is a case only about ethelene hazouri, not a case about r. j. reynolds at all. it is a case about r. j. reynolds. not just a case about ethelene hazouri. i'm struck every time that mr. -- dr. figlar said it, and he said that: we admit nicotine is addictive. we admit nicotine is addictive, but nobody is addicted. right? we admit nicotine is addictive but nobody is addicted. listen to the way in which they talk about it. if you can quit, you are not addicted. if you are choosing to smoke, you are not addicted. if you are enjoying it, you are not addicted. even though they admit that, they continue to say that she is not addicted and that nobody's addicted. he talked a lot about whether she had the ability to quit, whether she could control where she smoked. that is not the issue. nobody disputes that people who are addicted can quit. but why does he keep talking about it? why does he keep shifting the -- the question from whether she was addicted, whether her brain had changed, whether there were strives and desire? because he wants to say that nobody is addicted. he also talked a lot about the quit dates. ask yourself: why is that relevant? why is it relevant whether she quit in 1983 or whether she quit in 1986 or whether she quit in 1990 as one record says or 1992 as another record says or 1993 as another record says? that has nothing to do with whether she was addicted. whether she quit in the 1980s or she quit in 1990 has to do with whether she quit. the testimony is -- and the judge will instruct you that you bring to the jury pool -- you bring to the deliberations your common sense. and your common sense, as well as the testimony, told you that people report quit dates and then start smoking again; that people change quit dates; that people hide their smoking. that is very common. but regardless of whether that happened or not, it is not relevant to what you have to decide. you have to decide whether she was addicted. and whether she should could quit and whether she smoked in church and whether she told her grandchildren she quit, it is not relevant to the question of whether she was addicted, which is what you have to decide, whether her brain had changed. they talked a lot about whether certain people saw her smoking. there is dispute in this case that she was a smoker. ask yourself: is there any dispute as to whether or not she was a smoker? there is no dispute. and look at -- when he talks about how much she smoked, he is talking about when a grandchild saw her smoke five cigarettes when he saw her 40 years ago. that is what he recalls with his limited observation. the two son-in-laws, the ex-son-in-law and the current son-in-law, who said they saw her about an hour, maybe two, every other week, and that usually, sometimes they would see her outside and smoke during that time. does the evidence that she did not smoke in church have anything to do with the evidence of whether she was addicted? no. again, if this -- mr. geise said that she could not -- she did not smoke in church or she did not smoke while she was in the car or in front of her grandchildren. if that is the standard, imagine, there will be nobody addicted in the united states right now because nobody can smoke at work any more. everybody has to go outside of the buildings that they work in. everybody has to not smoke on public transit. everybody has to do that. and yet, and yet, the evidence is that 80 to ninety percent of the smokers in the united states are addicted. all right? mr. geise will say, yes, nicotine is addictive but nobody's quitting. nobody's quitting. one question he put up about whether the brain change was permanent. do you remember that? what was the testimony about whether that brain change was permanent? remember, dr. werner said that there is new studies that are coming out now that show that exposure to nicotine in early adolescence may make permanent changes to the brain. may make permanent changes to the brain. but also, what you will have with you is the 2010 surgeon general's report, and it is interesting because mr. geise said it again today, and that is that they point people to the 2010 surgeon general's report. they tell people to rely upon it. so i ask you: rely upon it. look at it. just like r. j. reynolds says. this is the 2010 surgeon general's report, and it talks about relapse: the risk of relapse, however, does not end six to 12 months after the attempt at smoking cessation. findings in studies of long-term outcome suggests that relapse ultimately claims 30 to forty percent of smokers who stop smoking for over a year. so even if they stop smoking for over a year, that addiction retakes 30 or forty percent. that is what the surgeon general says. in addition, the surgeon general says there is a genetic basis. they believe that there is a genetic basis to addiction. and that is important, ladies and gentlemen. i think mr. geise said something about him not being sure whether she was sent home on oxygen. the only testimony in this case is that in 1993 she was sent home on oxygen from the hospital. remember what the surgeon general's report says. i put it up three or four times in this case. it is that 2010 surgeon general's report; you will have it: the fundamental reason that people persist in smoking is nicotine addiction. r. j. reynolds says that. they say -- and r. j. reynolds points you to the 2010 surgeon general's report. that is in the 2010 surgeon general's report. there is little question in this case, ladies and gentlemen, that she was addicted. they have not really even given you any other reason why she continued to smoke other than that change in her brain, because one thing he said was she might have smoked because she enjoyed it. but remember what their own expert said about that. that the subjective experience of enjoyment is about the nicotine. you enjoy it because of the nicotine hit. so even if they say it is enjoyment that made her smoke, it is addiction that made her smoke, ladies and gentlemen. i'm surprised that they keep putting up that surgeon general koop which said something about the cigarette will not jump into your mouth. surgeon general koop was one of the most strongest advocates against smoking and its impact on the public health. and what he says in there, he talks about what an awful addiction it is and how very difficult it is to quit in that very same paper. he said it is a terrible addiction that is caused a tremendous toll on the public health of the united states. she is a member of the class. now, i loathe to talk for very long about it, but the defendants are again trying to create -- and it came to me, this phrase, when i was out there prepping -- the false controversy about the lung cancer. again, the false controversy. there is no controversy in this case that she had lung cancer. none. now let us talk about what the evidence is. now, you are allowed -- remember what we said at the beginning? evidence is what comes in. if the judge has said it comes in, you get to take it back. it is evidence, right? so what we do is we weigh the greater weight of the evidence. so stack it up. now, mr. geise wants to say that dr. prokes' record evidence is in evidence, or that the death certificate is. it comes in. you will have it. it is evidence. okay? so let us stack it up. you have the physician's attestation which said primary lung cancer. i've shown it to you four or five times. you will have dr. prokes' records where three times he writes down lung cancer, adenocarcinoma of the lung, primary cancer of the lung -- three times in his record. you have the death certificate. the death certificate, an official record of the state of florida. that is evidence that you have, the official record of the state of florida. you have all the negative screening tests. remember we went through this with dr. bagnoli. because she had a sigmoidoscopy that was normal. horowitz checked her colon. she had a mammogram which was normal; no cancer there. she had blood tests that showed no problems with her kidney. she had a pap smear, which ruled out cervical cancer. she had a hysterectomy, which means she could not have had uterine cancer. all of those negative screening tests is evidence that she did not have cancer anywhere else. negative blood work. you will have the blood work. no sign of cancer anywhere else. no symptoms of cancer at any other site. you have evidence of that. she had doctors' records for years. no symptoms of cancer at any other site. that is evidence. no diagnosis of cancer at any other site. that is evidence. she had a team of doctors who looked at her, who had a nine-day hospitalization when they diagnosed her with lung cancer. what is on the other side? where is their evidence that the cancer came from somewhere else? what piece of evidence do they even have over here? none. now, this whole thing about the chest x-rays -- it just makes me upset, but the whole thing about the chest x-ray is -- is -- is false, because there is no doubt she had a tumor in her chest. they biopsied it. and you have the record where they took a biopsy. there was a cancer there. not microscopic. a cancer they could biopsy, and, thus we know, as everyone said, it had been growing there for a long time. so the negative chest x-ray, it was there. it had to be there. whether it is metastatic or a primary lung, no matter what, it was there. so the negative chest x-rays, they had to have missed it because it was there. it did not spring there overnight. and that is not evidence one way or another of whether it was lung cancer. it was there and they missed it. he gave the example of the fire investigator that you cannot tell where it was in the house, right? what we have is the report from the fire investigator, right? that is what we have. we have the report who said, yeah, i investigated the fire and this is where it started. that is what we have. this is not a situation where we do not know where it came from. we have the fire investigator's report. now, what they are saying is that, because 20 years later we do not have the fiber sample, you know, where he took fiber samples at every different place and found where the accelerant was, that we cannot prove it. we have the fire investigator's report. it is a false controversy, ladies and gentlemen. where is the greater weight of the evidence? that is what you have to decide. and the greater weight of the evidence is that she had lung cancer. now, let me turn our attention quickly to -- turn our attention to what he is saying about everybody knew and gore knew. it flies in the face of the finding. if they said that dr. gore knew -- i mean, reverend gore knew, when the finding that you have to apply says -- mr. guise: your honor, i object to this. the court: well, wait a minute. okay. (sidebar was held outside the hearing of the jury:) mr. guise: when she puts up the findings and she said this is reverend gore -- no, she cannot take the finding and apply it to people and say this means reverand gore did not know, this means he did not know the finding is what it is. the jury instructions in this case are specific to ethelene hazouri, so i think this argument is inappropriate for putting the findings up and saying that it means this as to reverand gore. it does not mean that. that is why we have instructions in these trials because they have to prove what legal cause and everything else with regard to the. ms. shamp: we have to prove -- i'm entitled to the benefit of the findings, and the findings say they concealed material information that was not otherwise known. i'm entitled to rely on that. the court: well, you can tell them -- you can tell them that. mr. guise: but you cannot say reverend gore did not know. ms. shamp: what it means is that they cannot -- they cannot impose the fact that this was material information that was not otherwise known. mr. guise: that is the -- that is the problem. we do not know what that information is. the court: you understand? ms. shamp: i think i'm right, but i'll move on because i do not want to disturb this jury any longer. mr. guise: thank you, your honor. (sidebar was concluded and the following further proceedings were held:) ms. shamp: the judge will -- i'm sorry. i knew i'd get going. the judge will instruct you that you are required to accept the findings as true. all right? and interestingly, what they said -- and i was surprised by it -- but that in 1957 that there was a scientific consensus where wynder -- remember ernst wynder and graham at sloan-kettering memorial hospital -- and mrs. hazouri was right there with them. mrs. hazouri has an eighth grade education. the national cancer institute had not yet come out and said -- according to them, the ama -- that mrs. hazouri was right there with ernst and graham. it is not very reasonable, according to them, for them to assert that mrs. hazouri, with an 8th grade education, knew there were carcinogens in the smoke because her minister spoke to her about the godliness of the temple of god and putting cigarettes in it. one thing that is been consistent throughout everybody's testimony is the one place nobody ever smoked was in church. that is the one place nobody was smoking, was in church. and that is not because people knew it was a health risk; not because people said, oh, it causes cancer, you cannot smoke in church, but because people have always thought that smoking and drinking were a vice, a naughty thing, a not godly thing. and because her minister spoke to her about that is not evidence that mrs. hazouri understood what the tobacco companies were hiding. in fact, during that same period of time that mr. geise says that mrs. hazouri was right there, right on, sixty percent of the doctors in america were smoking cigarettes. mr. geise talked about that proctor said, that those two public health officials that he put up the pictures of, that they were wrong. that is not what proctor said. what he said is that the message the public health community was trying to get out, the surgeon general's message could not compete with the allure of cigarette advertising, with the allure and the doubt that the -- that the cigarette advertisers were trying to create. and the public health community was up against an extremely large foe and still is. you remember the document that we put up from the ftc which said that the tobacco company spent more in one day than the public health community spent on public health advertising in a year? in one day. ladies and gentlemen, the argument that mr. geise made throughout his statements to you is the same one: it does not matter what we did. it does not matter what we did. it does not matter what we did. it does not matter what we did because she was not addicted. it does not matter what we did because she does not have lung cancer. it does not matter what we did because she never heard anything the tobacco institute said. just thinking about that, and i was remembering what he said where, remember, he asked the question of the whole jury pool and nobody raised their hand? but i wonder, if we ask that question, if anybody who read the "true" magazine article would have raised their hand to say that they had known that was something from ti, from the tobacco institute -- think about that. if you had read this, right, which said: we do not know whether smoking causes any illness. right? we do not know the jury is still out. we -- now if you were asked: have you read anything the tobacco company said, you would say no. you read this, which was paid for by the tobacco companies. look at what their marketing and promotions were; what they were going to do. and that is in the tide rock document that they were going to do editorials, that they were going to publish things in magazines, that they were going to get to the newspapers, that they were going to make sure their position was in every article. and there it was. out there. and you -- the judge is going to tell you that you can infer from all of that that it impacted ethelene hazouri. you can infer that. you are permitted, based on all the evidence, to say that this was a cause of her continuing to smoke, switching to filters, maybe even the idea -- we talked about it before -- of her thinking that is heavy smokers, right? that is not me. that is heavy smokers, right? remember that people say that they thought it was heavy smokers? she smoked 15 cigarettes, maybe 10 cigarettes -- i'm not a heavy smoker; does not apply to me -- because they got that message out. this might be harmful to some people. you remember, that is what mr. cullman said. it might be harmful to some people. not to me. i do not fit in that category. right? if they are public relations campaign might have made her say maybe not me, if it made her continue to smoke at all, then you can infer on that part. common sense, ladies and gentlemen. common sense. if they are marketing and advertising and campaigns of doubt did not work, nobody including ethelene hazouri, was not impacted, would they have spent the billions of dollars that they spent doing it? common sense. they spent billions of dollars because it worked. and you can infer that from the evidence that you have. this case is not just about ethelene hazouri; it is about r. j. reynolds. and despite the fact that they did not put up a single document from r. j. reynolds' files, it is about their conduct. and i want to put one last thing up. the jury instruction that you will be getting -- and you might be asking yourself: well, ms. shamp, you did talk a lot about stuff they did after 1994. that is when she died. but the judge will instruct you: in determining whether punitive damages are warranted, you may consider similar harms suffered by other persons not parties to this lawsuit. you will have this back with you. look at it. you may consider similar harms suffered by other persons not parties to this lawsuit in assessing the reprehensibility or the wrongfulness of the r. j. reynolds acts proven in this case. similar harms. and the last thing i'll leave you with, just a statement about those similar harms: 12 million people since 1964. an epidemic. now, mr. geise asked you for one of you to be his advocate. let me ask you, for all of you, to be the advocate for the public health, to be the advocate for truth in that jury room. the word verdict means to speak the truth. veritas, v-e-r, comes from the word truth. verily i say on to you. you have probably heard that. veritas means truth and dic means dictaphone: speak. so verdict means speak the truth. ladies and gentlemen, i ask you for a verdict that says ethelene hazouri is a member of the case. that says what the defendant did made a difference and says that plaintiff is entitled to punitive damages based upon their conduct. again, i appreciate your attention on behalf of my team. i appreciate your service. thank you. the court: if you are finished, do you mind turning off the -- okay. thank you. ladies and gentlemen, we are going to depart from one of my instructions at this point. i'm going to ask that you not take notes while i read the instructions to you. the reason simply is i'm going to send everything that i read back in the jury room with you. and you have paid close attention to all of the evidence and to the arguments by the attorneys, so i want you to pay close attention while i read the instructions. and again they will go back in the jury room with you. okay. members of the jury, you have now heard and received all the evidence in the case. i am going to tell you about the rules of law that you must use in reaching your verdict. in reaching your verdict, you should consider and weigh the evidence, decide the disputed issues of fact, and apply the law on which i shall instruct you to the facts as you find them from the evidence. the evidence in this case consists of the sworn testimony of all the witnesses, all exhibits received in evidence, and all facts that may be admitted -- admitted or agreed to by the parties. the plaintiff -- the claims of the plaintiff sharon odum are as follows: the plaintiff sharon odum claims that the defendant r. j. reynolds was, one, negligent; two, manufactured and distributed a product that was defective and unreasonably dangerous; three, concealed material health information about cigarettes; and four, conspired with others to conceal such health information, all of which caused ethelene hazouri's lung cancer and death. the plaintiff must prove her claims by the greater weight of the evidence. the greater weight of the evidence means the more persuasive and convincing force and effect of the entire evidence in the case. in determining the believability of any witness and the weight to be given the testimony of any witness, you may properly consider the demeanor of the witness while testifying, the frankness or lack of frankness of the witness, the intelligence of the witness, any interest the witness may have in the outcome of the case -- excuse me -- the means and opportunity the witness had to know the facts about which the witness testified, the ability of the witness to remember the matters about which the witness testified, and the reasonableness of the testimony of the witness considered in the light of all the evidence in the case and in the light of your own experience and common sense. you have heard opinion testimony on certain technical subjects from persons referred to as expert witnesses. you may accept such opinion testimony, reject it, or give it the weight you think it deserves, considering the knowledge, skill, experience, training, or education of the witness, the reasons given by the witness for the opinion expressed, and all the other evidence in the case. during the trial, the sworn testimony of certain witnesses was given before the trial -- excuse me. during the trial, the sworn testimony of certain witnesses given before the trial has been presented to you. you are to consider and weigh this testimony as you would any other evidence in the case. r. j. reynolds is a corporation. you may not discriminate between corporations and natural individuals. both are persons in the eyes of the law and both are entitled to the same fair and impartial consideration by the same legal standard. excuse me. the court instructs you that the parties have stipulated, one, pursuant to florida statute chapter 47, venue is proper in jacksonville, duval county, florida; two, the decedent ethelyne hazouri was a resident of florida for purposes of the engle class membership; and three, mrs. hazouri died on march 15th, 1994; four, camel and winston cigarettes manufactured and sold in the united states were manufactured and sold by r. j. reynolds tobacco company and its predecessors in interest. this action arises out of a case known as the engle class action. you must determine whether ethelene hazouri was a member of the engle class. to prove ethelene hazouri was a member of the engle class -- excuse me -- plaintiff must prove by the greater weight of the evidence that ethelene hazouri was addicted to smoking cigarettes containing nicotine, and, if so, was such addiction a legal cause of her lung cancer. if the greater weight of the evidence does not support plaintiff's claim that ethelene hazouri was a member of the engle class, your verdict should be for the defendant on that issue; however, if the greater weight of the evidence does support plaintiff's claim that ethelene hazouri was a member of the engle class, your verdict should be for plaintiff on that issue. if you find that ethelene hazouri was a member of the engle class, certain findings from that action are binding upon you, the court, and the parties. the findings may not be denied or questioned, and they must carry the same weight they would have -- they would have if you had determined them yourselves. the findings that are binding on you are: finding 1 is that cigarettes cause lung cancer. finding 2 is that nicotine in cigarettes is addictive. finding 3, that r. j. reynolds placed cigarettes on the market that were defective and unreasonably dangerous. excuse me. finding 4 is that r. j. reynolds concealed or omitted material information not otherwise known or available, knowing the material was false or misleading, or failed to disclose a material fact concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes or both. finding 5 is that r. j. reynolds agreed with other tobacco companies to conceal or omit information regarding the health effects of cigarettes or their addictive nature with the intention that smokers and the public would rely on this information to their detriment. finding 6 is that r. j. reynolds was negligent. however, notwithstanding the foregoing, these facts will not be applicable to plaintiff's claim against r. j. reynolds if you find by the greater weight of evidence that ethelene hazouri was not a member of the engle class. notwithstanding the above findings which are binding on you and the court, the liability of r. j. reynolds to the plaintiff must be proven by the plaintiff in accordance with the instructions i will give you hereafter on specific claims. addiction to smoking cigarettes containing nicotine is a legal cause of ethelene hazouri's death if it directly and in natural and continuous sequence produced or contributed substantially to producing ethelene hazouri's death so that it can reasonably be said that, but for the addiction, her death would not have occurred. in order to be regarded as a legal cause of death, addiction to smoking cigarettes need not be the only cause. addiction to smoking r. j. reynolds cigarettes may be a legal cause of death even though it operates in combination with the act of another or some other cause if such other cause occurs at the same time as the addiction and the addiction contributes substantially to producing such death. if the greater weight of the evidence does not support the claims of plaintiff being presented, then your verdict should be for the defendant. however, if the greater weight of the evidence does support the claims of plaintiff, then you shall determine and write on the verdict form what percentage of the total -- excuse me. i got that out of sequence. sorry. r. j. reynolds tobacco company is successor corporation to american tobacco company and brown & williamson tobacco corporation. accordingly, r. j. reynolds tobacco company is legally responsible for the conduct of both american tobacco company and brown & williamson tobacco corporation for any harm caused by cigarettes manufactured by american tobacco company and/or brown & williamson tobacco company -- corporation. the next issue for your determination is whether the concealment or omission of material information concerning the health risks or addictive nature of cigarettes smoking by r. j. reynolds was a legal cause of the death of ethelene hazouri. ethelene hazouri's reliance on such statements to her detriment is a legal cause of loss, injury, or damage if it directly and in natural and continuous sequence produces or contributes substantially to producing her loss, injury, or damage so that it can reasonably be said but for ethelene hazouri's reliance, her loss, injury, or damage would not have occurred. material information is information that is of such importance that ethelene hazouri would have considered it significant in her decision-making process. the next issue for your determination is whether the conspiracy to withhold health information or information regarding addiction and acts proven in furtherance of that conspiracy was a legal cause of the death of ethelene hazouri -- ethelene hazouri. in order to be a legal cause of the death, plaintiff must show that ethelene hazouri relied on statements by r. j. reynolds or any of the other companies involved in the conspiracy that omitted material information concerning the health effects of cigarettes or the addictive nature or both at any time during or after december 1953. i hereby instruct you that the plaintiff has made no claim for conspiracy to conceal information regarding the smoke -- smoking and health addiction before december 1953. as to each of plaintiff's claims of concealment and conspiracy to conceal, i hereby instruct you that you may consider all the evidence in the case in determining whether or not plaintiff has satisfied the reliance requirement of those claims. if the greater weight of the evidence supports -- does not support the claims of plaintiff against the defendant, then your verdict should be for the defendant. however, if the greater weight of the evidence does support the claims of the plaintiff, then you shall determine and write on your verdict form what percentage of total fault of each party is chargeable to each. as to plaintiff's claims, the conduct of r. j. reynolds need not be the only cause. the conduct of r. j. reynolds may be a legal cause of death, even though it operates in combination with the act of another or some other cause, if such cause occurs at the same time as the conduct and the conduct contributes substantially to producing such death. i instruct you that after 1969 the warning labels placed on cigarette packs by r. j. reynolds tobacco company and the other engle defendants complied with the federal law, and that r. j. reynolds and the other engle defendants had no legal obligation to make any additional warnings. plaintiff has made no claim for failure to warn after 1969. manufacturing, selling, and advertising cigarettes is a -- is lawful activity. therefore, i instruct you that r. j. reynolds cannot be held liable merely for manufacturing, selling, or advertising cigarettes. if your verdict is for r. j. reynolds on all claims, you will not consider the matter of damages. but if your verdict is for one or more -- if your verdict is for plaintiff on one or more of the claims against r. j. reynolds, you should determine and write on the verdict form in dollars the total amount of damages which the greater weight of the evidence shows that sharon odum, as ethelene hazouri's survivor, sustained as a result of ethelene hazouri's death, including any such damages that she is reasonably certain to incur or experience in the future. in that regard, you should consider sharon odum's loss of ethelene hazouri's companionship, instruction, and guidance, and her mental pain and suffering as a result of ethelene hazouri's injury and death. there is no exact standard for fixing the compensation to be awarded. any such award should be fair and just in the light of the evidence. in determining the duration of any future loss, you may consider the joint life expectancy of sharon odum and ethelene hazouri, together with the other evidence in the case. the mortality tables you received in evidence may be considered, together with other evidence in the case, bearing on the health, age, and physical condition -- excuse me -- physical condition of each in determining how long each may be or may have been expected to live. in determining the total amount of damages to award mrs. sharon odum, you should not make any reduction because of the responsibility you charge to ethelene hazouri. the court will enter judgment based on your verdict and reduce the total amount of damages, if legally appropriate, by the percentage of responsibility you charge to ethelene hazouri. if you find for the plaintiff against r. j. reynolds, you should consider whether, in addition to compensatory damages, punitive damages are warranted in the circumstances of this case as punishment and as a deterrent to others. punitive damages may be warranted against r. j. reynolds based on your findings that r. j. reynolds was liable to plaintiff for fraudulent concealment or conspiracy to fraudulent conceal as described below. you may not find that punitive damages awarded against r. j. reynolds based upon plaintiff's claim for negligence or strict liability. punitive damages are warranted if you find, by clear and convincing evidence, one, the conduct causing the loss to plaintiff was so gross and flagrant as to show reckless disregard of human life, or of the safety of persons exposed to the effects of such conduct; or two, the conduct showed such an entire lack of care that r. j. reynolds must have been consciously indifferent to the consequences; or, three, the conduct showed such an entire lack of care that r. j. reynolds must have wantonly and recklessly disregarded the safety and welfare of the public; or, four, the conduct showed such reckless indifference to the rights of others as to be equivalent to an intentional violation of those rights. clear and convincing evidence differs from the greater weight of the evidence in that it is more compelling than persuasive. greater weight of the evidence means the more persuasive force and effect of the entire evidence in the case. in contrast, clear and convincing evidence is evidence that is precise, explicit, lacking in confusion, and of such weight that it produces a firm belief or conviction about the matter at issue. for purposes of determining whether the plaintiff is entitled to punitive damages, and if so, what amount, you may not consider in any way the findings regarding r. j. reynolds' conduct from the prior engle lawsuit that i described to you earlier. the only evidence you may consider on this issue is the evidence presented to you in this trial. when considering whether to award punitive damages, you may consider any harm r. j. reynolds' conduct caused to the plaintiff as a result of ethelene hazouri's death. in determining whether punitive damages are awarded, you may consider similar harms suffered by other persons not parties to this lawsuit in assessing the reprehensibility or wrongfulness of the r. j. reynolds acts as proven in this -- in this case. you may not seek to punish r. j. reynolds for harm suffered by other persons other than the plaintiff as a result of ethelene hazouri's death, and you may punish r. j. reynolds only for those harms suffered by plaintiff as a result of ethelene hazouri's death which were caused by r. j. reynolds' punishable conduct. if you decide that punitive damages are warranted, we will proceed to the second part of the issue in the amount of punitive damages, if any, during which the parties may present additional evidence and arguments on the issue of punitive damages. i will give you additional instructions, after which you will decide whether, in your discretion, punitive damages will be assessed, and if so, what amount. in deciding this case, it is your duty as jurors to answer certain questions i ask you to answer on a special form called a verdict form. you must come to an agreement about what your answers will be. your agreed-upon answers to my questions are called your jury verdict. the evidence in this case consists of the sworn testimony of witnesses, all exhibits received in evidence, and all the facts that may be admitted to or agreed to by the parties. in reaching your verdict, you -- you must think about and weigh the testimony of any documents, photographs, or other material that has been received in evidence. you may also consider the facts that were agreed -- admitted or agreed to by the lawyers. your job is to determine the facts. you may use reason and common sense to reach conclusions. you may draw reasonable inferences from the evidence. but you should not guess about things that were not covered here, and you must always apply the law as i've explained it to you. now, members of the jury, you have now heard all the evidence, my instructions on the law that you must apply in reaching your verdict, and the closing arguments of the attorneys. you will shortly retire to the jury room to decide this case. before you do so, let me have a few last instructions to you. during deliberations, jurors must communicate about the case only with one another and only when all jurors are present in the jury room. you will have in the jury room all of the evidence that was received during the trial. in reaching your verdict, do not do any research on your own or as a group. do not use dictionaries, the internet, or any referral materials. do not investigate the case or conduct any experiments. do not visit or view the scene of any event involved in this case or look at maps or pictures on the internet. if you happen to have -- well, if you happen to pass it, do not investigate. all jurors must see or hear the same evidence at the same time. do not read, listen to, or watch any news account of this trial. you are not to communicate with any person outside the jury in this case. until you have reached a verdict, you must not talk about this case in person or through the telephone, writing, or electronic communication such as a blog, twitter, e-mail, text message, or any other means. do not contact anyone to assist, you such as a family accountant, doctor or lawyer. these communication rules apply until i discharge you at the end of the case. if you become aware of any violations of these instructions or any other instruction i have given you in this case, you must tell me by giving a note to the bailiff. any notes you have taken during the trial may be taken to the jury room for your use during discussions. your notes are simply to aid your own memory, and neither your notes nor those of any other juror are binding or conclusive. your notes are not a substitute for your own memory or that of the other jurors; instead, your verdict must result from the collective memory and judgment of all the jurors based on the evidence and testimony presented during the trial. at the conclusion of the trial, the bailiff will collect all of your notes and immediately destroy them. no one will ever read your notes. in reaching your verdict, do not let bias, sympathy, prejudice, public opinion, or any other sentiment for or against any party to influence your decision. your verdict must be based on the evidence that has been received and on the law on which i have instructed you. reaching your verdict is exclusively your job. i cannot participate in that decision in any way, and you should not guess what i think your verdict should be from something i may have said or done. you should not think that i prefer one verdict over another; therefore, in reaching your verdict, you should not consider anything that i may have said or done except for my specific instructions to you. pay careful attention to all instructions that i gave you, for that is the law that you must follow. you will have a copy of the instructions with you when you go to the jury room to deliberate. all the instructions are important, and you must consider them altogether. there are no other laws that apply to this case, and even if you do not agree with these laws, you must use them in reaching your decision in this case. after you have decided what the facts are, you may find that some instructions do not apply. in that case, follow the instructions that do apply and use them together with the facts to reach your verdict. when you go to the jury room, the first thing you should do is choose a presiding juror to act as foreperson during your deliberations. the foreperson should see to it that your discussions are orderly and that everyone has a fair chance to be heard. it is your duty to talk with one another in the jury room and to consider the views of all the jurors. each of you must decide the case for yourself, but only after you have considered the evidence with the other members of the jury. feel free to change your mind if you are convinced that your position should be different. you should all try to agree, but do not give up your honest belief just because the others think differently. keep an open mind so that you and your fellow jurors can easily share ideas about the case. i will give you a verdict form with questions you must answer. i've already instructed you on the law that you are to follow in answering the -- answering these questions. you must follow my instructions and the form carefully. you must consider each question separately. please answer the questions in the order that they appear. after you answer a question, the form tells you what to do next. i'm going to have mr. schaefer pass out the verdict forms, and then i'm going to read the verdict to you while you are looking at it. and when i'm finished reading, i'm going to have him pick those forms back up, those copies. and this verdict form that i'm holding will go back to you in the jury room. okay. as all of you can see on the first page, it says in the circuit court of the fourth judicial circuit, duval county, florida, civil division, which is just where we are, and the heading of the case, and then is says verdict form: we the jury return the following verdict. question 1: was ethelene hazouri addicted to smoking cigarettes containing nicotine, and if so, was such addiction a legal cause of her lung cancer? and you must answer that question either yes or no. if your answer to question 1 is yes, please proceed to question 2. if your answer to question 1 is no, please proceed no further except to sign and date this verdict form and return it to the courtroom. okay. and if you answer question 2, it says: fraudulent concealment. state whether r. j. reynolds' concealment or omission of a material fact about the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes or both were a legal cause of ethelene hazouri's death. and if you answer question 2, you are obviously going to answer it yes or no. and then it says to proceed to question 3. question 3: civil conspiracy to fraudulently conceal. state whether r. j. reynolds' agreement to conceal or omit a material fact regarding the health effects of cigarette smoking or the addictive nature of smoking cigarettes was a legal cause of ethelene hazouri's death. and if you answer question 3, you are to answer it yes or no. then please proceed to question 4. question 4: comparative fault. state for each party the percentage of fault that was a legal cause of ethelene hazouri's death that you charge to: r. j. reynolds tobacco company, individually and as successor to brown & williamson tobacco company and american tobacco company. and if you answer question 4, you are to put a percentage of fault that you charge to r. j. reynolds in that first column. and then ethelene hazouri, and if you answer question 4, you are to put a percentage of fault that you charge to ethelene hazouri. the total must be one hundred percent. and then it says proceed to question 5. and if you answer question 5, it says: damages. what is the amount of any damages that sharon odum sustained for, a, her mental health -- mental pain and suffering as a result of her mother's injury and death. and if you answer question 5a, you are to put a dollar figure there. and, b, the loss of her mother's companionship, instruction, and guidance. so if you answer question 5, put a dollar figure there. in determining the total amount of any damages, you should not make any reduction because of the fault you have charged to ethelene hazouri. the court will enter a judgment based on your verdict and will reduce the total amount of damages, if legally appropriate, by the percentage of fault which you charge to ethelene hazouri. so if your answer to question 2 or 3 was yes, please proceed to question 6. if your answers to questions 2 or 3 were no, please proceed no further except to sign and date this verdict form and return it to the courtroom. question 6: punitive damages. if you answer question 6, it says under the circumstances of this case, state whether by clear and convincing evidence punitive damages are warranted against r. j. reynolds tobacco company individually and as successor to brown & williamson tobacco company and to american tobacco company -- american tobacco company. and if you are answer question 6, you are to answer it yes or no. and it says: please sign and date the verdict form. it says: so say we all this blank day of june 2013, foreperson, and the foreperson's name, printed. would you take them back up, please. you can just hold on to them right there. your verdict must be unanimous; that is, your verdict must be agreed to by each of you. when you have -- when you have finished filling out the form, your foreperson must write the date and sign it at the bottom and return it -- return the verdict to the bailiff. if any of you need to communicate with me for any reason, write me a note and give it to the bailiff. in your note do not disclose any vote or split or the reason for the communication. you may now -- excuse me just a minute. mrs. whistle and mr. williamson, do you have anything in the jury room?