mr. geise: may it please the court, ms. shamp, mr. kalil, mrs. odum. good morning, ladies and gentlemen. the jurors: good morning. mr. geise: once again it is the bottom of an inning, and once again i want to start by the way i started everything else, and that is thanking you for your service. as i said in voir dire and i said in opening statement, we could not have a jury trial without the aid of you so thank you. now, lawyers, we have to be here, we choose to do this. mrs. odum is here because she chose to file a lawsuit. but you did not choose this. you all were drafted to be here. and there are a range of ways that people can serve this country. ms. shamp mentioned at the end of her closing that last week was memorial day. and memorial day we honor those who have paid the ultimate sacrifice for this country. and while jury service does not rise to that level, it is still pretty high and it is i still very important and you by doing this are contributing to that. and so whatever you decide when you deliberate today, whatever your verdict, you can go back to your family, you can go back to your friends, you can go back to your co-workers and you can tell them that you contributed to making this country what it is because you have. and you have made a tremendous contribution to it. you have been on time, you have been attentive, you have taken lots of notes, and you have asked lots of questions. you have truly participated in this process. and for what you have done, again, let me thank you on behalf of myself, my team, and my clients. thank you. when this case started two weeks ago i told you that this is not the case about other smokers. it is a case only about ethelene hazouri. and, in particular, this case has two distinct issues. where did her cancer start and what were her choices that she made when it came to smoking? and as this case comes to a close now, it is still about those issues. and two weeks ago i told you in opening statement you are going to hear an avalanche of testimony about things that have nothing to do with ethelene hazouri or those issues. and you sure did. and you saw more of that today from ms. shamp. you saw things that judge mitchell has instructed you a couple of times that do not need to be resolved here. things about the engle findings. those findings are done. that part was over. things that i told you in my opening statement were not an issue. and the findings do not answer a single question on that verdict form for you, not one. dr. burns and dr. bagnoli, one came live, one by video. they spent a lot of time telling you that smoking causes cancer. well, you heard that from judge mitchell on day one and me on day one. it was not an issue then, it is not an issue now. dr. burns and dr. werner talked to you a lot about cigarette smoking is addictive. we heard that from judge mitchell, you heard that from me on day one. it was not an issue then and it is not an issue now. and another thing that this case is not about is whether cigarettes should be legal. you heard a lot about advertising. you will be instructed that cigarettes are legal to make, cigarettes are legal to advertise, cigarettes are legal to sell, and cigarettes are legal to smoke. and in this case you heard that, yes, my client manufacturers cigarettes. and you heard in this case that the hazouri family's own store sold cigarettes. and you heard it in this case that mrs. hazouri smoked cigarettes. all of those things are legal acts, all of them. none of them is a basis for liability. now, ms. shamp talked for a while and i have a lot to respond to. and throughout my closing argument i'm going to try to walk through the evidence you heard, and i'm going to show you a lot of the testimony you heard. and i want to show you the testimony you heard in this case because this is ethelene hazouri's case, not somebody else's case. so i'm going to focus on that testimony. and i'm also from time to time going to revisit things that you heard in opening statements from either ms. shamp or me, things that we told you we thought the evidence would be, because i want you to see if the parties kept their word on what the evidence was. to start, i told you in opening statement that the plaintiff would only tell you half the story, and that you would probably have to wait for cross-examination or for our witnesses to the bottom of the inning to hear the whole story. and the plaintiff did just that. do you remember dr. proctor? he was the witness who was probably the best half story teller in the trial. he was the million dollar witness that had that travel itinerary and that calendar that had him in a different courtroom almost every day in the month of may. and he came in here and he told you he could not tell you anything about ethelene hazouri, nothing. he knew nothing about her story. well, maybe no story is better than a half story. and how many times did i have to show you the rest of the story with dr. proctor? he planted a nugget in your minds during direct examination and let it sit there, let it fester until i've had a chance to get and cross examined him to show you the other side of the story, the side he did not want to tell. remember you were shown a winston ad used the flintstones. do you remember that? dr. proctor put it up, played it for you and said, well, reynolds' advertised on here, and the implication is, we are targeting kids, we are using cartoons. but on cross you heard the rest of the story. you learned that the flintstones were originally an evening kind of, for adults, modeled after the honeymooners. and it aired in the evening and that is when reynolds advertised it; not saturday mornings. and you learned that the flintstones were also sponsored by alka seltzer and one-a-day vitamins. dr. proctor did not want to tell you that. and you learned that reynolds never advertised on the flintstones after it moved to mornings. they did not. you learned that mrs. hazouri was 38 years old when the flintstones debuted it. and the last part of the story, the last part that they did not share is there is no evidence that mrs. hazouri ever watched the show. teague 53, you saw it again today. plaintiff told you and dr. proctor told you that dr. teague did a research project and he found all this information about cigarettes, and that he did not make his research memo public. but on cross you heard that all 78 articles cited by dr. teague he got from public literature. and on redirect, dr. proctor said, well, but some of them may have been hard to find. do you remember that? so are you going to punish dr. teague for working a little harder to find them. another example of only telling you half the story is this: internal company research about nicotine and suggesting that research was done to find the level to keep smokers addicted. on cross you heard the other side of the story. this research was done at the urging of the public health community in conjunction with the national cancer institute, tobacco working group. do you remember that testimony? at the instigation of the 1981 surgeon general's report. and you also heard today about sine qua non. and that is something that dr. teague put in an article. and i do not know if you remember when i took dr. proctor through that document and i put up quote for quote next to it to what dr. teague said in the 1970s, and showed the same language from other articles in the published literature in the 1930s and the 1940s. and you heard that this study of nicotine was done by the national cancer institute as a way to try to find a less hazardous cigarette. that was the name of the program. the idea was, okay, let us get the tar down because tar has the carcinogens that kill, but let us keep the level of nicotine medium because people smoke for nicotine. ms. shamp likes to call it nicotine manipulation. the national cancer institute called it progress, called it worked toward a less hazardous cigarette. dr. proctor did not tell you any of that on his direct. but on cross this is what he admitted about that research. i asked him: and you are aware of documents that throughout the 1970s where public health groups and even the united states government were recommending that the tar-to-nicotine ratios should be altered in an effort to produce a less hazardous cigarette. and dr. proctor said: exactly. i think it is actually a great idea. a great idea. and dr. proctor also talks about at one point this accusation that dr. maurice seavers who was at the tobacco industry plant on the surgeon general's committee because he was a consultant for american tobacco. do you remember that testimony? but on cross dr. proctor admitted that dr. seavers was actually nominated by the american cancer society, and that before he accepted that nomination he told surgeon general burney: i want to make sure you know this, that i have a consulting agreement with american tobacco. surgeon general burney said: it is okay, we still want you. and, you know, they put it up again and maybe this will get played later for you, but the 1994 congressional testimony that ms. shamp has played a couple of times through trial. just to point out the other side of the story, it was after ms. hazouri had died. and maybe the most inflammatory half story of all considering ms. shamp's argument about youth marketing is dr. proctor's story about joe camel. he alleged that joe camel made young people smoke. do you remember his testimony on that? well, since he did not know anything about the facts of mrs. hazouri, he may not have realized that she was in her 60s during the time of joe camel. but surely, surely he knew that his allegation had been investigated by the ftc and shot down. you saw this with dr. proctor. and this is exhibit am2645. and the ftc concluded: although it may seem intuitive to some that the joe camel advertising campaign would lead more children to smoke or lead children to smoke more. the evidence to support that intuition is not there. again, dr. proctor told you half the story. now, when i kept showing dr. proctor all these things he did not tell you, what did he say? i said: now, you did not tell the jury any of those facts today, did you? and dr. proctor said: no, there is a million facts i did not tell you. dr. burns and dr. proctor showed you lots of memos from bench level scientists and from other reynolds employees, but there was one that they failed to show you. one that i had to show you with dr. proctor and i showed you again with dr. figlar. this is as173. and this is from the president of reynolds to the head of r and d in 1968. and what did it say? it said: in cooperation with others, you should push the work concerning tobacco and health, you should prepare a plan to foster any relationship with government personnel, and to quest a mutual understanding of facts ultimately to gain the cooperation and proper research of the subject. and then the president of reynolds said: if there is a safer cigarette, let us continue and increase our efforts in this program. please prepare a plan to carry it out. and he uses the term "continue" because it was already underway. the work was already underway. and he says: increase our efforts. and you heard from dr. figlar about the efforts that reynolds was undertaking. dr. burns and dr. proctor knew about that document but they did not show it to you. and why did we have to wait for cross-examination before our witnesses to get those full stories? the side of the story the plaintiff did not tell you, why? the answer is simple. to get you mad. dr. burns and dr. proctor did not offer a single opinion about mrs. hazouri. they were here to get you mad so that you would decide this case based on emotion instead of facts about mrs. hazouri. because if you focused on mrs. hazouri, unlike dr. proctor or dr. burns, the plaintiff loses. the plaintiff loses because she cannot meet her burden of proof of proving mrs. hazouri's cancer started in her lung. the plaintiff loses because mrs. hazouri was not addicted. she maintained control over her smoking choices and she smoked because she wanted to until she was ready to quit. and the plaintiff loses because she cannot build that bridge i talked about to prove reliance, to prove a link between anything reynolds said or did in any smoking decision made by mrs. hazouri. you might recall that i used this slide in opening statement, and i showed you the burdens that the plaintiff has to meet in this case. the plaintiff has to meet medical causation, addiction, and addiction causation first. medical causation, they have to prove that mrs. hazouri's cancer started in her lung. for addiction they have to prove she was addicted to nicotine. and for addiction causation, that addiction was a legal cause of her death. as i said in open statement plaintiff has the burden of proof. that was true then and it is true now. and the plaintiff has to prove those three things. now, the three burdens are found in the first question on the verdict form. and i am going to walk through the verdict form. and these three questions are found in the first question. you can see you are going to be asked: was ethelene hazouri addicted to smoking cigarettes containing nicotine, and if so, was such an addiction a legal cause of her lung cancer? so the plaintiff has to prove that she had primary lung cancer, that she was addicted, and that addiction was a legal cause. now, the plaintiff has to prove all three of those to get a yes to the question, all three. if she fails on one, she fails on all. one strike and she is out on this question. and if she said -- and if the answer to this question is a no, you proceed no further except to sign and date the verdict form. so that is to cross all three of those hurdles on that first question or this case is over. i'm going to address all three of those burdens. let us start with the first one. where did her cancer start? to address the question the plaintiff called dr. bagnoli. and you heard that this is the second tobacco trial that dr. bagnoli has been in, but the first one he is been in as an expert. in a prior case brought by mr. kalil's firm, dr. bagnoli testified as the treating physician, you know, the doctor who meets the patient, conducts the test, know what happens, made an independent diagnosis based on those factors. here you did not hear from any of mrs. hazouri's treating physicians. you got dr. bagnoli. dr. bagnoli, kind of like ms. shamp said, this is an easy case. it is an easy case. and no matter what i asked him on cross-examination, he was not willing to change his way, but he changed his story along the way. do you recall how many times i had to get out his deposition and point out to him that he was saying something different on the stand than he had said just a couple of months in his deposition. he said different things on whether at the time he had records that relate to the diagnosis or not; whether a workup was done to distinguish a primary from a metastatic cancer. and there was this flip flop on the stand, one page of art in the transcript. i asked dr. bagnoli: and you agree that mrs. hazouri did quit smoking, correct? and he said: no. and then a page later i said: let me ask it again. do you agree that mrs. hazouri actually quit smoking? and then he said: yes. aside from these ping-ponging stories they are concerned is about how thorough dr. bagnoli reviewed the records in this case. before his deposition you heard he said he did not see any medical records regarding her smoking history, any. so we showed him the records of the deposition that do mention smoking, and both of them mentioned that she was a former smoker. and what was his explanation for why he did not see those? in a case where you hear there is very few medical records, what was his explanation? he said: must have just missed them, must have just missed them. that seems like that is the theme of what the plaintiffs are saying, there is medical cases out there. dr. bagnoli says: he assumes the doctors who actually treated mrs. hazouri did what they needed to do and did a complete workup. well, the problem ladies and gentlemen, is the burden of proof is not met by assumption, it is not. and if dr. bagnoli had taken a minute to call his partner -- he said, i know these people, oh, yeah, that is my partner. if he had taken a minute to call him, a minute he might have been able to answer some of the questions and fill some of the blanks. if he is so sure, why not just pick up the phone and confirm it? and, you know, when i forced dr. bagnoli to comment on the evidence he looked at, and instead of telling us what his assumption is, he had to admit that some of those assumptions must be wrong. he admitted that a diagnosis of primary lung cancer cannot be made from the radiology. i asked him this question: and dr. bagnoli, i think you said earlier the diagnosis of primary lung cancer cannot be made from the available radiology in this case; correct. and he said: well, you are correct. you cannot make that diagnosis just from the x-rays that we have available to us. so dr. bagnoli said it. and i told you in my opening statement, i told you you would hear from an expert witness hired to come in here and testify who would say he could not make an independent diagnosis of primary lung cancer based on the information that is contained in the medical records. i told you that would be dr. bagnoli. and when i said that in opening statement, ms. shamp objected. and i said, fine, you will hear it from dr. bagnoli. when you heard from him, it was true. i asked dr. bagnoli: based on all of the information that was contained in ethelene hazouri's medical records, you agree that you cannot make an independent diagnosis of primary lung cancer; correct? and he said: i personally cannot make the diagnosis without seeing the pathology report, reviewing records which are unavailable to me. i have the same information you have, dr. bagnoli said, he cannot make a diagnosis of primary cancer. if the plaintiff's own expert cannot make that independent diagnosis, then the plaintiff cannot meet her burden of proving primary lung cancer to you. and you know why dr. bagnoli had to admit that? you know. you have now seen the evidence. and to paraphrase what ms. shamp said, the evidence here -- she said the evidence of primary lung cancer is enormous. you have seen what the evidence is. you know there are no pathology, nothing from mrs. hazouri's lung cancer for any doctor for you to look at. you know there is no pathology report that describes anything about mrs. hazouri's cancer. you know there is no record of any stains or any diagnostic tests that were done on her cancer. you know no autopsy was performed, and you know there are no chest x-rays, actual films to look at. and dr. burns, in his testimony, went through another laundry list of things that you would do to distinguish a primary from a metastatic cancer, things about the ct scans, chemical tests, bone scans, brain scans, and mris. those steps were not done here either. and just like a high school math class, the burden of proof demands that the plaintiff show her work and prove how she came up with the answer; not just an assumption, but proof. and when you add everything up that is missing, it does not equal proof of primary lung cancer. it does not add up. there is no pathology, there is no pathology reports, there is no stains, there is no diagnostic tests, no autopsy, no chest x-rays, no cancer on the x-ray reports. and we are going to talk more about that. no bone scan, no mri. it adds up to no proof of primary lung cancer. so we called dr. okun and you heard from dr. okun. he spent 33 years sitting on tumor boards, and he told you that tumor boards are where cancer specialists work together and they discuss their difficult cases to determine what kind of cancer the patient has, where the cancer started, and what is the best course of treatment. and dr. okun said, looking at the records here, you cannot say it is a primary lung cancer based on the missing evidence. and he said, you cannot say it is a primary lung cancer based on the evidence we have. and let us look at some of the evidence you saw. i'll start with the cytology report. mr. quagmeyer (phonetic), if you could just maybe bring it up a little bit slower, that would be awesome. you are ahead of me a little bit. cytology report: no tumor cells noted. dr. okun told you that the fact that there are no cancer cells on the cytology, it does not tell us much, but it certainly does not prove that mrs. hazouri had a primary lung cancer. it just proves there were no cancer cells in the cytology. but an interesting point about that cytology report is the date. and let us look at the destruction sheet. you saw this sheet with dr. bagnoli and dr. okun where there is bronchial washings, bronchial brushings, plural fluid or psychology done in the left lung biopsy. you will notice these three tests were done on november 26th, and you will notice that the cytology was done on november 30th, four days later. now, if the biopsy was positive for lung cancer, or if the bronchial washings, or the brushings were positive, then why would the doctors go back for days later to do another test to look for cancer? why? and you have also seen the collection of radiology reports from over two years leading up to mrs. hazouri's cancer diagnosis. all seven of them. i walked you through all seven of them with dr. okun. x-rays from august of 1991 to july of 1993. dr. okun told you that no radiology report ever mentions a tumor, a mass, or anything that can be primary lung cancer. he told you that if someone has a primary lung cancer that starts in their lung, it would be growing, you would see a tumor in the lung developing and getting bigger in the years and months leading up to the diagnosis. that was not the case in here. there is no x-ray report leading up to her diagnosis that mentions a tumor in her lung, none. in the very last chest x-ray we have from july of 1993, it says: no acute disease seen. no cancer, no tumor, no disease, no nothing. no proof that cancer started in her lung. now, dr. bagnoli agrees. i asked him: so my question to you, dr. bagnoli, is the same question you were asked in january, is there a particular radiology report in the available medical records that you believe described what might by the primary tumor? and he said there was no tumor, no mass identified. that is dr. bagnoli. now, in her closing argument, ms. shamp talked to you about, there is something on the x-rays, there is something there. well, you saw on the x-ray report, there was something there. it was pneumonia. remember that? the one record said pneumonia. and i asked dr. bagnoli and i asked dr. cook, pneumonia comes and goes, does not it? and they said, yes. so if there is something there, it was pneumonia. there is no indication that it was a tumor, or a mass, or cancer. now, the series of x-ray reports do not prove that the cancer started in her lung. and, in fact, they are more typical and more consistent with the metastatic spread of cancer from somewhere else into the lung. and despite admitting that the diagnosis of primary lung cancer cannot be made on the x-rays, and that no tumor or mass was ever identified in the lung, dr. bagnoli said there was nothing inconsistent with the x-rays and the diagnosis of lung cancer. nothing inconsistent? seven x-ray reports that do not mention it? his admission that you cannot see it on there and that is not inconsistent? and you learned about mrs. hazouri's specific cell type, adenocarcinoma. and you learned that it is the most common cell type in nonsmokers. and you learned that it is the most common cell type of cancers that start somewhere else and spread to the lung. and dr. okun explained that there are 30 to 40 sites in the body that have that same glandular structure, the glandular cells that give rise to adenocarcinoma, 30 to 40 sites that could be the source of a primary cancer. and you might recall in my analogy for opening statement where i said, you know, this is kind of like, you know, a house that caught on fire is you need to determine which room the fire started. and you might guess that it started in the kitchen from grease on the stove, or you might guess it started in the family room in a fireplace, or you might guess it starts in the bedroom from a candle. but to go beyond a guess and to prove the answer, you need facts and you need evidence. and in this case, you know there are no pictures of what was going on, but you have seven eye witness accounts from the fire marshal, seven. seven x-ray reports. the reports of what the radiologist saw when they looked at her x-rays, and what they saw in the years leading up to her diagnosis. and in every x-ray report the doctors make no mention of cancer at all. the pictures they looked at of her lung or the kitchen, there is no report of a frying pan, there is no report of a stove, there is no report of grease, there is nothing at all. dr. okun walked you through every one of those, and no mention of a tumor, no mention of cancer, no mention of a primary cell, nothing. and dr. bagnoli agreed with that. now, ms. shamp today said it was there, they just did not see it. now, before, she said, these doctors who treated her are great, this is a great team. and now she is saying, it was there, they just did not see it. well, first of all, they did not see it because there was nothing to see there, there was nothing there. and even so, if you want to believe this that they did not see it. not seeing something is not proof of it being there. she needs to bring the proof in here and show it to you. where was the doctor that said, you are right, we missed it. you did not hear from anybody who said that. and that is -- you know, that is kind of what the plaintiff asked you to do here. they have seen the x-ray reports, they know what they do not have it. and they say, well, let us fill in the blanks. let us assume something else. let us assume we can prove what we need to prove. they want you to guess, they want you to speculate, they want you to assume. the plaintiff cannot meet her burden of proof by suggesting that something once existed that might helped her to meet it. it does not work that way. she does not get to assume that tests were run when there is no records that they were and certainly no record of the results. she does not get to have you assume that the doctors you did not hear from did something that we have no record of them doing. in a lawsuit to recover money, the plaintiff has the burden of proof. the plaintiff does not get a benefit of the doubt. in the passing of time, and here i understand it is 19 years, it does not give the plaintiff a pass on her burden of proof. it does not. the burden of proof remains the same today as it would have been 19 years ago. and mrs. odum did not prove that mrs. hazouri's cancer started in the lung. and so a couple of more points on this medical question. and one of them links to a question to dr. okun that one of you asked him. and he actually said, it would have been a great question for me to ask, and i wish i had. but you asked whether a cancer can go from an unseen stage 1 to stage 4 in a matter of months? and dr. okun told you the primary cancer does not work that way. he says it takes years and years for a cancer to grow, and it can take a long time before the patient knows it is there before they know the have the cancer is there. and dr. burns told you the same thing. he told you that lung cancer does not just pop up overnight. this is what he said. he said: people tend to think of cancer as if it were being hit by a lightning bolt because that is the way it is commonly experienced. you come in with a symptom, the doctor says you have cancer. but in reality, cancer is a series of chronic changes that occur over a very long period of time that lead to two important changes in how the cell functions. by the time mrs. hazouri presented with metastatic cancer it was stage 4. and dr. okun told you that the cancer that gave rise to her disease had to have started somewhere in her body years before that; or as dr. burns said, a very long period of time before. and we do not know where the primary site was, but we know from the evidence in this case from the chest x-rays that it was not in the lung. now, to try to counter over two years of chest x-rays, negative cytology report, the report from all seven radiology reports, the plaintiff relies on three sheets of paper, a handwritten note, a billing record, and the death certificate. and dr. prokes -- i think it is prokes, not prokes. i think it is dr. prokes, he does mention lung cancer, no doubt about it. but you know that the word primary lung cancer does not appear on a single record. and i say the word "primary" for a reason. i thought it was interesting that today, and with dr. okun ms. shamp asked if that little line and a circle is like some shorthand symbol for the word primary. and what dr. okun said was, i do not know, i do not know what dr. prokes' thing is. it could mean primary, or it could be his primary assessment because it was on the assessment form of the thing, so i do not know. but if it does mean what ms. shamp wants it to mean, why did not she ask dr. bagnoli about it? why did not he come in here and tell you that? if it is his opinion that mrs. hazouri had primary lung cancer, would not he have used that to support his opinion? of course he would have. of course. and if that is what dr. prokes meant back in december of 1993, when you saw that handwritten note, then why did dr. prokes write metastatic lung cancer on the death certificate in march of 1994? now, you have heard that mrs. hazouri had a team, and dr. bagnoli knows dr. prokes and he knows the team of doctors who actually treated her. but he did not bother to call anyone from that team to try to get more information. and since you did not hear from dr. prokes or any other team member, you are stuck with dr. bagnoli. and since dr. prokes put metastatic lung cancer on the death certificate, i suggest that dr. bagnoli was afraid of the answer he would have received if he did call him. and it is safer for dr. bagnoli to just make an assumption instead of making a phone call and being proven wrong. and there is one other thing dr. burns told you about primary versus metastatic cancer. dr. burns was asked: and when you use terms like primary and metastatic, primary means primary lung cancer would be cancer that started in the lung; correct? and he said: starts in the lung cancer and spreads to other tissue. and then he is asked: and metastatic cancer might be a cancer that starts outside the lung and spreads and deposits tumors in the lung; correct. and dr. burns says: that is correct. he is their expert. he is not my expert. now, if we could bring up that other chart again. if you look at this, you look at all the medical evidence we have. nothing, plus nothing, plus nothing, plus nothing, plus nothing, plus nothing, plus nothing, plus nothing, all adds up to equal no proof of primary lung cancer. and the greater weight of the evidence, the weight of those two years of chest x-rays prove that there is no primary lung cancer. and combined with the lack of the other evidence, the plaintiff failed to meet her burden of proof, and that failure decides this case. because she did not clear that first hurdle, the answer to the first question on the verdict form has to be no, and that ends the case because the answer to that is no, you sign it ends the case. now, i'm going to address the other issues. and if you get passed that first hurdle, the next hurdle that the plaintiff has to prove if mrs. hazouri was addicted? and when you get the instructions from the court, you are going to need to decide what addiction means in this case. the court is not going to define that term for you. now, if we want to take, as ms. shamp says, we will take dr. prokes' word for what he put in his records. if he put cancer, that means cancer. and i think she said dr. prokes knows the patient, he did a nine-day workup of the patient. if we are going to do that, let us take dr. prokes' word on addiction. because there is not a single medical record that ever says mrs. hazouri was addicted. nine days of workup and all the times that dr. prokes saw mrs. hazouri, he never said she was addicted. and there is no medical record at all from dr. prokes or her other doctor that reveals that. dr. werner agreed. i asked her -- actually, mr. parrish asked her: my question was when reviewing ms. hazouri's records there was nothing you ever found where a doctor gave a diagnosis of nicotine dependence or addiction; correct? and she said: correct. now, dr. werner testified that addiction is the loss of control over the use of a substance. the evidence in this case demonstrated that mrs. hazouri had complete control of her smoking. let us look at this example. you heard that she did not smoke in her living room, she did not smoke while cooking, she did not smoke in her house, she did not smoke in church, she did not smoke around people from church, she did not smoke around mrs. odum's friends, she did not smoke around her kids. and there were other long periods of time when she did not smoke. you would hear she could go six or seven hours at a time if she was at one of her grandson's sporting events where she did not have to have a cigarette. look at all of these places and the situations in which mrs. hazouri did not smoke. that is not evidence of a loss of control at all. mrs. hazouri controlled when, where, and around whom she smoked. she exercised control over her smoking; her smoking did not control her. and under that definition, one of the ones offered from dr. werner, mrs. hazouri was not addicted. now, an additional way that mrs. hazouri controlled her smoking behavior was the amount she smoked. and ms. shamp told you in her opening statement that mrs. hazouri smoked every waking hour. i do not know if you remember that. she said every waking hour. and she told you today that no one disputes that mrs. hazouri smoked 15 to 30 cigarettes today. she told you that just this morning. 15 to 30, no one disputes, every waking hour. you have heard the evidence and you know that is just not true. let us take a look at this slide. every waking hour. you heard from richard odum, mrs. odum's husband. he said he new her for about seven or eight years and that he saw her smoke seven or eight cigarettes ever, ever. that is but about once per year. you heard from robert raulerson, bobby raulerson, mrs. hazouri's grandson. he spent the summer days with her and she smoked four to five cigarettes a day. you heard from ernest raulerson, mrs. odum's first husband who knew mrs. hazouri from 1966 to 1986, and he said she smoked less than bill hazouri. and he said bill hazouri smoked five cigarettes per day. and then you also have reverend gore and nell nelson. they were around mrs. hazouri for an awful lot of waking hours and never saw her smoke in one of them. and this is another interesting point. if mrs. hazouri was smoking every waking hour, where are the other people that saw her smoking every waking hour? where was that evidence? you did not hear that. and in addition to those witnesses, you heard from mrs. hazouri herself by way of her medical records. and what did she say? 1993 she said, 15 cigarettes a day for 25 years, quit in '11. and then there is not a single record that describes her as a current smoker, none. there is not one. and the other thing is, dr. werner told you that her definition of a heavy smoker is someone who smokes more than one pack per day. do you remember that testimony? and using her definition, she admitted mrs. hazouri was not a heavy smoker. she was asked: you do not consider ms. hazouri a heavy smoker, correct? and dr. werner said: correct. you saw a lot of pictures of mrs. hazouri. she is not holding a cigarette or smoking a cigarette in any of those. so the evidence that you heard shows that she certainly was not smoking every waking hour. and as dr. werner told you, she was not a heavy smoker. she controlled the environment in which she would smoke an she controlled the amount she would smoke and she controlled the amount she smoked. she did not have a loss of control over that. she was not an out-of-control smoker and she was not an addicted smoker. and under dr. werner's loss of control definition, mrs. hazouri was not addicted, and the plaintiff does not clear that burden either. now, dr. werner and dr. barnett both talked about the dsm, and dr. werner told you that you she agreed that qualified psychiatrists can look at the same set of facts under the dsm and reach different opinions. and that each psychiatrist has to apply their own clinical judgment based on their experience, their background, and their training. dr. barnett did just that and reached a different conclusion than dr. werner. now, ms. shamp in her cross-examination of dr. barnett and today tries to belittle her, tries to belittle her because she works in a solo practice, tries to belittle her because she is not writing papers or writing books. when you look at dr. barnett's experience and her background, what did you hear about it? you heard that she is board certified as an addiction psychiatrist. dr. werner was not. and you have heard that dr. barnett was the chair of the addiction committee for the florida psychiatric association. and she left that post when? when she became the president of the florida psychiatric association. and you could put up a list of things that dr. barnett has never done. well, you know what else you can put on that list? dr. barnett has never sent a letter to all the lawyers in the state of florida offering to show up in court and testify for them. but dr. werner sent a letter like that. so the attack on dr. barnett's credentials as a board certified addiction psychiatrist, as the former president of the florida psychiatric association, i think that is a little off base. now, despite telling you that that dsm can be used as a cookbook. you might remember dr. werner told you that. dr. werner tried to do just that, and ms. shamp tried to do it again today with you when she put up a checklist with all the boxes. it cannot be used as a cookbook but we are going to use it as a cookbook. and in trying to use the cookbook, dr. werner missed that first step of the recipe. you saw it today. when the dsm says, the first thing you must do for substance dependence is look for a maladaptive pattern for substance abuse that leads to clinically significant impairment or distress. that is the first thing in that criteria. and dr. barnett told you that, that is the threshold, that is the key one. and if you do not see that maladaptive pattern, or you do not have that clinically significant impairment, you stop. that is the first thing that a clinician does, and you did not see that here. mrs. hazouri did not have a maladaptive pattern. she was not clinically significantly impaired or stressed. you saw how she functioned normally. she functioned normally in her house, she functioned normally in her garden, she functioned normally with her family, she functioned normally anywhere she went, bowling, you name it. now, in addition, ms. shamp showed you that top part from the dsm today and it was talking about some of the clauses in there, but there is one part that she left out. where her ellipses went dot, dot, dot, you know what that said for the criteria? it said you need to observe those within the same 12-month period. now, dr. werner did not do that. she pulled information from the 1930s to try to satisfy one criteria, she went over here in the 1950s, picked another, 1970s, picked another. it has to be that same 12-month period. and finally in talking about how she tried to apply this and what she looked at, dr. werner really stretched in a few points. do you recall this testimony when she was talking about mrs. hazouri's conversations with her grandson about smoking? she said this: and that was when robert, her grandson, was about ten years old; correct? and she said: i believe so, yes. and those are the conversations that bobby testified about that she told him, do not smoke, it causes cancer. and then dr. werner was asked: and that would be in the 1970s when that occurred; correct? and she says: correct. but she could not stop there. she could not resist. so she said: which is around the same time of reverend gore's testimony with regard to her talking to him about the health effects; not in the '50s, it was in '70s. and you know that is not true, and we are going to talk about reverend gore quite a bit. now, unprompted. that is something that dr. werner just throws in. something you know is not true. you heard that mrs. hazouri was happy, sunny, spiritual. she was not significantly impaired. in choosing to do something that you enjoy and then stopping it when you are ready to quit is not a maladaptive pattern of substance abuse. and i told you during opening statement you were going to learn some simple facts about nicotine and nicotine addiction, and you did. can we bring up that slide again. it is: nicotine addiction does not permanently change the brain -- i'm going to go back to this one: nicotine leaves the system in 48 hours. it does not interfere with the smoker's ability to understand warnings, and it does not prevent smokers from quitting. let us look at that first, because one thing might have gotten confusing during dr. werner's testimony with regard to whether the changes in the brain, the changes that ms. shamp talked about today are permanent or not. everything causes brain changes, and smoking certainly does. everybody who smokes is going to get a brain change, but it is not permanent. one of you asked dr. werner that question. i do not know which one it was, but it was a good question. and i'm not sure that the answer she gave you on the jury was the same answer she gave during cross-examination. because during cross-examination she made her answer clear. she made it absolutely clear. let us take a look. she was asked: so this change to the brain you are talking about, that is not a permanent change, is it. and she said: it is absolutely not a permanent change with regard to the receptors. the brain is an amazing organ and it tries to fix itself. absolutely not, is what she said on cross. she tried to say something different to you. and i do not know if that is part of the things that dr. werner learns or she teaches it. you remember that addictionology class that she teaches for other people going to court and testifying like she does. and ms. shamp said, the documents that are going back are all important, she said. well, her addictionology slides are going back with you, too. just take a look at ats4777, and see what dr. werner tells other folks that are coming to testify. see what she tells them about how you look at the jury, how you are supposed to act on the witness stand, what you are supposed to do, and then ask yourself if she tried that same stuff with you. and i think the answer is yes. now, as you learned, nicotine and addiction do not prevent people from quitting. and the plaintiffs' experts and everybody admitted that. and when dr. werner put up a slide of the addiction cycle. do you remember that? it was right at the end of her testimony on redirect she put up this slide. and there was one thing she left off her slide. she had all these arrows everywhere, but she never had an arrow for people who quit. and you know that millions and millions and millions and millions of smokers have quit. millions of addicted smokers have quit and they have quit for good. and ethelene hazouri quit, too. and speaking of ethelene hazouri quitting, i do not think there is any dispute in this case over whether she quit. i do not think there is. but like many of the other issues, there are two sides to the story about when she quit. and it fits, frankly, mrs. odum and her husband against everybody else. this is the line up: did she quit before her diagnosis or did she quit after her diagnosis? and under mr. and mrs. odum's version of the story: mrs. hazouri quit after her cancer diagnosis when she came home. at some point she had oxygen in the house. we do not know if it was that very first day, it seemed like it was months later. but she quit after the diagnosis. she quit without patches, she quit without nicorette, she quit without any assistance. so even under their story it demonstrates she had the ability to quit when that diagnosis motivated her. and even under their side of the story, she was not a tortured smoker who had to keep smoking after the diagnosis. but the other side of the story demonstrates that she quit well before her diagnosis. and let us go down what we will call, on this side of the story. ms. odum's own son, bobby raulerson, testified: "so you believe that by 1986, your grandmother had quit smoking? "yes, i do believe by 1986 she had quit smoking. "and after your observation that she had quit smoking as of 1986, did you ever know her to smoke other cigarettes. and he said: not that i'm aware of." now, bobby raulerson said he lived with his grandmother for six months between 1991 and 1992, did not see her smoke, did not see or smell any signs of smoking. and he even told us something else about this period in the 1980s. he testified that mrs. odum told mrs. hazouri that she was proud of her quitting in the 1980s. mrs. odum did not tell you that as part of her testimony. next up is mrs. odum's youngest son, james raulerson or jimmy raulerson. he testified that he remembered his grandmother smoking when he was five or six, but last time he saw her smoking was when he was 12 or 13, in the early '80s, never saw her smoke again. never saw her smoke when he lived with her for two years in the early '90s before her diagnosis. let us look at his testimony. and there was a dispute over whether he was living with her full-time or not. he moved in in july of '90 and moved out september '92: "talking about september '90 to september '92, you lived there full-time? "yes. "okay. is it possible in your mind during the length of time and the amount of time that you spent in your grandmother's house that your grandmother was smoking cigarettes and you did not know? "no, she did not. "and is it possible for her to do it -- smoking without you detecting it during that period of time? "no, she did not smoke at all." he lived there for over two years and he said she did not smoke. now, interestingly, despite the fact that jimmy raulerson lived with mrs. hazouri for over two years, mrs. odum told you she was not even sure that jimmy ever lived with his grandmother. and he did for over two years. next we have ernest raulerson, mrs. odum's ex-husband. and he testified that ms. hazouri quit sometime in the '80s: "best of your recollection, he had a conversation with her, she told you she had quit before 1990? "yes, sir. "and to the best of your recollection, that conversation took place between 1986 and 1990?" now, those are three eye witnesses from the 1980s who said she quit. and you also saw the testimony from mrs. hazouri herself and her medical records. the 1991 medical record that refers to her as a previous smoker. you saw it. and in the 1993 medical record it says she smoked for 25 years, 15 cigarettes a day and quit in '11. now, in opening statement i said, i do not what the quitting leverage is. but with some of mrs. shamp's witnesses they said, oh, that means she quit in november 1992. i do not know where we got that information. i did not hear anybody take the stand and testify that that is what it meant. but whatever the answer to that, it is evidence for sure that she quit and evidence for sure that she quit long before her diagnosis. and mrs. hazouri was the source for the information on her medical records. in every record that mentions smoking, mentions that is she quit. it mentions that she quit before her diagnosis. now, on top of this evidence we have been looking, there is one more witness who supports the fact that mrs. hazouri quit in the 1980s, and that is nell nelson. and you remember her. she was probably the most captivating witness who took the stand and what did she say: "now, you testified that mrs. hazouri was your very best friend. "yes, she was. "and you never saw her smoke a cigarette? "never. "and you said the only time you had heard that she had smoked cigarettes was when she told you after she was diagnosed? "right. "so in any of the conversations you had with your very good friend in the 1980s into the 1990s, she never mentioned to you that she was a cigarette smoker?" and she said: "no." mrs. hazouri's very best friend never saw her smoke, never saw her with a pack of cigarettes, never saw a pack at her house, never saw an ashtray, and never smelled smoke in the house. and ms. nelson made it extremely clear that she did not smell smoke in mrs. hazouri's hair when she hugged her every time she saw her. do you remember that testimony. now, mr. odum testified and made it a point to tell you, i could smell the smoke in her hair. now ms. shamp said you can question the credibility of the witnesses. i think you should question the credibility of richard odum's testimony. and why? because you heard on his deposition he said, he was not aware of any conversations or discussions about smoking with mrs. hazouri. but on the stand he all of a sudden, he recalled that he overheard some things when he was in the den and something was going on in the other room. well, with regard to smelling smoke, i wonder if his sense of smell improved when he took the witness stand as well. and, moreover, nell nelson told you she had no idea that ethel ever smoked, and while many other people in the church came to her and asked her to pray for a number of things, including smoking, her best friend, mrs. hazouri never did. do you remember this testimony: "and mrs. hazouri never asked you to pray for her or to help her stop smoking, correct?" and nell said: "no. others had, but she had not." why? why did not mrs. hazouri ask nell nelson to pray for her? because she did not need to, because she had already stopped smoking. now, go back to this chart. this is the evidence of when mrs. hazouri quit. on one side you have the disinterested factors, and mrs. hazouri herself. and on the other side you have the person bringing the lawsuit and her husband. and i think it hurts the plaintiff's theory in the case to say that the person quit and they were motivated before a diagnosis. but you are the judges of the facts and you are going to have to judge which facts to believe. and no matter what, we know that mrs. hazouri had the ability to quit smoking. dr. werner admitted that she had the ability at any point in any decade. can we see that, please: anybody has the ability, she had the ability the 1940s, the 1950s, the 1960s, 70s and 80s. because mrs. hazouri never experienced the loss of control, never lost the ability to quit, never had a maladaptive pattern of use, and never was clinically impaired, she was not addicted. and because the plaintiff did not prove she was addicted, she did not clear that second hurdle either. and for this additional reason, the answer to the first question on the verdict form has to be no. now, if you find otherwise, the third hurdle to determine is to determine if addiction was the legal cause of her lung cancer. and to be the legal cause the addiction must be -- and you will see it in the instructions -- it must directly and in a natural and continuous sequence caused her death. so, in other words, the addiction has to be the but for the cause of her death, that is but for the addiction, her death would not have occurred. well, addiction was not the but for cause of her death. let us look at this slide i showed you in opening: addiction did not directly and in a natural and continuous sequence cause her death. because what came in the way are these choices, the choice to begin smoking, the choice to smoke despite health warnings, to smoke -- to choose the enjoyment she got out of smoking over the risks, and the choice to not quit until she was ready to quit. now, proving legal cause is kind of like a highway. it has to be a direct and natural continuous sequence. so for addiction to be the legal cause of mrs. hazouri's disease, the plaintiff has to prove that once she started smoking, there was no way she could exit that highway; that all of those off ramps were blocked and she was destine to keep smoking until it led to her disease. a continuous sequence, direct and unbroken. and that is not the case here. mrs. hazouri had multiple exit ramps she could have taken over the years, but instead of taking them, she chose to stay on the highway. and it was her choice to stay on the highway that was the legal cause; not her addiction. now, let me point out an issue about when mrs. hazouri even got on the highway. plaintiff said that she started smoking when she was about 13, and dr. werner said she got addicted soon thereafter. but there was no evidence of her smoking a reynolds' product until the 1950s, at the earliest. so if addiction during that first 20 years of smoking is a legal cause of her death, that legal cause of her death cannot be linked to reynolds. especially if you consider mrs. hazouri said she only smoked for 25 years. now, we are going to talk in a minute about mrs. hazouri's knowledge that smoking is harmful. but do you remember how ms. odum testified every conversation about smoking was with her mother. let us take a look at that: "you told the jury earlier today that sometime in the 1960s you recall telling her that you wish she would quit smoking, try to quit smoking. "right. yes. "and her response to you was, she asked you to quit bugging her; right? "yes. "and then she told you she would try to quit when she was ready to quit. "yeah. "and you talked about having conversations with your mother throughout her life about trying to quit smoking. and each time you had a conversation with her, it kind of went the same way, did not it? "yes, sir. "she would tell you to quit bugging her. "yes, sir. "and then she would tell you she would try to quit when she was ready to quit. "yes, sir." mrs. hazouri did not want to be bugged. she decided to pass up an exit, stay on the highway, and that became the but for cause of her death. and she put off quitting because she was not ready, she chose to stay on the highway and became the but for cause of her death. she could have exited the highway and interrupted that direct and continuous sequence, but she choose to continue. and why? why was not she ready to quit? she enjoyed smoking. she told mrs. odum that she enjoyed it and she liked it. reverend gore said that mrs. hazouri, when he asked her, why are your smoking? she told him it calmed her nerves. she told him it took her thoughts away from whatever issues she faced on a daily basis. and finally she told him that she just enjoyed lighting a cigarette and inhaling. and during her opening statement ms. shamp said personal choice is a factor in this case, and it is. and mrs. hazouri's personal choice is the but for cause of her smoking. it is the but for cause of her smoking because we know that when she made the choice to quit, when she was ready to quit, she did quit. and no addiction got in the way of that choice. you saw what a couple of witnesses the 1986 surgeon general's report and how he talked about smoking being a personal choice behavior. and dr. burns agreed with that. the surgeon general koop wrote: cigarette smoking is an addictive behavior and the individual smoker must decide whether or not to continue that behavior. "you agree with that, do not you?" he said: "absolutely, sure." and dr. werner agreed too, same statement. she said, "yes. that is the first step making the decision of whether you are going to stop is the first in having to quit." mrs. hazouri was the one who made the decision to continue that behavior. and mrs. odum testified that there were occasions when her mother went without smoking for a couple of days. do you remember that? and she said, she never encouraged her mom to try to stick it out, to try to go another day. why did not she do that? because she recognized it was her mother's choice to smoke or not. mrs. hazouri and mrs. odum could have exited that highway long before, but mrs. hazouri made the choice to stay on it. when her mother had pneumonia and mrs. odum saw her smoking, she did not talk to her about it. why? because she said it was her choice whether she smoked or not. so when she had to describe why she did not talk to her mother about quitting, she said it was her mother's choice. and you heard from reverend gore, too. he talked to ethel about it and she agreed it was a matter of choice, a matter of will. he told her, that is a choice, ethel. and she agreed. now, in this lawsuit, to get money for her mother's death and her mother's choices, mrs. odum and her attorneys tell you that her mother lost her control and she did not have a choice and that she smoked because of addiction. but during her life they said it was because of her choice. and you saw this from dr. cooper a couple of different times. he told you who was in control. he said: "ultimately, you are the one who has control over your behavior. that cigarette is not going to jump into your mouth, you are not going to go into a hypnotic trance. no matter how much you have smoked or how much you smoke, you the chose to light up is always yours." this is ans9023: "the choice to light up is always yours." and when mrs. hazouri made that choice, she was the legal cause. a couple of more things on this point. we heard that mrs. hazouri said that making the choice to quit smoking was easier said than done. do you remember that testimony? let us look at it. and of course it is easier said than done. it just makes sense. but we need to look at what she said and compare it to what she did. ms. hazouri told some people throughout the course of her life that she wanted to quit smoking, that she wished she could quit, and that she wanted them to pray for her to quit. that is what had she said. but what did she do? if she started smoking when she was in her teens in the 1930s and stopped in the 1980s, that means she smoked for about 50 years. in those 50 years, almost five decades, what did she do to try to stop smoking? you heard she tried hypnosis, she chewed regular gum, she prayed, and she quit cold turkey. now, she also asked reverend gore for counseling on one occasion or maybe a couple of occasions. and he told her, remove yourself from people who smoke. and reverend gore said, i do not know if she ever took that advice or not. so we looked at her experience of hypnosis in the 1950s. we know she said it did not work, but we do not know what it was or how long it lasted, we just know that she said it was not working and she wanted to go back into smoking. she tried chewing gum. no one knows when and no one knows how many times. and dr. werner told you that mrs. hazouri stopped chewing gum because of her teeth. she did not give up that attempt because of an addiction compelled her to go back to smoking. she quit it because of her teeth. and if gum was not a suitable method because of her teeth, did she ever try something different to try to quit? no. and finally she prayed. there is no question that mrs. hazouri was prayerful. and this is a sensitive subject to talk about. as i said in my opening, i do not dispute the power of prayer. but, in this case, what evidence was there of anything mrs. hazouri did in conjunction of those comments to try to stop smoking? she never threw out her cigarettes, she never threw out her ashtrays, she never tried nicotine gum, never tried the nicotine patch. ms. shamp: objection, your honor. the court: hold on. mr. geise: your honor, i'll move on. ms. shamp: your honor, i'd like an instruction. the court: wait. wait. come to sidebar now. (a sidebar conference was held outside the hearing of the jury as follows:) ms. shamp: the nicotine patch was not available and there has been no testimony that the nicotine patch was available at that time. mr. geise: dr. werner talked about it. ms. shamp: no, she did not. mr. geise: mr. parrish asked her about it. ms. shamp: the nicotine patch did not become available until the '90s. mr. geise: '91. i believe it was the '91. you said she smoked until '93. ms. shamp: no, i do not think that -- mr. geise: it is not -- the court: what do you want to put on the record? ms. shamp: your honor, i think there is no evidence that the nicotine patch was available for him to suggest that she did not utilize the nicotine patch i think it is improper and i think you can instruct the jury the nicotine patch was available. mr. geise: you had a witness who talked about it. ms. shamp: she did not say that it was available. mr. geise: then why was she talking about in her diagnosis of mrs. hazouri? ms. shamp: she did. mr. geise: your honor, i'll move on. i'll clear it up and say that the evidence, whether it was available or not, before she died. the court: all right. okay. (following the sidebar conference, the following proceedings were had:) mr. geise: i was running through the things that there is no evidence she threw out her cigarettes or her ashtrays, never tried nicotine gum. there was a question of when the nicotine patch came out. so you know what? put it aside. forget about the nicotine patch. another thing that there is no evidence that mrs. hazouri ever did was ask dr. probes for help in quitting or any other doctor. you did not see that in any of the records. now, my son might ask me to pray that he will get an a on his history final. but if he is not motivated to put in the work and to study, it will not happen. and we know what mrs. hazouri said, but we also know what she did, or more accurately, what she did not do. for many years she simply was not motivated to quit. she was not ready to quit. perhaps it was because she was married to another smoker, bill hazouri, and they enjoyed smoking together. and as long as he was smoking, maybe she was never going to be ready to quit. whatever that reason was, it was not because of addiction. and if she had primary lung cancer, it was caused by that choice, her choice to continue to smoke until she was ready to quit. that is the legal cause; not addiction. because she was the only person who could have made the decision to exit the highway. her choice whether to do that or not is the legal cause, the but for cause of her disease. and whether we agree with it or not, we should not second guess it and we should not award mrs. odum with money for the choices her mother made. now, if you get passed that first question on the verdict form you will continue into the next two which are concealment and conspiracy to conceal. if we can bring those up. you will see that they both ask about a concealment or admission of a material fact about the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes or both and legal cause. and the one thing i want to point out is when mrs. shamp was talking about these two, she started talking about things in the public and things all over the place. but the question that you have to answer, both of them relate to mrs. hazouri. these questions go to mrs. hazouri and mrs. hazouri only. and there are essentially two parts to these questions. first, you need to determine if the information about the health risks and addictive nature of cigarette smoking were secret to mrs. hazouri? and, if so, you will need to determine if she relied on any statement to her detriment. that is the legal cause part of these two questions. and here the information was not a secret to mrs. hazouri and she did not rely on anything any tobacco company said. let us look at the next one. first, we cannot conceal information from somebody who already knows the information. so to be a legal cause of mrs. hazouri's injury, the concealed or omitted facts must have been unknown to mrs. hazouri. so ms. shamp said i want to talk about what was known. i am. i'm going to talk about what was out there in the public and i'm going to talk about what was known to mrs. ethelene hazouri. do you remember in opening statement mrs. shamp said, the evidence would show the public did not know smoking was harmful? and dr. proctor took the stand and said relatively very few people understood the harms in the 1950s. well, ladies and gentlemen, the other side of the story showed just the opposite. it showed that the public did know about the risks of smoking and its addictive nature, and more importantly, so did mrs. hazouri. and we are going to need to start this story before she was even born. we are going to start it with that 1906 florida health notes. the state of florida says: smoking is the very worse form of tobacco addiction. and dr. proctor told you about the movement following alcohol prohibition. remember when he said, the crowds would chant, nicotine next, nicotine next, nicotine next, because they were going to prohibit tobacco and smoking? and he said the reason they said nicotine next is because nicotine was synonymous with tobacco, because everybody knew that that was the drug in tobacco that made it hard to quit. ms. shamp said i'm going to talk about reader's digest. i'll talk a few of them up, why not. you heard that mrs. hazouri read reader's digest. let us look at a couple of them. 1935, this is aiw130: of course it is perfectly easy to give up smoking. one would not like to think that one has become such a slave to tobacco. let us look at the next one, 1938: sometimes hap heartedly and sometimes earnestly, he wrestles with his addiction. let him think. let us look at the last one. remember i talked to dr. proctor about this for a while, nicotine knockout and gene cunning? all this stuff was out there. and these items helped to demonstrate that the public was aware of the information. but boy, oh, boy, reverend terry gore's testimony proves that mrs. hazouri knew. let us talk about reverend gore. in the 1950s, mrs. hazouri told him that she understood that smoking could negatively affect her health and she told him she had a habit and was addicted. let us look at some of his testimony: "when did you meet her? "at central baptist church in the '50s. "so back then she actually characterized her smoking as an addiction? "she did. she referred to that often. and the next line, please: "so in the 1950s she asked you for assistance in quitting, and one of the reasons was she knew that smoking was affecting her health? "she did, sir." in the 1950s, mrs. hazouri knew the material facts about the health effects and addictive nature of smoking. now, during the 1950s, reverend gore said he was also telling the youth ministry at central baptist church about the dangers of smoking and telling the youth of the central baptist church to go home and tell their parents what they learned. and you heard that reverend gore remembers telling that to mrs. odum. and mrs. odum did not remember that, but reverend gore did. let us look at his testimony: "and you had a discussion with mrs. odum about her mother smoking in the 1950; is that right? "that is correct. "and you discussed with her that smoking was detrimental for her mother's health in the 1950s? "i did." dr. proctor said the consensus on cigarette smoking and cancer developed in the 1950s. well, mrs. hazouri was right there at that consensus. she knew about the risk and knew that her smoking behavior could be addictive. she described it as such. and, you know, other people possess the information, too. you saw this from dr. heller and dr. burney. leroy burney, the surgeon general in '57: our position is that we have informed the public through the excellent coverage of the press, radio and tv. and dr. heller said: newspapers, radio, tv, and other media have done an excellent job covering this problem and a very objective job. this is an exceedingly valuable way of informing the public. now, let us not forget that surgeon general burney and dr. heller, they were public health giants that lived and breathed during this time in the 1950s. they were officials who had their boots on the ground at the time and could give eye witness accounts, and at the time they said the public knew. now, 60 or almost 70 years later dr. proctor comes into this courtroom and says, the surgeon general and other health officials were wrong. remember he said, he is a seed to seam scientist? they were just beating their chests. do you remember that testimony? he said they have been beating their chests. well, when reverend gore is talking to mrs. hazouri and mrs. odum about the health risk of smoking in the 1950s, was he beating his chest, too? dr. proctor tried to tell you that people in the public were ignorant of the risks of smoking as late as 1964. but not ethelene hazouri. you heard that she read the newspaper, and the jacksonville newspapers covered the surgeon general's report when it came out in '64. and cigarette smoking was held a grave hazard in health in the united states. you heard from richard odum that mrs. odum told him that she told her mother from the time she was an early teenager from about the late '50s to early '60s that smoking could affect her. let us talk about reverend gore. in 1962, he gave a sermon which mrs. hazouri attended in which he preached about the detrimental effects smoking had on health and how smoking was an attack on the body's temple. and after the sermon reverend gore had a private discussion with mrs. hazouri. in that discussion, mrs. hazouri told him that she agreed with what he said, and he told her further about statistics on the health risks of smoking from doctors at johns hopkins, duke university, and the mayo clinic. and she told him that she agreed with those statistics. look at the testimony: "and when you told mrs. hazouri that again, she told you that she agreed with that? "she did. "and i think as you told us before, she said, right on. "she used that term to some degree, yeah. she was trying to tell me that she agreed with it and being emphatic about it. "so she was emphatically agreeing with it? "she very definitely did. she emphatically agreed, "right on, reverend gore. that is what she said." now, 1962, ms. shamp showed you a document from alan rodgman. you want to talk about overwhelming evidence. what dr. reverend gore told you, that is overwhelming evidence of what mrs. hazouri knew. that reverend gore continued to preach on about the dangers of smoking. in 1967 and 1968, he talked about the wednesday bible studies and the sunday services where he again warned about the dangers of smoking. and again he had conversations with mrs. hazouri after the sermon. and this is what he said on this: "and in those conversations you told mrs. hazouri that it was a proven fact that smoking was detrimental to health? "i told her that i believed that and that was my opinion. "and her response was she believed it, too, correct? "she said that they did, and she said again, right on. she said, yes. once again, right on, reverend gore. she got the message. she had the information." and that was her response in 1962, in 1968, 1967. she knew the risks and believed they were proven facts. you heard about in the '70s that mrs. hazouri talked to her grandson about cancer and reverend gore and her continued the discussions, and the awareness continued. dr. burns told you this in 1981, he said -- "you told the group in 1981 that 95 percent of smokers were thoroughly aware of the health risks and 90 thought it might affect their own health, correct? "that is correct. and i believe i said that more smokers know that cigarette smoking causes disease or cancer than know the name of the president of the united states." so on this first prong for questions two and three, the plaintiff cannot prove that the material information about the health effects or the addictive nature were secrets to mrs. hazouri. they assured you they were not. when you look at: did mrs. hazouri know smoking was dangerous and addictive? there is only one answer to that question. yes. now, ms. shamp can look at a company document or look at something else and say, well, very few people know. well, you know what? this case is not about all people. it is not about very few people. it is about one person. it is about ethelene hazouri and ethelene hazouri knew. so for this reason alone on questions two and three the answer should be no. now, the second part of those two questions. the plaintiff has to build a bridge between statements on one side of the river and mrs. hazouri on the other, that is what she has to do. and for purposes of that verdict form, that bridge is the legal cause and its reliance on these two questions, and the plaintiff has the burden to prove it. for these claims the plaintiff has to prove that reynolds' conduct caused mrs. hazouri, not some other smoker, to take some action, to rely on something that was or was not said, and that get a disease caused by smoking that she otherwise would not have gotten. that is the burden. and if the plaintiff cannot build that bridge, then she failed to meet the burden. the evidence that you heard in this trial never let the plaintiff lay the first stone down to build that bridge. in this case there is no evidence, none, that mrs. hazouri saw, heard, read, or relied on anything reynolds or any other tobacco company said. let us look at this list. all of the witnesses you heard from that were asked: did anyone say that she saw, heard, or read, or relied on anything? frank statement, there was no evidence. ctr, nope. tirc, huh-uh. tobacco institute statements, nope. press releases, nope. white papers, no. interviews, no. statements, no. no. no. no. no evidence that she ever saw, heard, or read any of these statements. and if somebody else in the public did, that is fine. they can bring their own cases. this is mrs. hazouri's case and there was no evidence that she saw, heard, or read it. now, during voir dire i asked the entire panel of people if anybody had heard of tirc or ctr or frank statement. no one raised their hand. and if mrs. hazouri had been sitting in that jury pool, she would not have raised her hand either because she had never heard, read, saw, or relied on any of those things. and, you know, dr. proctor spent a long time telling you about statements that industry representatives made to the public. ms. shamp showed you some this morning, she will probably show you some more this afternoon. statements that more research is needed. no proof of harm. still controversy. not proven to be unsafe. now, dr. proctor told you that those news stories that were out there about the health risks of smoking that sometimes contained a brief response from the tobacco industry. and you remember dr. proctor called it the tail of the kite? remember that testimony from earlier in the trial? then ask yourselves, do people ever look up in the sky and say, wow, look at the tail on that kite? people look at the kite. people notice the kite. the public noticed the kite and so did mrs. hazouri. and no matter what dr. proctor said, he was not here to prove reliance of mrs. hazouri. look at what he testified: "you do not have any information that mrs. hazouri believed there was a controversy over the dangers of smoking? "that is right. "and you do not know whether mrs. hazouri relied on anything the tobacco company said or did? "that is right. "and you do not know whether ms. hazouri said or read any of the ads you showed? "that is correct." 212-279-9424 veritext reporting company www.veritext.com 212-490-3430 024f9a8a-1cf0-4a50-984e-5b360a641673 now, ladies and gentlemen, i agree that some of those statements that you heard and some of these statements that you saw are stupid. and some of those physicians, whether they were based in science and people believed them or not, they were brought to you for far too long by representatives in the tobacco company. and in some other smoker's case they may be relevant, but not in mrs. hazouri's case because there is no evidence that she ever saw or heard any of them. now, in addition to the lack of evidence that she saw or heard, you did hear what she said in her conversations. when mrs. odum asked her to quit, she said stop bugging me, i'll try to quit when i'm ready. and as i previewed in my opening statement, that tells us a couple of things. first, she was not ready to quit yet. and it tells us a lot of what she did not say. there was no evidence that she ever told anybody, including her daughter, that the risks were not proven. there was not evidence that she told her mother that smoking was not harmful. there was no evidence she did not tell her ads that made her think smoking was not bad. and she did not tell her she was waiting for some bit of confirmation from somebody at r.j. reynolds that smoking was hazardous. now, ms. shamp said that jimmy raulerson does not agree, does not think that these things were proven. well, this is not jimmy raulerson's case. this is ethelene hazouri's case. and you heard from reverend gore that jimmy raulerson even disagreed with this case. and reverend gore pointed out the risk and the scientific studies to mrs. hazouri over three decades. did she ever tell him she doubted the risks? did she ever tell him she needed more information? no. she said she believed it. she believed it was a proven fact. and instead of expressing doubt, she expressed an emphatic "right on." you may see it again this afternoon, you saw it today, that doubt is our product sign. ladies and gentlemen, if doubt was a product, it was never a product that ethelene hazouri bought or used. she had the material information about the risk of smoking and its addictive nature. in her words she knew it, she accepted it, she believed it as a proven fact. dr. proctor talked about the meeting in the plaza hotel in 1953 and then the frank statement in 1954. and then he said, that is the start of this conspiracy. but there is no evidence that mrs. hazouri saw the frank statement. but interestingly at this very same time in the 1950s, mrs. hazouri was having her own meeting. a private meeting with reverend gore. a meeting in which she told him she wanted to quit her habit or addiction because it was bad for her health and bad for her testimony as a christian. that was her own frank statement. her frank statement that she knew and her frank statement that she did not rely on anything reynolds or anyone else had said. now there is one other point, when you get the jury instructions that the question three, the conspiracy claim is limited to 1953 and after. and because of what mrs. hazouri knew at that time, that conspiracy claim has to be rejected. and for both of these claims, questions two and three, the plaintiff has a build the bridge between something reynolds said or did to mrs. hazouri, and she did not. let us look at this next slide. so ask yourself, for legal cause, for reliance, for that bridge: did concealment of information cause mrs. hazouri's death? no. this case is only about mrs. hazouri, and there was no evidence that she heard or relied on such statements. and no matter what some other smoker might have seen or what some other smoker might have done, that is not mrs. hazouri. the plaintiff did not prove this, ladies and gentlemen. there is no proof of reliance. and the answers to questions two and three have to be no. just a couple more minutes and i appreciate your patience this morning. let me touch on ads for just a moment. i told you in opening you are going to see a lot of ads from dr. proctor, and you did. and i told you they are probably going to try to upset you with allegations about youth marketing, and casting stones about ads themes were used by a variety of consumer goods, and you did. dr. proctor showed you ads from lucky strike and chesterfields, brands mrs. hazouri never smoked. you saw a marlboro truck in superman ii movie. there is no evidence that mrs. hazouri went to see superman ii, or superman i, for that matter. marlboro is not made by my client and ms. hazouri never smoked marlboro. they showed you documents that contained statistics from public information cites on statistics on youth numbers in the 1970s and 1980s. and some of those numbers are in reynolds' documents. again, they showed you those documents to tick you off. these documents are in the 1970s and the 1980s. mrs. hazouri was in her 50s or 60s at that time. and they talked this morning about a document for a new brand for smokers. did that have any connection at all with mrs. hazouri? dr. proctor, remember he talked about the campaign for target youth? and they took him through those meet the tirc ads and the candid ads, and this old guy with finger jewelry of a sweaty tank top. and dr. proctor said, oh, yeah, that appeals to the youths, that appeals to youth. everything does to dr. proctor. they told you that reynolds used to sponsor winston cup racing. there is no evidence that mrs. hazouri ever went to a race or even watched one on tv. you heard her hobbies were bowling, gardening, and cooking dumplings. that is what you heard. not time trials, trading paint, or asphalt bolders. why are they showed you that? they showed you an ad with joe dimaggio. remember that one? there is no evidence that mrs. hazouri was a baseball fan. and even dr. proctor told you that when ms. shamp picked that ad, he thought it was a curious choice for this case. now, the only ad or jingle ever mentioned was: winston tastes good like a cigarette should. mrs. odum is saying on direct and saying it again on cross-examination. but look at her testimony and it reveals that that many ads has nothing to do with mrs. hazouri. i asked her: "and your mother did not tell you that that jingle was the reason she smoked winstons, did she? "no, she did not. "and you did not have any discussion with your mother of any other cigarette advertisements, correct? "correct." and, you know, remembering a catchy jingle proves nothing. you can be a regular mcdonald's or your can be a vegetarian and you probably remember the old wendy's, where is the beef commercial. and whatever insurance you have, everyone can probably sing along: like a good neighbor, state farm is there. it proves nothing. the important facts for this case are that no witness who knew mrs. hazouri testified that she ever smoked a brand of cigarette because of an ad, because of a jingle or any other statement by reynolds. ms. shamp mentioned filters. there is not a single witness who testified as to why mrs. hazouri picked the brands she did. not mrs. odum, not dr. proctor, nobody. ms. shamp spent a lot of time this morning talking about the enormous amount of advertising money that reynolds spent. and at one point she said, you know, advertising and promotion. and i went over that with dr. proctor how most of it is a promotion at the store level in this case. but with regard to advertising, you might be surprised to hear this. judge mitchell is going to instruct you that r.j. reynolds cannot be held liable for merely manufacturing, selling, or advertising cigarettes. it is going to be in the jury instructions you get. plaintiff knew that. and worse yet, they knew that advertising had nothing to do with mrs. hazouri, but they spent all that time talking about it in hopes that that would upset you. now, i'm going to move pretty quickly through the last couple of things on the verdict form. if you get to question four, the allocation of fault you will have already decided that mrs. hazouri had primary lung cancer, that she was addicted, that addiction caused her cancer, and that reynolds' conduct was a legal cause of her lung cancer. now, i think you can understand throughout the morning, i do not think you should get to this point, but i'm going address it. and if you get that far, you will have to allocate fault between reynolds and mrs. hazouri. and let us look at this slide, because the allocation of fault is for mrs. hazouri's death. and i want you to keep a couple of things in mind. the assignment of the fault relegates only to actions that were a legal cause of mrs. hazouri's death. so whatever you are comparing, it has to have been the legal cause of her death. and reynolds cannot be assigned fault for actions that were not the legal cause of mrs. hazouri's death. so when you are asked to consider all the evidence, for this question you have to consider the evidence that goes to the legal cause of her death. and, again, i want to remind you of this 20-plus year history at the beginning of mrs. hazouri's smoking history. her 30s, 40s, and into the 50s where we do not know what she smoked, and there is no evidence that it was a reynolds' product. i suggest reynolds should not be assigned to any fault for that period of smoking for sure. now, ms. shamp tried to play it cute by saying, it is up to you to determine if mrs. hazouri was responsible or not. but they never acknowledge or accept any responsibility for mrs. hazouri's decision to start smoking, and continue smoking until she made the choice she was ready to quit and did. and here i'll come back to the words of the plaintiff's own experts: dr. werner agrees that the decision whether or not to try to quit is one hundred percent within the smoker's control. and dr. burns said this: "you have said many times that smokers are responsible for their own smoking behavior, correct? "that is correct. "and even if they are addicted, smokers are still responsible for their own smoking behavior, correct? "that is correct. the fact that someone is addicted is a barrier to behavior change, but it does not free them from responsibility for their own behavior." but mrs. odum does not think her mother is responsible at all. look at how mrs. hazouri accepted responsibility during her life. ms. shamp talked about whether she made adult decisions when was she was a teenager. when her mother died, she left school and accepted the responsibility of raising 12 brothers and sisters. that is a pretty responsible decision to make. she got married and divorced in that time period. i think those are pretty responsible decisions. with her second husband billy, you heard he was busy at work and she accepted responsibility of raising mrs. odum. and when she was dying of cancer, she never placed the blame on reynolds. and if mrs. hazouri had to assign responsibility or fault, do you think she would accept it? i think she would. because ultimately you are the one who has control over your behavior. and it is not 10 percent control or fifty percent control. you have one hundred percent control. nobody made mrs. hazouri's decisions for her. nobody could decide for her to choose to smoke. nobody could choose for her to stop the smoking. not fred flintstone, not joe dimaggio, not reverend gore, and not mrs. odum. only mrs. hazouri could make those choices. so when it comes down to fault and responsibility, when you look at mrs. hazouri's knowledge about the risks, when you look at the power and the ability she had over her smoking, and you look at the responsibility she had to choose health over smoking, i submit she is one hundred percent at fault because ultimately she was the one with responsibility for and control over her behavior. and somebody who in her life took responsibility for her actions, so too in this courtroom, she should be held responsible for her actions. now, if you find everything that i've said unpersuasive and decide to return a verdict for mrs. hazouri, you will have to decide on the amount of damages for mrs. odum. and this is -- i agree with mrs. shamp at least on this one thing. this is a hard thing to talk about. you cannot put a value on a human life. whenever anyone, any of us loses a family member, but the loss is real. and, you know, we all feel compassion and we all wish ms. odum the best, and anybody who loses somebody. but compassion and good wishes are not reasons to exceed common sense and good judgment. and i would suggest that the evidence in this case suggests that an award should be in the thousands, not in the millions if there is an award at all. certainly not six million. it is not a question of whether r.j. reynolds is a big company. if you find reynolds' liable, it is a question of what damages mrs. odum has as a result of her mother's death. and you heard that she was 47 when her mother died. she was 35 when her father died. and i'm sure the loss of her father was a real loss as well. and at the time that mrs. hazouri died, she was not financially supporting mrs. odum. mrs. odum did not incur any expenses because of her mother's death. the only thing she can remember was maybe the cost of the obituary. and while she was understandably saddened by the loss of her mother, she did not seek any counseling or need any medication. and i thought this was an interesting point. she did not call reverend gore for any support in the 19 years following her mother's death, but she did call him for support and comfort about his lawsuit. i think that is an important fact. so if you make an award and decide to compensate her, please compensate her based on the evidence in this case. and finally, and this is a finally for me because i do not get to speak again. if you get all the way through the verdict form you have to decide whether punitive damages are warranted. and if we get that far, you will have already fully compensated mrs. odum for her mother's death. and punitive damages are not about compensation or making someone whole. punitive damages are about more money. look at the slide. and the other thing about it is punitive damages are damages in addition to damages that fully compensate the plaintiff. punitive damages can be awarded only for conduct that was a legal cause of the harms suffered by the plaintiff. and importantly in this case if you get to this point, and i do not think you should but if you do, punitive damages cannot be based on those findings, the findings that ms. shamp showed to you. punitive damages are designed to punish and deter, punish her conduct that is tantamount to reckless disregard to human life. and to prove it, the plaintiff has got to meet a higher level of proof, higher than all the other hurdles, and it is called clear and convincing evidence. and you will see in the jury instructions that burden is more compelling and persuasive. clear and convince evidence is evidence that is precise, explicit, lacking in confusion and of such weight that it produces a firm belief or conviction about the matter at issue. so if you get to the point and you are considering whether to punish reynolds, i ask you to consider the testimony from dr. figlar. and what you heard about what he and others at reynolds have done to try to develop a product that may reduce risk. you heard, cigarettes, it is an inherently risky product. and one thing about dr. figlar, remember, he does not get paid to come to court to testify. and ms. shamp asked him about his yearly salary as a vice president of a company with over 4,000 employees. but his yearly salary is about what dr. proctor gets paid for three good months on the witness stand. and dr. figlar told you that reynolds went to work in the 1950s identifying smoking constituents. he told you that reynolds alone identified between a third and a half of all of it, including the carcinogens. he talked about tar and nicotine levels and where they are now. you saw the chart, and whether it fluctuates a little bit once it gets down to almost as low as they can get it. you saw where it started in the '50s, and you saw where those numbers are now. there has been a dramatic reduction in tar and nicotine. in the 1960s, reynolds provided information to the surgeon general's report, and that is when they joined the national cancer institute of tobacco working group. they continued that work in the 1970s, and they explored then with that group with those suggestions the low tar and medium nicotine cigarettes that the surgeon general, nci, and dr. russell proposed. the 1980 you saw their efforts continue and focus on heat, not burn cigarettes, premier, premier monograph. you saw that book. that is an exhibit. and later eclipse. and i've got to stop for a moment on this eclipse thing with the labstat study. leave aside whatever labstat was trying to do when dr. figlar was talked about that. but the comparison was between eclipse, which had more milligrams of tar to begin with versus cigarettes that had less milligrams of tar. and when they tested it they found that low and behold eclipse had more milligrams of tar than the cigarettes that had less milligrams of tar. now, we can talk about all these comparisons, but that is what they started out with. let me -- i'm sorry. i had to pause for a moment. the other thing you saw yesterday was that 1985 document on y1 that ms. shamp brought up today. well, first of all, it was one of only a couple of documents that ms. shamp asked dr. figlar about yesterday. and that was her opportunity to grill him about anything. and she asked him about y1 and made it sound like it was a sinister secret project in the deep woods of north carolina that nobody knew about. but you heard actually the idea of a high nicotine strain of tobacco was the idea that came from the u.s. department of agriculture. they came up with it. was b&w then looking at it and called it y1? yes. but the idea of looking at this high nicotine strength came from the united states government. i mean that was just the last of all those half stories you heard throughout this trial. speaking of farm, i guess, in north carolina. you heard that reynolds discovered a way, a different way to cure tobacco that lowered those tobacco specific interests and reynolds shared it with the world. you saw the results of reynolds' efforts over the years. and no matter what mrs. shamp says now, you have heard from dr. proctor, you heard from dr. burns that the entire time that mrs. hazouri was alive, the public health community, including dr. burns, encouraged reynolds to try to develop and make a lower tar and nicotine cigarette. dr. figlar showed you reynolds took out dozens of patents and how many times and how many authors the surgeon general has cited from reynolds starting back in 1964 to 2010, all those people. and one thing about the 2010 sgr, you saw where dr. figlar said on the reynolds' web site like, go ahead, rely on the 2010 sgr. it is out there, the public can look at it. you have heard about dr. rodgman's speech, the american chemical society where he identified the constituents in smoke including benzopryrene. he even drew the diagram of it. you saw reynolds' published that huge book on premier, and a book called the biology of nicotine with multiple chapters on nicotine receptors. in addition, you know, reynolds is focusing on snus and then the nicotine replacement therapies now. and dr. figlar told you why. and the idea of trying to put out products that have less risk to health is not a reason to award punitive damages. and the record for 50 years with reynolds is not a record of wanton conduct or disregard for human life. it is a record of trying to lower the risks of an inherently risky but always legal product. there were some successes and some failures, but they tried. and in trying to lower the risks of an inherently risky but legal product, reynolds should not be punished. ladies and gentlemen, in jury selection each of you committed to holding plaintiff to her burden of proof. and you committed that if the evidence warranted it, you would have the ability to enter a verdict in favor of my client. -- for all the reasons i went through today and all the reasons you saw during the trial, the greater weight of the evidence in this case, in ethelene hazouri's case, compels a verdict for reynolds or each and every question. mrs. hazouri lived her life the way she wanted to. i ask you not to award the plaintiff by make her mother a victim for the choices she made during her life. and this is the only chance that i'll get to speak with you, because the plaintiff has the burden of proof here. ms. shamp will get a rebuttal. and we will probably go to lunch and so she is going to have time to think of what she wants to say in response to what i've said. and i cannot predict what she is going to say, and because i do not get a chance to respond to her, i ask that one of you be my advocate in the jury room. you have seen time and time again throughout this trial how we have responded to show you the other side of the story and point out the full story. so as you deliberate, i asked you to keep the full story in mind and answer ms. shamp as you think i would if i had that one last opportunity. ladies and gentlemen, it has been a great pleasure to try this case in front of the eight of you. it is a cool thing that we as lawyers get to do is to try cases in front of jurors. it is weird after three weeks we feel like we kind of know each other but we do not ever get a chance to talk. i want to thank you again for letting us do what we do by showing up and serving as a juror. again, on behalf of myself and mr. parrish, and the 4,000 men and women at r.j. reynolds tobacco company, thank you very much.