mr. acosta: good afternoon. i'm privileged to represent reinaldo ojeda, and, of course, you have met hutch pinder, who has assisted me in the trial. i'm going to try to sum up the evidence a little bit. it dates back a couple of weeks and sometimes it is hard to remember what certain people -- what some of the witnesses have said. and i know you have taken notes, you have done a great job, and we appreciate your patience, because, you know, the way things work, we just -sometimes we like to go faster, faster, faster, and we cannot, for one reason or another. so we do appreciate your patience and know it is been a hardship on you. and we also know that this is america, and this is a constitutional right, you know, for people to come to this courthouse in miami and bring their claims. that is what this is all about. and it could not be possible if it was not for people like you in this country to do this duty, you know. and we know that it is really an inconvenience and a hardship. and, you know, but without it, you know, we would not have this third branch. this third branch, the judicial system, is what checks everything else. and so it is very important. you know, you can tell by the length of this case and what happened during the case, all the arguments and the -- you know, it is an important case. it is important to reinaldo ojeda, and it is important to r.j. reynolds tobacco company. my job was to present the plaintiff's side of the case. and i'm going to argue and say some things. if your memory differs or your notes differ, you know, if your memory differs from what i tell you, please, believe your -- what you remember. you know. nobody is perfect, and people sometimes make mistakes about what they remember. i'm going to point out some of the mistakes some of the witnesses made, you know, either remembering the wrong thing or doing something else. but you will be the ones to decide the believability of each of the witnesses, you know, and decide who you believe. the plaintiff has the burden of proof. and basically, that means is that if this was a basketball game, we would have to win 51 to 50. we win by one point, and we win. we do not have to win by a lot of points. we do not have to win by five touchdowns. if you win by one point, you win. we just have to tip the scales. that is what the more persuasive and convincing force of the evidence means. and so the evidence that we presented, we think that you will find that it tipped the scales in the favor of the plaintiff on each of the issues that we have to prove. and as i told you at the beginning of the case, that there were basically four issues, one of them has been sort of subdivided in half, but the first one is whether or not an addiction to nicotine was a legal cause of emphysema or lung cancer or both. and then the second one is whether or not -- whether or not cigarette smoking, camel cigarettes, was a -- at least a substantial contributing cause of his death. then if you find -- if you find yes for both of those, to both of those questions, if you check yes on the verdict form, you go on to the next question, which is to determine the extent to which each party is at fault. and as you remember when we started this, i did admit, and the judge just read to you part of the instruction, we admit that juan ojeda bears some measure of responsibility in this case. and i want to tell you how i argue this, because, you know, personal responsibility certainly is something extremely important in this country, because if people do not accept personal responsibility, everything falls apart. so we accept some personal responsibility. and the question is how much. and what i want you to think about is this is not -- everybody -- when you think of the concept of personal responsibility, what you are thinking about is responsibility to who. because responsibility is something that you have to -- you owe somebody, basically. you are responsible for something, but as to who. well, responsible to family? sure. responsible to your fellow man? sure. but this is a case between a cigarette company and the victim of cigarette smoking. so when you measure the relative responsibilities, keep in mind that mr. ojeda, juan ojeda did exactly what r.j. reynolds wanted him to do. he did exactly what they wanted him to do. so how is -- how much does his personal responsibility weigh against theirs? corporations have to be treated the same way. this corporation made its choices too. it made lots of choices. it made bad choices. and we know that and we kno-< that they were bad choices by the findings that happened in that engle trial so long ago. you know, this case really started back in 1997 or so when reinaldo ojeda contacted a lawyer. you know, it started, what, 15 years ago. 15 years to get a day in court. you know, and we are -we are -- we are honestly, we are lucky to be here, and we are happy to be here, and we are really happy that you were able to sit and be on the jury. but anyway, the first finding is nicotine in cigarettes is addictive. it is addictive. okay? now, we know that not everybody gets addicted. you may remember one of the documents that i put into evidence and showed you through dr. cummings -- and maybe we could put up dr. cummings' picture so you could remember who h is. could we have the computer setup, dewitt? could you switch us to the computer, please? there he is. you might remember dr. cummings. he was our first witness. and dr. cummings talked about addiction. he -- his name is in the surgeon general's report as a reviewer. he is the guy that does run a state smoking -- stop smoking clinic for the whole state of new york. he is seen thousands and thousands of people that have had trouble with smoking. he is studied it. he is been a reviewer of a number of surgeon general's reports. you know, dr. cummings worked with the world health organization, the american cancer society. he gives half of the money that he makes to cancer research at the roswell cancer institute. thank goodness for public health officials like him to come down to explain what he knows about smoking and, you know, everybody comes to court when they first get here and they see this, and you have, you know, your own ideas about cigarette smoking. and hopefully, the information that you got in this case was at least interesting to you. you know, this is -- this is a decision for you to make based on the evidence that you actually saw and heard in the courtroom. it is not to say that your own personal understandings and common sense and so forth, just as the judge said, does not -- it applies, obviously, but think about the evidence that came through the witness stand and the documents in the courtroom. the document i was referring to a minute ago was written by a man that became a director at r.j. reynolds tobacco company, their tobacco research department. and director is way high up. and he wrote that cigarette smoking is a hereditary -- the nicotine, the addiction is a hereditary thing, you know, that some people do not get addicted. but at that time, this was back in the mid-'70s when he writes this -- and you will be able to take these documents back into the jury room with you and look at them. you will get the medical records to go back. all the things that we introduced into evidence, you get to carry back -well, you will not carry them back there, they will be brought back in by the clerk. and you get to look at them and review them. and you can see, you can see for yourself, read some of these documents, you know, read them. i mean, reynolds was very happy that cigarettes were habituating, and they played down the role of nicotine. you will see that in the documents. people did not -- did not really know back in the '70s and '80s, you know, what they know today. you remember dr. bernstein, dr. bernstein, their addiction specialist. dr. bernstein was the only person, the only person that testified about addiction for the defense, just that one guy, a $900,000 guy, that is how much he is made doing like 17 cases for the cigarette companies. he made 15 -- $15,000 just to come down here and go back. there is a huge value here, you know, what is at stake. well, what is at stake is the loss of a life, a father. and, you know, you are going to get hopefully to the point after you consider all the evidence again and go back and y'all talk to each other -because y'all may have different ideas and you are going to remember different things, and you can talk together and come to conclusions together. your verdict's got to be unanimous. right? you all have to agree. and so if you believe that plaintiff is right on the case, stick with it, you know. somebody else, you might be able to explain something to them that they just did not quite understand or they did not hear. you know, because every -- you know, you sit in these trials, and a lot of stuff just goes way over, just it is so complicated, we try to simplify things as much as possible, but, you know, unfortunately, when you have people like dr. cummings and you have people like dr. goldman, know, and you have dr. hernandez, they talk in medical language. and, you know, we try to get -- we try to ask questions in a way that they are understandable, and sometimes that gets a little bit awkward, that you can probably tell that maybe we should have asked something different or asked it a different way. but what we are doing is we are trying to get the information so that it can be presented to you in the most efficient way that we can. so anyway, some of these documents that you see, dr. cummings entered -- you know, they went into evidence through him. and you will see, you know, that reynolds was happy that smokers smoked for nicotine. they were very happy about it because they took the position that it was a reasonable thing to do, that it was a very reasonable thing to do. so when you are measuring the comparative fault of -- you are measuring the comparative fault of mr. ojeda versus r.j. reynolds tobacco company, y know, that responsibility versus -- they are the seller, you know, so keep that in mind. let us go back to these findings for a minute. another one is smoking cigarettes causes c.o.p.d. and emphysema. there is no question about that. no question about that. it is been established. and, you know, the only person that talked about that on the defense side was mr. bennett yesterday. and you may remember -- you remembei the last question that was asked, and the way it wound up, i got to ask a follow-up question and he looked at that death certificate and he had to agree that emphysema was a significant contributing cause of mr. ojeda's death. so even the defense witness, the only one on their side that talked about it, admitted that emphysema was a substantial contributing cause. that is all we have to prove was that it was a substantial contributing cause of the death. and it does not have to be -- as the judge mentioned, you will have these instructions and the verdict form, it just has to be a cause, it does not have to be the cause, because that implies that it is the only cause. it just has to be a cause. there could be a number of different causes. lots of different things, you know, happen to people. but, you know, when you smoked as much as mr. ojeda smoked, it is -- it is crazy to think it is not a cause. i mean, the evidence -- you know, there was some controversy over direct evidence versus indirect evidence and all of that. and you are going to get to -- you will see the records that he smoked for many years. and the emergency room record that happened in april, they take a little history, it says plus many years. that also is where the two packs a day is noted in the record, it is in a medical record. and then dr. cummings, he talked about brand switching. people do not switch to the little old-fashioned camel, that is one that people start out with. these brand-switching studies, people do not -- extremely rare for somebody to switch off like that. and vast majority of people start before they are 25. and you might remember dr. fernandez. dr. fernandez was the defendant's historian, the guy that where the lawyers thought of a historical question that he comes in to answer. dr. fernandez said there was no direct evidence, but he admitted there was indirect evidence. so i just want you to keep that in mind. we do know, because the only person that is still alive is reinaldo ojeda and julio caravia, they testified. there is not anybody alive that saw him smoking before 1977. juan ojeda's mother died a few years ago at age 94. so we have what we have, those are, you know, the facts. we know that he started smoking -well, i take that back. we know that he was smoking camels in 1980. and he continued to smoke camels all the way through. there is a little discrepancy in the testimony about when he actually stopped. three witnesses thought that -- they did not see him smoke after about 1992, once he was diagnosed with emphysema. but julio caravia saw him smoking and said he was hiding it, hiding it from berta bekec. and dr. hernandez, who interviewed -remembered him, remembered him, remembered him t the extent that he knew that he was still smoking some when he would have a coffee or something, still smoking a little bit as of, i guess, january of 1996. now, the defendant likes to spin that and say, well, he was in control of his smoking because he could cut down to a few cigarettes. well, that is somebody that is trying, struggling to get off. that is somebody that is heavily addicted. you know, that is what happens. if he was not addicted, he would have put it down and walked away from it. you know, but he tried. now, one of the -- before i jump ahead of myself to some of the other issues, let me finish going through these boards. smoking cigarettes causes lung cancer, and it caused both cell types. large cell is its own cell type, its own kind of lung cancer. and they tried to smear that around and make it seem like, well, maybe that is -- maybe they did not really know what large cell was, maybe it was, you know, some other form of cancer, maybe it was somehow included in something else, maybe -- you know, they did not know. you know, they brought in these guys from wyoming -- i mean, not wyoming, montana, that is even further away, montana, philadelphia, you know to tell you that the doctors here in miami at palmetto hospital and hialeah hospital, one of those is where dr. hernandez is the chief of medicine, you know, that he is wrong, that the local doctors actually -- they had all the information, these guys that came in for the defense to tell you what his problems may have been, they have a few records, and now they are guessing. and they are -- they are trying to pull little pieces out of it and try to make the puzzle look like something else than what the doctors that really knew, knew. you know. that is -- that is how they defended this case. they defend this case by telling you that he was not addicted; if he was addicted, it did not cause his disease; but he did not have the disease. you know, he would not have died of emphysema, or he did not have lung cancer, you know, it is one defense, one backup defense after another, and it is all against what the local doctors decided the case was. so you have to kind of weigh that, you know. what was the financial interest of these defense witnesses? and dr. fernandez, their historian, had made over $300,000, and $65,000 in this case. and you member dr. bernstein, the psychiatrist, $900,000, 15,000 for coming down here. i mean, just think about it, that is all i can ask -- that is all i'm asking you to do, because it is your decision. all these things are your decision now. my job is just to present it to you, and it is your job to decide it. the defendant placed cigarettes on the market that were defective and unreasonably dangerous. unreasonably dangerous. that is a difference -there is a difference between unreasonably dangerous and dangerous. how is -- how is juan ojeda to know they were unreasonably dangerous? he was doing what reynolds told him to do, what they wanted him to do. how would -- how would he know they were unreasonably dangerous? well, they were unreasonably dangerous. and that is been established. and they are defective, okay, because of this unreasonable danger. but all of that, you have to -- you have to accept, because otherwise, this class action case just -- it would not work, it would not exist. we have to -- we all follow the law. and when we follow the law, we followed the law to get to this point right here. see, this is the end point for -- for somebody that believes that they were a class member, you know. and if it was up to the cigarette company -- companies that are involved, there would not be any class members. they denied all these things in that case, and they lost. it is been established that the defendant agreed to conceal or omit information regarding the health effects of cigarettes or their addictive nature with the intention that smokers and the public would rely on this information to their detriment. okay. that is concealment. fraudulent concealment. and, you know, you are going to be asked, one of the issues in the case, at the end of the verdict form, if juan ojeda relied. so think about this. juan ojeda is living his life, and in 1984 he tries to stop smoking. okay, in 1984. and he is not able -- he is not able -he is driving around in a car with julio and they are both trying to stop smoking. and julio said that juan ojeda said, "i'm going to stop smoking today. i'm not going to smoke today." and so they drive around. and julio said, you know, he could not go more than an hour or two without a cigarette. that is a person that is smoking to avoid the bad feelings that you get whe you do not have a cigarette. okay, now we get a warning in 1985, '86, a warning changes, it gets stronger. the historian did not want to so much admit that. but it goes from danger to now it says it will cause cancer, which it did not say before, it made the warning more explicit. and then you hear reinaldo ojeda testify that his dad was trying more to quit in the -- after_ that time, after 1985, because that is when reinaldo ojeda first starts sort of breaking away from his mother enough so that he can go visit his father, you know, a father that followed him around from school to school, that wanted a relationship with his son, and his son got it and wanted the relationship too. and he remembers his dad trying to stop smoking in the late 1980s, and he remembered that julio's kids were also telling juan, you know, hey, you should not smoke, it is not good for you. that is not much of an issue. i mean, a person that is addicted, they know that it is not good for them. they -- you know, most people want to quit smoking. and that is not something that dr. cummings made up. there is a document called the nordine study from 1980 in this batch of -- batch of documents that are in evidence in the case that you will get to see that says basically eighty percent of people -- in fact, they wind up saying most of our customers would quit if they could. eighty percent. eighty percent. they would just walk away from it if they could. reynolds -- they continued to make it addictive so that that would not happen. you see, they basically -- what they did, they basically proved the case that we are trying to present to you, because that -- that is the addiction. i mean, they -- they knew it. they knew that people -- you smoke for -- it is not -you know, young people just start out, they do not want to stop smoking, they think they are invincible, or they are going to quit in five years, or i'm going to quit when i get married, or i'm going to quit some other time. but about half those people keep smoking, they cannot stop. and, i mean, all those statistics, you know, we showed statistics, and, i mean, it was -- this is not something that we make up because you know that their own witness agrees with these statistics. this dr. bernstein, he had only a one out of ten, ninety percent failure rate, using all the things that he could use as a psychiatrist to help people stop smoking. that is incredible, you know, ninety percent of the people that want to quit smoking that go through a program like that, that take a drug like chantix or take some other drug or they wear the nicotine patch or they get counseling or whatever it is that they do, you know, he tried all of it, only one out of ten. dr. goldman -- can we have dr. goldman's picture up? he was sort of sandwiched in the middle between dr. cummings, who started, and dr. hernandez, who was our last witness, who was testified by videotape. there you go, there is dr. goldman. dr. goldman is the chairman of the department of internal medicine at the university of south florida medical school. he is got a lot of people that he oversees, but he also works at the v.a. clinic, which is like a hundred yards one way, the moffitt center, that is one of these registered cancer institutes, one of a few in the country, it is a top-notch place, he started the whole lung division of that, he started a smoking cessation program at u.s.f. back in the late '70s. they had psychiatrists and psychologists. and they could not figure out how to get people to quit. these are people at the v.a. that want to quit. they go to this clinic, it does not work. it does not work. now, we know that there is a hereditary component to this by the documents that they have got, you know. and some of the things that they do, some of the things that reynolds does to cigarettes, you know, they -- they put chemicals -we showed you the chemicals that are in camel cigarettes. a couple of them are ammonia. we showed you that ammonia is put in there to freebas some of the nicotine, freebase it so it gets to your brain real fast, because it is the speed that it gets there. and that is kind of a common sense thing when you think about it, you know, getting it to your brain fast is how drugs work. you put a patch on, and it does not do anything. in fact, dr. bernstein even said that, you know, that the nicotine replacement therapies is of marginal use. so -- ghosts, i guess. so let me move back again. the court: felipe, see who is out there. mr. acosta: okay. the court: sorry, mr. acosta. mr. acosta: that is okay, judge. this is similar to the other one, it is -- you know, see, there was actually an agreement -- this first one i showed you, there was an agreement among the cigarette companies to withhold information. you know. and there is really a common sense reason for that. a common sense reason. you know, if one of them broke ranks, then what would happen? defendant concealed or omitted material information not otherwise known or available, knowing that the material was false or misleading or failed to disclose a material fact. a material fact, that is something that is important. that is something that would change, influence someone, it would influence them and cause them to perhaps try harder to quit smoking, try more times, do something more. they withheld that information. they did not want people to stop. they wanted to stay in the conventional cigarette business as long as they could. that is what their documents say. "defendant sold or supplied cigarettes that at the time of sale or supply did not conform to representations of fact made by defendant." so the things they said about their cigarettes, their cigarettes did not do. and then this goes with that one. again, it is another finding that the ones they supplied were defective. and then, of course, the last one, it is been established that defendant was negligent. and you will see on the jury instructions there is a definition of negligence. negligence is basically something that a reasonable person would not do. so in applying that to juan ojeda, you know, was he doing something a reasonable person would not do at that time. you know. it was reasonable, as far as reynolds was concerned. so when you weigh this comparative fault thing out, you have to please look at it that way, because it is between -- it is between the ojedas and them. you know, we are not addressing his personal responsibility as to the world, we are addressing it as to them. and some of its admitted, and you should put a percentage down there under his name, because we know that there should be some. i mean, he tried. maybe he could have tried harder. maybe he could have tried more frequently. maybe once he got his emphysema, he should not have been hiding it from his wife. i mean. but that decision is yours. you are the ones that have to decide that, you know. think about the seller of the drug, what they wanted him to do, how they did it, what these findings are, then think what was he doing that a reasonable person should not do, you know. and interestingly, dr. bernstein, their psychiatrist, admitted that back in the '80s, people smoked in hospitals. you know. it was different back then. it took a while, you know. boy, starting in the '90s, it started really hitting. but, you know, 1991 was 20 years ago. sometimes time flies for some of us, and -- 20 years ago. and that is when he was diagnosed with emphysema. and again he is trying to not smoke. the ones who do see him smoke a little bit, he is weaning himself off, then they do not see him smoke anymore, susan ojeda did not see him smoking anymore, reinaldo did not see him smoking anymore, but julio did and so did dr. hernandez, not see him, but interviewed him and it was still there. dr. hernandez is not being paid by the cigarette company to be here. he -- he did his stuff for free. you heard the testimony, mr. ojeda did not have any insurance, so dr. hernandez treated him for free. he remembers the man. he remembers asking him, well, you know, when did you first smoke in the morning? he said it was before he washed out his mouth, what he told dr. hernandez. now, that is a very strong sign of addiction. he basically -- dr. hernandez said i remember him saying it was from one to three packs a day. then we have a record that says two packs a day. so we have been using two packs of day, sort of average of the two. you know. dr. hernandez saw him when he first comes in, and his complaint is shortness of breath. he did not know he had lung cancer in january of '96. now, at the time he comes in, he was already on three breathing medications. if you look at the medical record from the emergency room, you will see it. you will see it. so he had been being treated before coming in to see dr. hernandez. there is testimony he was on oxygen. but dr. hernandez does not remember him coming in with oxygen, but reinaldo and the other people that saw him, they remember him being on oxygen. he would not go to home depot, where he had to get supplies for the motel where he -- which he owned because he was embarrassed, he could not wal to the car. this was a man that had a substantial problem that had started -- it got diagnosed in '91. okay. got diagnosed in '91. now it is '96. and he just has enough lung to have this surgery done. they do calculations, they do pulmonary function studies, they do a perfusion study. perfusion study, that was sort of explained, but it showed like 57 and 44 percent remaining of good lung. okay. and then they -- they -- i mean, it is horrific surgery to remove a big section of ribs and a big hunk of lung. in fact, it opened up and you heard about the pooling of the blood and so forth. i mean, it is horrific surgery. and, you know, he does not do well afterwards. he did get in to see dr. hernandez one time, but, you know, by the time april rolls around, he is developed a pneumonia. and he had that -- the lower g.i. bleed. the pneumonia was like the thing he could not get over because he did not have enough lung left. you saw dr. hernandez demonstrating what it is like to breathe every two seconds. it is shocking to see somebody breathe like that. you know. imagine what the family is going through. imagine what juan ojeda is going through. so getting back to this issue of -- the first issue, which is addiction. mr. persons: your honor, objection. violation of the golden rule, asking the jury to put themselves in the position of the family. you cannot do that. mr. acosta: yeah, i do not think i did that. mr. persons: he did. mr. acosta: i do not think so. so this issue about addiction, let me talk about that for a minute. there were -dr. cummings, you know, he -- he showed you all th different tests that are used, went through them. and these are some of the criteria in the dsm. and the first one is this one called a maladaptive pattern of substance use leading to clinically-significant impairment or distress as manifested by three or more of the following occurring at any time in the same 12-month period. he went through all of these with you. now, dr. bernstein, the $900,000 doctor, dr. bernstein, he stopped right here. he did not discuss any of the rest of them with you. he stopped right here and said, well, he did not have a maladaptive pattern of behavior that was significant -- clinically significant. you know, to think about it, he said, you know, people that inject heroin and then they get a disease from it, that is a maladaptive pattern of behavior. well, what about somebody who smokes a drug like nicotine and gets emphysema? what about somebody that smokes cigarettes and gets lung cancer, and they cannot breathe, they cannot walk? he says, well, you have to give up important activities like scuba diving, that was an example that he -- he had given. a person that gives up scuba diving could meet this right here because of their -- because of their smoking. well, you know, when juan ojeda went in, he could not have sex with his wife, and he could not dance. i mean, and they -- the defense tried to make light of that. i mean, that is pretty significant -- you cannot do stuff like that, and that is not -- that is not -- that does not fit this? that is ridiculous. it is absolutely ridiculous. this dr. bernstein who came in from philadelphia -- no, he was from pittsburgh, i believe, the psychiatrist that they had testify, he said addiction does not cause any disease. now, previously, before these engle cases, you know, got all going, he used to testify that cigarettes did not cause addiction for cigarette companies. you know. and then when engle comi along, of course, he is got to recognize addiction, because that is a feature of the engle case, you have to prove that addiction caused the disease, so now he says, okay, i'll accept that it is addictive, but it does not cause any disease. if dr. bernstein was the authority, there would be no engle class members, zero. that cannot be. that cannot be what all -- this is all about. you know. that does not make sense. but that is what his position was. and, you know, if we went through these right now, it would take a little time, maybe too much time, but mr. ojeda qualifies under -- under this. you know, i bet people -- most people do not think of an addiction to cigarettes being a mental illness or a psychiatric disorder that is identified in the diagnostic manual for mental disorders. and he said it was. and, of course, he admitted that half the people that ever smoked were addicted. that is like 24 million people. that is pretty serious. that is a pretty serious situation. okay. this just goes on, more of those criteria. we talked about this fagerstrom test. you know, reynolds bought this guy's company, who -- because he was making some special products over in europe that -- to help people stop smoking. reynolds bought the company. since they bought the company, they have not implemented any of those in the united states. you can ask yourselves why would -- why would they do that? these are the fagerstrom questionnaire that he scored mr. ojeda on. two of them he could not use because mr. ojeda was not here to answer, but the rest of them, he got the information from the depositions and so forth. and mr. ojeda would score in a very high dependence range. this is the surgeon general's definition of addiction. highly controlled or compulsive use. this, when you think -- what this means is, he gets up the first thing in the morning and smokes, then he smokes all day long. it is compulsive. nicotine has psychoactive effects, it changes your mood. and then it has drug reinforcing behavior. and you might remember a document that is in evidence that you will see where it said that basically nicotine had a stronger reinforcing effect than any other substance, even food. that is one of the documents that you will have to see. we even mentioned webster's dictionary's definition. and -- and that was read to you. all these definitions juan ojeda meets. interestingly, reynolds also has -- had a definition, not quite sure what it is today, but around 2000, 1999, 2001, they had a definition of addiction. and this is their definition. "engaging in an activity which is hard to quit once you start." well, if you use their definition, clearly, juan ojeda was addicted. i showed you the -- this 2010 surgeon general's report which said there is no consensus on what the definition is. you know. addiction to some extent, you know, that is your decision. that is your decision. think -- you know, think about a man that is -- you know, now he is -- in 1996, he is 64 years old. the clerk: counsel, you have ten minutes. mr. acosta: thank you. 64 years old and had been smoking two packs a day, wanting to quit, tried to quit, cut down, weaned himself off, used candy, used coffee candy, used rubberbands, you know, wanted to stop, tried to stop. once a person makes up their mind, say, look, i want to stop smoking, that is -- that is a -- a choice. that is a choice, saying i want to stop smoking. okay. the part where there is no choice is the addiction part. that part you -- you -- if you could choose not to have it, you would. but that is still there, and you have got to overcome it, and that is one of the things that dr. cummings was trying to explain is that you can make the choice to try, but you cannot choose not to have the addiction, because you have got the addiction. and going through all the chemical stuff, i mean, it was not just dopamine that is released, as suggested by dr. bernstein, i mean, there were -there were like ten different hormones that do different things. that is why nicotine is so unique, and they knew that, and it is in their documents, because it can stimulate and it can relax you, depending on your situation, how much you smoke and so forth. and that is the way nicotine works. and it makes people that smoke feel normal when they smoke. it is a weird drug because it does not really do you any good, it just makes you feel bad when you do not have it, and when you do have it, you feel -you feel okay, you are in a good mood, it makes you -- relax you, you know, it is -- it is -- people do not get addicted to things they do not like. i mean, that is what it is. you know. that is what it is. and so, you know, here's a man that comes over to this country, and he is found to be smoking and he is probably smoking a long time, and in 1984, he tries to stop. when he says that, i want to stop, well, how voluntary is it after that? you know, i want to go back to the medicine for just a second, because i'm going to try to wrap this up in about five minutes, and then i get to come back after they have given you theirs, their arguments. but dr. hernandez, who took that history, he said he was addicted, said he was addicted, he said his addiction was the cause of his emphysema, and he said his addiction was the cause of his lung cancer. and he also said that cigarettes were the root of all of his lung problems. you know, you have got to decide what is -- what is more probable? what is -- what is the most persuasive and convincing evidence in the case? dr. hernandez is pretty convincing about that. you know. he -- all doctors do not want their patients to smoke. you know, they -- he talked about that. he talked about how you have to -- to choose to try to quit, and you have to stick with it, so on and so forth. but they all know that so many people cannot. they try and try, and they cannot do it. maybe -- maybe they eventually can. maybe juan ojeda eventually would have done it had he been able to live. but that -- that -- he did not have enough lung left when he got that pneumonia to survive. and he could not survive because he had terminal emphysema and he had lung cancer. either one is enough for you to mark yes on that -- on that verdict form. if addiction -- if you believe addiction was a significant contributing cause of either one of those, you know, it does not have to be the only cause, but if you believe that, you should check yes. and we ask you to do that. we ask you to do that. we ask you to please do that. you know. that is what we are here for. i want to tell you if you do that and you get to -- you put the percentages down and all that, then you have to decide what are you going to make the defendant pay for the loss of a father, loss of life. that is what it is. what is the value of that here in miami. the clerk: counsel, you have five minutes. mr. acosta: thank you. here in miami, how much -- how much money do you make them pay? you know, that is entirely up to you. that is your job to figure that out based on the elements of damages that the judge tells you about. you are the ones that decide that. and consider the -- just consider the whole situation. consider what reinaldo lost. you know, his wife said it, you know, she had -- he did not have him, and then he found his father, they were best of friends, and then he lost him. that was, what, 15, 16 years ago. you know. so you think about that length of time, you know, whether there is future or not is for you to decide, just remember, his mom lived till she was 94. you know. would he still -- he would be 79 today. all right? he would be 80 in about a month or so. so, you know, how much past, how much future, you know, is it -- do you put -- how much do you -how much is it -- there is a range. people are -i think you will find that you will -- that may have different opinions about this. some may be -- if you think of it this way, some losses -- i mean, there is nothing, i mean, there is relatively small losses. what is the maximum kind of loss? this is near the maximum of what you watch somebody go through and die and lose a father, you know, when you are not even finished school, and your father does not get to see what you have done and the achievements you have made and you do not get to see him be proud of you, you lose something, you cannot replace that. it is priceless. so you decide -- you know, whatever you think the full value is. and, i mean, there is a range. there is a range. if you get way up in the high millions, it is too much. you know. like $50 million would be too much. you know. but something -- something less than that. and that is something you have to decide. we do not -- we do not -- we are not asking you for any kind of sympathy. you know. he is gotten that from his wife and family and friends. from you, we ask for justice. i mean, really, that is what happened, that is how this got started, and that is what this is about, is justice. and you are the ones that get to determine that. and at the end of this, you get to make your decision. what is going to happen next is the defense lawyers are going to tell you what the defense side of the story is, and then i'll get to come back for a few minutes, and then after that, i guess you all will have to decide whether you want to keep working tonight or whether you want to go home and come back tomorrow. i think the judge said that is your choice. so i'll be back to talk to you in a little while. i thank you very, very much for your attention. thank you. mr. acosta: may it please the court. the court: um-hum (affirmative). mr. acosta: you know -the court: you are done, right? ms. henninger: oh, yeah, i'm sorry. mr. acosta: i'm sorry, i assumed she -the court: you have 30 minutes left. mr. acosta: right. thank you. i do not -shall i just proceed? the court: yeah, go ahead. mr. acosta: okay. the court: the only thing i was going to do, i noticed they were hungry, so i got my -- so i went down and had felipe bring the chocolate down. if you want to pass that around, i do not want to interrupt your thing, but. mr. acosta: it is all right, judge, it is giving me a second to find something here. the court: it will give them -- they need some sugar. mr. acosta: you know, it is kind of interesting that defense counsel would suggest that, well, dr. hernandez did not remember the son. you know, the son signed the no hope, this is a no hope document. this is signed by reinaldo ojeda. and it says, "directions to withdraw and/or withhold life sustaining procedures." he was there in the hospital. he is the one that had to sign this in the hospital. he is the one that was there when his father was dying, and he is the one that had to give up hope. i mean, that is what this is. when you sign that -- a statement that the hospital is to not resuscitate your father, it is about the worst thing you can do. and he was -- he was there to do it and had to. and i've got some things that i can tell you about dr. hernandez too. dr. hernandez was asked, does nicotine create a dependency that cannot be removed? answer: "i've tried in several occasion in some of my patient. very limited number of my patient, most of them have quit but only to return back again. but if they are given the proper situation, they will quit. which is the situation? do not sell cigarettes." that was his answer. you know, r.j. reynolds had choices, too. they had plenty of choices. they are the ones that chose how to make their cigarette. they are the ones that chose what to tell people. you know, there was evidence that they disagreed with that surgeon general's report. you saw the c.e.o. of r.j. reynolds on the screen when he was before congress deny that smoking was addictive. you know. we have got some interesting records for you to look at. you may remember some of them. but there is a couple you can look at which r.j. reynolds was doing research, they were doing research on the brain and wanted to do research on the brain and how it affected certain receptors in the brain, thinking that they were the same receptors that bind opiates. see, the opiates are narcotics. and they did -- they wanted to do research on that. and those documents are in the pile of documents that you will get to take back. and they were written by a man named perfetti. and this is -- this is how important it was to reynolds to find out how nicotine worked. "i have no doubt that the work will be done and relatively soon since nicotine is the next naturally occurring alkaloid used in appreciable amounts which has been implicated as an addictive drug." by the way, this is january 5th of 1978, on reynolds' letterhead. and he actually even draws a little molecule here. he says, "i cannot stress this fact enough since its results could be devastating to the tobacco industry as a whole." they were worried that they are going to find out nicotine is addictive. you know, they knew -- they knew back then that only about twenty percent of smokers thought that nicotine was an addiction. this is another -- this is a study of public attitudes towards cigarette smoking, the tobacco industry, 1978, okay, it was prepared by the tobacco institute, it is a spons- -reynolds sponsored them, they talk about how there was more than 64 million unsuccessful quit attempts, people trying to quit smoking, 64 million unsuccessful -- unsuccessful. and only 22 percent of smokers thought it was addictive. well, reynolds did not want anybody to know it was addictive, this is another memo that is in the -- in the pile that you will get. there is only about 10 or 15 documents in there, they are not very big. you can -- if you remember this one, it is -it is from a mr. knopick to a mr. kloepfer. kloepfer was the president of the tobacco institute. and this talks about nicotine being addictive, a drug, and it is dated 1980. this is a document that says, "we cannot defend continued smoking as free choice if the person was addicted." you see. they know that continued smoking is not a matter of free choice except to the extent that somebody says i want to quit and they try. but the smoking itself, that comes from the addiction. and all of these documents, all of these documents show that. "the frequency of self-administration of tobacco smoke in habituated smokers constitutes a high level of reinforcement that is undoubtedly higher than for any other substance fed or otherwise consumed by humans." that is pretty strong stuff. this is a report prepared for r.j. reynolds by a laboratory back in 1981. this is that study i told you, the nordine study. "however, we cannot ever be comfortable selling a product which most of our customers woulc stop using if they could." then he talks about, "slow but steady progress is being made in developing techniques for stopping smoking, but no universal easy method is yet in sight. if and when that occurs, first thing, well, maybe we should go out of business; second thing, let us find a way to eliminate the desire of smokers to stop smoking." this is a document that said most would like to quit. this is a document that says that most are not able to quit. are not able. i mean, this is their document, this is reynolds that says this, secret document. you know, here is one from another director there, claude teague, in 1972, "in a sense, the tobacco industry may be thought of as a specialized, highly ritualized, and stylized segment of the pharmaceutical entry -- industry." i'm sorry. that is how they were looking at theirselves, as a highly ritualized and stylized segment of the pharmaceutical industry, that is what they were thinking inside. now, did the average smoker like mr. ojeda think that the cigarette company was a highly stylized segment of the pharmaceutical industry? that is not the way people looked at it. they are the ones that created that lifestyle. they create this huge lifestyle. they have been doing it for years, i mean, a hundred years. and it finally caught up to them when people started discovering the information in their secret documents. and you heard dr. cummings talk about how he had a grant from the national cancer institute to review millions and millions of documents that have been put online, you can get them now, you can see what they really did. i need to have all these boards back, if somebody could help me get them. i want to -- i want to go back through those findings real fast because, you know, whose choice was it to do the things that they did. i'm sure you -- they make the roll -- cigarette companies sell roll-your-own tobacco, but they made these cigarettes and they changed the ph of the smoke with chemicals to give the smoker a kick. and if you read these, you will see that that is exactly the word they use. see, they -- they do something extra so that the person cannot get away from it. you know. like dr. cummings said, it can be grown without any nicotine in it, you know. they have the technology to take it out, make a nonaddictive cigarette. they did not do it. you saw at the very end of dr. cummings' testimony, there was a question asked, and wound up showing him this quest advertisement that had three kinds of cigarette from vector cigarette company, the last -- you start out with like a medium, then a light one, and then no nicotine at all so you can stop smoking. you wean yourself off. they did not want people to wean themselves off. let me go back and start this off with some of the things that -- that r.j. reynolds knew. they knew that their cigarettes were dangerous and addictive. they knew that they could have made a nonaddictive cigarette. i mean, that is their choice. they had choices, too. see? that is why -- that is why we have this comparative issue where there is a comparative fault issue, where you can put this percentage in there. i mean, this is why. they -- they could have provided more information, which they did not do. i mean, this finding -- these findings where they concealed information that was material to smokers, material information means it is important information. and they are the -- they are the ones that -- that concealed it. they could have -- they could have made a cigarette that -- that would not have harmed people with -- by making it without nicotine, but they did not do that. now, what did -- did mr. ojeda choose to use a negligently made product? well, he would not have known -- there was no evidence that he knew it was negligently made. would mr. ojeda have chosen to use a defective product, an unreasonably dangerous product? he did not know it was unreasonably dangerous or defective. that was not determined until later. he did not know that. but would he have chosen to do that? would he have chosen to use a product if he knew that information about its health effects and its addictive effects had been concealed from him by the company? and that the companies conspired to do that? you know, he -- would a person have made those choices to do that back then if they knew these things? you have to ask yourself that. the answer is no, people do not do stuff like that. but they did not know that these were defective, unreasonably dangerous, unreasonably dangerous. you know, when these engle findings were made. they were made despite the warning label that was on there, despite that warning. mr. persons: objection, your honor, preemption. the court: overruled. mr. acosta: you see, those warning labels have been known. they dispute them, but despite those warning labels, the cigarettes were found to be unreasonably dangerous, despite the warning labels, they were found to be negligent, despite the warning labels, they were found to have fraudulently concealed information. mr. persons: continuing objection to any reference to those labels, preemption. the court: okay. same -- same ruling. mr. acosta: you know, there was some talk about some of these depositions. and, you know, this case is just a few years old. you can see the case number on the -- on the verdict form when you get it. in this court, it is an '09 case. you know, when people talk about things that happened many years ago, i mean, they are talking about in the last 20 years. i mean. the references, it is hard when you are taking depositions of people some 20 years after the fact, 15 years after the fact, you know, memories are not exactly perfect, we do the best that we can. so the information that came out of the depositions, people remember different things in different ways i want to talk to you for a second about the statement that was made by defense counsel that, you know, cigarettes are a legal product. you know, congress did not say it was legal to have -to be negligent about your product. it is not lawful to do that. negligence is a breach of a legal duty. it is not legal to fraudulently conceal information about your product. it is not legal to sell a defective product. so, yes, it was not a crime to sell cigarettes, because this is not a criminal court, but their activities were not legal activities, because they would have been found negligent to commit fraud, conspiracy, and selling defective products. you know, you remember there was some questions about dr. cummings on the choice issue, you know. the surgeon general said it was a personal choice behavior. those were earlier surgeon general's reports, the one in '88 and the one in '89, both of them said that the addiction to nicotine removes the free choice of the smoker. i mean, it is compatible with their own documents. i mean, we all like to think that we have a free choice and free will to do things, and that is -- that is true, we do, we -- we want to do that, that is being a human being. but, you know, we are vulnerable. humans are not perfect. reynolds took advantage, they take advantage when they do what they did to addict people the way they did. and that is what they did to mr. ojeda. you know, we do not have a live witness that goes back before 1980 -- i think counsel misspoke when he said '85 for camel, because it was 1980 according to julio caravia, he remembered that. and then both dr. goldman and dr. fernandez -- i mean hernandez, the treating doctor, both were asked about, you know, what if he only smoked sinc 1980? you know, that -- till 1991, that is 22 pack-years of smoking. a pack-year being a pack a day for a year, so since he smoked two packs a day, it is 22 pack-years. both of them said -- there is not any question -- real question that there was not sufficient amount of smoking to be a cause of these diseases. dr. hernandez was asked -- dr. hernandez was asked, you know, what was the role of emphysema in his death, and he testified that it was the greater of the two causes. see, they had removed the lung cancer. or he thought they had. you know, he thought they had. so he was asked, well, what is the greater of the two causes? and he said he thought it was emphysema, end stage emphysema. and he said that it was caused by his addiction, because i asked him straight out was addiction a cause of his emphysema? yes. was addiction a cause of his lung cancer? yes. i mean, i could read more of it and more of it to you. he was asked is there any way this could have been a colon cancer in terms of medical probability. he said no, you know. what it was is this colon cancer was a possibility. that is what dr. goldman said, too, i mean, it was a possibility. you know, anything is possible. but you know what is interesting is their two witnesses, medical witnesses, dr. harris, the oncologist, and then dr. bennett? dr. harris, dr. harris said, oh, the colon cancer is up high here. remember, he had the diagram of the colon, the colon, you know, is shaped like this, and then up here is where he had the colon cancer. now, dr. bennett said, well, if he had colon cancer, it would have been down in the rectum. and then dr. bennett said, you know, we do not really know where the tumor came from. the clerk: counsel, you have ten minutes. mr. acosta: ten minutes? thank you. we do not really know where it came from. they are just -- they are really just guessing. you know. the death certificate says end stage emphysema and bronchogenic carcinoma are both causes of death, that is what dr. hernandez said, dr. hernandez is confronted with that, he says, yeah, despite all this colon stuff, that was correct. and he is the one that had all the material. you remember dr. harris said, you know, i wish i had the nursing notes, the progress notes, i wish i had the lab reports, i wish i had the operative report, i wish i had the pathology report. well, dr. hernandez had those things. and dr. -- you know, dr. bennett suggested that he did not have the pathology report until i showed him in the deposition that, indeed, he did, and he had talked to the pathologist. they have these hired guns that come in and want to convince you. now, let me talk about dr. goldman, you know, for just a second. dr. goldman, in the cases that he is testified in, has agreed with the treating physicians. i mean, why would anybody -- if the treating physicians did not think that the person had lung cancer and addiction, why would anybody bring such a case? he just -- you know, it would not -- who would do that? you know, we have tried to present you with the honest facts of the case, the honest truth. mr. persons: objection, you cannot do that, commenting on the honesty of a witness. that is for the jury to decide. the court: sustained. mr. acosta: it is interesting that defense counsel said what dr. hernandez did in '96 was reasonable. mr. persons: we have a motion, i apologize, have something i need to take up at sidebar, please. (the following is at the bench.) ms. henninger: what is the objection? the court: he said defense counsel said -mr. acosta: no, i do not think that is what they are objecting to. ms. alonso: your honor, the objection is that he is commenting on -- he is giving his personal opinion on the validity of the evidence, he is saying that we brought you the honest evidence. we think that is objectionable. your honor has sustained. the court: i already ruled on it. ms. alonso: i understand. i'm moving for a mistrial. i know you sustained the objection. i think the only way to cure it at this time is to mistry the case. mr. acosta: i do not think so. ms. henninger: if we do not make this motion, it is waived. mr. persons: if we did not make the motion, we would waive it. that is why. the court: okay. (in open court.) mr. acosta: you know, defense counsel said it was reasonable in 1996 that he had a primary lung cancer. reasonable for dr. hernandez to say that. well, somehow that is changed with less information than he had. that is impossible. the probability, the most convincing, persuasive evidence is that he did. but, you know, the interesting thing is all we have to prove is that one or the other, emphysema or the lung cancer, either one of them is enough if it is a contributing cause of his death. and both of them were. and, you know, counsel, defense counsel suggested that, you know, dr. bennett, when one of you asked this question of dr. bennett, it was written down, the judge read it to him, dr. bennett is answering it, then i do a follow-up question, and he says something about some problem and then maybe it stopped your heart one beat sooner or something like this, but i followed up with another question, and i walked all the way up here with that death certificate, and i read right from the death certificate what it says. and he had to -- he admitted then that emphysema was a significant contributing cause of his death. if you remember that, it was like the last question that i asked him. it was the last one i asked him. it was a follow-up to that other question. you know, i've got to touch real fast on the -- on this colon cancer issue. we had -- dr. goldman went through all these boards. well, let me tell you something that -- dr. hernandez was grilled over and over during his deposition about the possibility that it was colon cancer. and if you look in the evidence when you get it, it is -- the plaintiff's evidence is actually in this binder, okay, and if you look at his deposition, you will see this picture, it was on an envelope that he drew talking -- it actually goes like this, that he drew of two lungs, and he showed, you know, usually if somebody has a metastasis from someplace else you have little nodules in the lower lobes of the lungs. there were none in mr. ojeda. usually you have round nodules when you have metastasis from other places you do not have a lobulated, oblong mass in the upper lobe. and dr. hernandez explained that. you see, none -- the symptoms that he had, that mr. ojeda had, are not compatible with a metastasis from someplace else. he was a smoker, he has a tumor in his upper lobe, it is lobulated, it is not round, like you would see with a metastasis from someplace else. usually the metastasis are in the lower lobes, there were no metastasis, no mets in the lower lobes, and he explains that. and those were the questions that i had dr. goldman answer. see, that is what all these were about. dr. goldman said no, no, no. because he looked at all this stuff, and he knows what a metastasis looks like when it comes from someplace else, and there was not one there. but like i say, dr. hernandez said that the emphysema was the greater cause of his death. you know, he -- he would have survived the pneumonia i he did not have that much damage to his lung. let me see if i have anything else, because i'm almost -- i think i'm almost done. you know, i do not want to repeat myself, but dr. hernandez was asked do you have patients that you do not think can quit smoking, and he said yes. you know, this is just one of those cases where somebody has stood up and said, you know, they should be held accountable. that is what this engle thing is all about and that is why we are here. so i want to thank you again and i'm finished. you get to decide whether you are going to stay longer or come back tomorrow to deliberate, but i thank you very much, and hope, you know, i -- we will just wait and see what you have to say. thank you.