22 closing argument mr. barnhart: good morning, ladies and gentlemen of the jury, counsel. first let me say thank you, on behalf of mrs. piendle, on behalf of myself, on behalf of jack scarola, on behalf of sia baker-barnes, on behalf of mr. sales. i'm sure i speak for defense counsel too. this is a large, big, important case, and there is no way in closing argument we can cover everything that is happened, and we do not intend to. but we have watched you, and each and every one of you has paid close attention, taken good notes, and thank goodness we can rely upon that. now, one thing. this is closing argument. it is going to be more adversarial, and anything i say or anything that jack scarola says or anything that sia baker-barnes says, it is not intended as a slight against defense counsel. they are excellent lawyers and they have done a fine job for their clients. but closing argument is a time to determine and separate truth from falsity, sense from nonsense, lies from deceit, illusion from reality. now, if you will remember, about a month ago, i came in front of you in the courtroom right next door, and i told you that we were here for the death of a fine man, and that you would hear no evidence other than that. and we are indeed here for the death of a fine man, and you have heard no evidence other than that. now, you sit as a jury and you have watched us and you have seen objections and you have seen arguments and so on, but the decision is yours. and so you sit collectively as the representatives of the state of florida, of the united states of america, and you have immense power. when you go back in there tomorrow, in that jury room, you have the immense power to 24 right a wrong, to do what people have been doing in england and in the united states for 1200 years. you have the power to do what is right. now, folks, i want to tell you that how -- i want to talk about the way in which you do this. the way you do this is you follow the law. and so let us start from the beginning. when we started this case, we told you that this was an engle progeny case; in other words, it comes from an engle class action, and this case did not start yesterday. this case started in the 1950s, really when all the actions were done, and we are going to go through that. it goes to court in the -- the lawsuit is filed in 1994, it goes to court in 1999, and the florida supreme court makes its decision, and we are really at the end of 2006, early 2007. and then people were given the opportunity to file a lawsuit within that next year if they believed they fell within that class, and that is when this lawsuit was filed on behalf of charlie piendle. and in the very first paper that was filed in this case, when we walked down to this courthouse, we admitted, on behalf of charlie piendle, that he himself shared fault, that he himself beared responsibility for what he did, but that is not the end of the story, because tobacco denies any fault, not a smidgen, not an iota, not an iota, not a sliver of fault, and that is why we are here. all right. so we heard the judge, and let us talk a little bit about what the law is as you approach your job. the first and primary issue, was addiction to cigarettes manufactured by r.j. reynolds and philip morris a legal cause of charlie piendle's death? a legal cause. and we will explain that. let us go to the concurring cause. all right. so here are the instructions that you saw, you have them with you, but i want to work through them because it gives you an easy way to weigh the evidence, to follow the evidence, and see what goes on. addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine is a legal cause of death if it directly and in natural and continuous sequence produces or contributes substantially, it does not have to be the only cause, but contributes substantially to producing the death, so that it can be said that but for the addiction -- but for the addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine, the death would not have occurred. all right. and to be regarded as a legal cause of death, addiction need not be the only cause, and we know it is not, because the actions of charlie piendle were part of the cause and the actions of tobacco were part of 9 the cause. addiction may be a legal cause of death, even though it operates in combination with the act of another, charlie piendle, r.j. reynolds, philip morris, some natural cause or some other cause if the addiction contributes substantially to charlie's death. okay. so what is the addiction? it is combined with charlie's actions, with tobacco's actions. but to put this case in context, if we weigh it into what goes on in 2010, we are not doing justice. because what happens is charlie piendle started smoking, when, in the 1950s. he was born in 1941, and it was a different time, a different time. remember in opening statement when i pulled out a cigarette, it was shocking, it was jarring, but that was the milieu, that was the time in which charlie grew up, when everybody was smoking, when we had -- people smoked in the hospitals, people smoked on airplanes, people smoked at the doctor's office, doctors smoked, people smoked in schools, teachers and principals, they smoked everywhere. we had nurses, famous coaches, people in orchestras, people of everyday life, priests and clergy. well, we heard in this case that their priest smoked cigars, that their doctor who made house calls would show up smoking a cigarette, you heard betty piendle say that. people smoked during athletic activities. arnold palmer smoking away during a tennis tournament. people smoked traveling. they smoked everywhere. and to put this in study again, if we were -- if we were back in that time, people in the audience would be smoking. you would have ashtrays right here. somebody would be smoking. maybe i would, maybe the court would. but it was a different time. and so when we weigh charlie's activities, when we weigh a decision he made as a kid, we need to weigh it at the time when he lived, at the time when he was young, at the time when all of the influences around him counted the most. all right. so let us go back to the 1950s and talk about it statistically. in the 1950s nearly eighty percent of all men smoked. so remember, that was the world war ii generation, just above charlie. everybody had gone to war, and what did they get, free cigarettes in their rations, free cigarettes on their ships if you are in the navy, free cigarettes on the beaches if you were a marine. eighty percent of the men who fought in world war ii, eighty percent of all men in the united states were smokers, regular smokers. charlie grew up in a haze of smoke. it was what happened, it was not anything unusual. dad smoked, mom smoked, the kids down the 20 street smoked, the teacher smoked, the firemen smoked, the police officer smoked, priests smoked, doctors, nurses, everybody smoked. all right. so by the time, we know from a poll, we do not particularly know about bridgeport, the national high school classes of 1958 and 1959, charlie was the class of '59, 65 to 68 percent of the kids were regular smokers. i do not mean experimenting out behind the bleachers, i mean regular smokers. regular smokers. all right. so going back, here is charlie. so what do we know about charlie? and when you evaluate the impact of the loss of charlie piendle on his wife liz -- on your way there. when we evaluate the loss of charlie for liz, we have to go back and see what kind of a man charlie was. right? no one in this courtroom other than liz knew charlie, but to evaluate the loss to liz, we have to understand charlie, we have to get to know him, we have to understand what that loss meant to her. well, who was charlie? well, he was a good-looking kid. he was a nice kid. we saw his grade card, he was not the best student, but he was a good athlete. he was a popular kid. he was captain of the track team. he was a football -- i do not know if he was a football star, but he was the starting halfback on the football team. his best friend babe, we heard him testify, babe was a star, and they were best friends growing up. and so what was he? he was different things. he was a marine, he was a member of the school, and he was not stuck up and he was not conceited. he was just a nice guy. and how do we know that? because the friends he made in high school are his -- were his best friends all his life, all his life. remember babe who came down? the very last question, one of the defense lawyers asked him about why he was here, and he said, i'm here for my friend. i'm here for my friend. and when you have a man who inspires that kind of loyalty, that kind of love, even 14 years after his death, that is a remarkable man, and that is a terrible loss. all right. so i wanted to talk -- we -- you know, we talked about the time, but now let us talk about the ads. and, look, the judge told you there is nothing wrong with advertising, and there is not. there is not. you can advertise. there is nothing wrong with that. but what you cannot do, what you cannot do is false, misleading, deceitful advertising and representations are not protected by the first amendment. you know why, because they are wrong. you can advertise, you can puff, so to speak, but you cannot lie, and you cannot 5 mislead. all right. so what are some of the advertisements we have seen? lucky strikes, prom, 1952. and these were everywhere. they were in magazines; they were in newspapers; they were on billboards. and remember what babe said? right across from the candy story where they got their penny cigarettes, you know, kids would go in, plunk down a penny, get a cigarette and a match, penny cigarettes. and right across the street from that was a billboard of the marlboro man. and what did babe say? everybody wanted to be the marlboro man. everybody wanted to be there, because he was a tough ombré. he was a man's man. he was an american, square-jawed, tough, independent, the kind of person that conquered the west. and what teenager -- or what child would not want to be like that? we have sports figures. john wayne. we have doctor's advertising. the defense keeps saying -- you know, there are warnings everywhere. he had to know more than tobacco as a kid. we have doctors. "more doctors smoke camels than any other cigarette." how did they get that? remember what dr. cummings said, how did they get that poll, so to speak? the doctors had a convention, and they put camel cigarettes in their rooms. and then when they ran out of their cigarettes, they had the camels. they came down, and said, doctor, what cigarette is in your pocket? that is how they got them on camels. they advertised 28 percent less nicotine, more sports figures. we had -- is it don newcombe and roy campanella? they do not mean much to us now, but to charlie they did. that was lebron james, that was dwayne wade, that was dan marino, that was frank gifford. so to put it in context, to do what is right, to be fair, to understand the responsibility charlie had, compared to the responsibility tobacco has, we need to see the information environment that he lived in. remember that, and that is when -- the cross-examination of their polster and the cross-examination of their historian, this came out. so here's charlie in the 1950s and let us look and see what are his influences. well, the number one influence are his parents, of course, his siblings, his teachers, his neighborhood, his friends, his neighbors, his peers, his school, the military. military was big back then. we were just out of world war ii. we had beaten the bad guys. the american navy ruled the waves. the american army conquered. the u.s. marines were tough. that was in the 1940s, 1950s. big heros. tv started in the early 1950s, and it was saturated with tv ads. and then doctors, we 16 talk about doctors. so what do we have, billboards, newspapers and magazines, and from the annual report of philip morris and rjr -- i cannot remember which one it was, in the '50s, 1957, 3 billion messages that year. that is one company, and you see it has a synergistic effect, because although he did not smoke cigarettes from other companies, they all did it. they all advertised. and every cigarette company advertised sex, cool, sophisticated, manly, boy meets girl. that was the story. all right. this is frank gifford. we can start it. (thereupon, the video clip was played and transcribed as follows:) mr. gifford: some fun, i sure hope you get a chance to try it sometime. here's something else you ought to try, and soon, lucky strike. why? because if you like taste in your cigarette, you will get it with luckys. this is all the taste a smoker could want. it is rich and smooth, the taste of fine tobacco. and let me tell you, once you start getting that taste, you will want to keep getting it -- mr. barnhart: because you are addicted. mr. gifford: -- so come on, get that fine tobacco taste. get lucky, the taste to start with -- mr. barnhart: he was the biggest star. mr. gifford: -- the taste to stay with. get lucky strike. mr. barnhart: the biggest star, the dan marino of his life. narrator: it takes a steady hand and a quick mind to put a jet fighter plane through its paces. every jet pilot is given intensive training at some of the most modern airbases in the world . . . try them for 30 days. you will discover -- mr. barnhart: for 30 days. narrator: -- camel's rich flavor -- mr. barnhart: dr. benowitz, get addicted. try them for 30 days. narrator: -- and cool mildness continue to please you pack after pack. you will see why camel is america's most popular cigarette. leads all other brands by billions of cigarettes per year. banker: . . . with winston's filter blend up front, it is like money in the bank -- mr. barnhart: beverly hillbillies was the most popular show on tv in its time. banker: you are going to like winstons. mr. clampett: i reckon i'll decide that for myself. banker: yes, sir. mr. clampett: uhm, i like it. this here winston tastes good . . . ms. london: . . . you get a lot to like 6821 1 with a marlboro filtered, flavored, pack or box. mr. rubbel: gee, we ought to do something -- mr. barnhart: sexy, cool, sophisticated, even the little fist bump with the cigarette. it is very well done. there is no question about it. mr. rubbel: -- fred. mr. flintstone: okay. how's about taking a nap? mr. rubble: hey, i got a better idea, let us take a winston break. mr. flintstone: that is it. winston is the one filtered cigarette that delivers flavor 20 times a pack. winston's got that filter blend. mr. rubble: yeah, fred. filter blend makes the big taste difference and only winston has it, up front where it counts. here, ahead of the pure white filter . . . mr. flintstone: . . . winston tastes good like a cigarette should. (thereupon, the video clip ended.) mr. barnhart: now, that was, in its time, the number one tv show, and it was shown at night. it was prime time. and who watched it? a lot of people did. but who primarily watched it? kids and teenagers. it just covered the media, saturated the media. all right. so that puts us into the time. so what is the evidence you-all saw on addiction, going back in time, realizing where charlie grew up, how he grew up, what he thought. the evidence on addiction causing death came from three experts, and let us talk about them. these were three of the most qualified experts in the world. i mean, it really bears scrutiny as to who came to testify for you. what did neal benowitz -- if you will recall, he is published almost 400 peer review documents -- peer-reviewed articles. that means -- and we have heard about this, and some of you know the process of peer review. you cannot just willy-nilly throw off an article and it gets published. it has to go to judges who are leaders in their field, leaders in their field. he is a peer reviewer himself. he lectured all over the world on nicotine, on addiction, on substances. he is board-certified in three specialties. he is written over 80 chapters in books. he did not look that old. frankly, i do not see how he did it. but eighty chapters in books. he was involved in seven surgeon general's reports. he was the senior editor of the landmark 1988 surgeon general's report, which did what? link addiction -- addiction to nicotine to all other addictions, alcohol, cocaine, heroin. put it in that class as a 12 matter of medical science. so what did he say? cigarette smoke is addictive; nicotine's is a responsible culprit; the physiological processes are similar to other drug addictions; nicotine is highly addictive, and i believe he used 80 to ninety percent of the people who used nicotine regularly are addicted. you remember that. compare that to alcohol. now, many people drink alcohol. not many people are alcoholics. it is ten percent or lower. nicotine, 80 to 90 percent of the people, regular smokers, become addicted. does everybody? no. some people are lucky. but a regular smoker, eight to nine out of ten become addicted. okay. and he is consulted with a number of organizations around the world, the national cancer institute, the epa, and so on. david burns. david burns was our first witness in this case, as you will recall, a long time ago. it is been a month-long trial. david burns, medical school at dartmouth, medical school at harvard. and he took -- he studied from harrison's, as do all doctors, all fledgling doctors, in the united states and probably in a lot of countries, harrison's or cecil. that is your basic textbook. and he studied from it at dartmouth and harvard. he wrote -- and he wrote chapters on nicotine in those books and at the time he became a star in his field. so when the new doctors at harvard and dartmouth and the university of florida and university of miami are studying to become doctors, they are reading chapters written by dr. burns. he was the senior editor of the 1975 and 1976 surgeon general's reports. and then he had an important role. it varied, but an important role in every single surgeon general report thereafter, except for a couple, '75, '76, '79, '80, '81, '82, '84, '85, '87, '88, '01 and '04. and every one of those surgeon general's reports were attacked by tobacco, and we are going to see the evidence. do not take my word for it. you have seen it. we are going to put it together, and we are going to see the documents, and you will watch that attack as part of a coordinated plan. you know, it is rare that you get a case where you have actual documents showing a conspiracy, a cover up, a plan. most cases are like footprints in the sand. you have to piece it together. not here. not here. you are going to see it in their own words. all right. let us go to the next one. then we brought dr. michael cummings, and he is a ph.d. kind of doctor. he is at the roswell cancer institute, and he has written almost 270 peer-reviewed articles. so when you put these experts together, folks, we are talking about a thousand, approximately, 23 peer-reviewed articles from the people that came before you. he served on editorial boards of the two leading cancer journals. he is the director of new york state's smoking cessation line. and what did they have -- something like a million people have gone through it, something like that. it is the oldest cancer hospital in the country. he got 50 -- what was it -- 57 grants for over $57 million for the roswell cancer institute. he was the author, senior editor and senior author of the 1988 and 1999 surgeon general's reports. and then -- and you will see what happened. and tobacco said, look, we have done a lot of good things. we put -- we put warnings on cigarette -- cigarette packages. well, sure, because they were forced to by law. you will see from the facts that everything they did, all the manufacturing changes they did were either required by an act of congress, forced by a lawsuit, or done to maximize profit. every single one of the things they did. and so, he, dr. cummings, is the repository of millions of documents from the state attorney's general who sued the tobacco companies and forced them to produce the documents which you have seen in this court and you will see now. thank you. okay. so who did tobacco bring to talk about addiction? we heard about each one of these folks. tobacco brought nobody, nobody to say that charlie was not addicted. now, look, tobacco has the resources, and they certainly have the lawyers who can find an expert around this country to have said charlie piendle was not addicted. mr. kelly: your honor -- mr. barnhart: and they did not. mr. kelly: your honor, it is improper to reference resources of the various parties. the court: i'll sustain, and ask the jury to disregard that statement by counsel. mr. barnhart: thank you, your honor. we know that the experts they did bring came from las vegas, nevada, right, and from tennessee -- knoxville, tennessee. they brought nobody. nobody. okay. so what was the testimony that you heard, without a doubt, according to dr. burns, according to dr. cummings, without a doubt, addiction was a contributing cause of his death. now, what are you going to do with evidence of that -- like that? it is all -- it is not just the greater weight of the evidence. there is none on the other side. so the evidence on that is very clear, but we need to see how that affected -- because it is not just whether he was addicted, it is how it affected his behavior and the behavior of 8 everybody else they studied and who was addicted to cigarettes. addiction drove his smoking. when an addicted smoker smokes, there is a drive. it is the drive for addiction. it is the core. it is the critical element to what a smoker does. it is the critical element to why somebody will smoke 20 or 30 or 40 cigarettes a day for ten, 15, 20, 40, 50 years. your control is affected and, as we will see, most smokers want to quit and want to -- and regret the day they started. and it is no longer a free choice. it is not impossible, nobody ever said that it was impossible to quit smoking cigarettes. we know people do it. many people have done it. millions of people have done it. but it is difficult. it is doggone difficult. it is hard. and as charlie said to his family, it is the hardest thing he ever did. when we picked the jury, you heard that from some of the smokers who smoked a long time: it was a hard, hard thing to do from an addicted smoker. and the relapse rate, unfortunately, well, you can quit, but the relapse rate is tough. so people have quit for a day, a week, a month, a year, sometimes many years, but the relapse rate is high. okay. and that brings us to the circle of addiction, which you saw, but it is a good graph to show things. people experiment. kids, usually, experiment. can you see mr. tad-y? juror tad-y: yes. mr. barnhart: as they smoke more cigarettes and they become more and more addicted, their choice, their free choice diminishes, until they get to the point where they are addicted, and then you have daily use and physical dependence. could you go to the next one? then, what do we have? we have a cycle of addiction. that is why people smoke so much, smoke so regularly. there are actual physical changes. there are brain changes in the brain of smokers. you heard dr. benowitz talk about tolerance, and tolerance is -- most people who have tried cigarettes had an unpleasant experience. they either get sick or they do not like it. they certainly could not start smoking two packs a day, for example, when you are kid. you would become deathly ill, but you develop tolerance over time. then you develop a compulsion, a physical compulsion, a physical craving to have cigarettes, and then you develop withdrawal symptoms, which are -- range from very unpleasant to dreadful. they are awful. and then it goes hand in glove with the psychological effects. people like the high. it relaxes people. it stimulates them. 19 remember that? it targets the pleasure center. so the brain secretes dopamine, and all the other pleasure hormones that dr. benowitz talked about. but over time, over time, that constant bath of nicotine causes the body to reach an equilibrium where the body lowers its own natural production of dopamine, and that causes withdrawal symptoms. so in a daily cycle, even though people do not think, gosh, i'm going through withdrawal, they think or they feel it is time for a cigarette. and if you -- an addicted smoker, a regular smoker takes them out, depends on how addicted they are, you take your cigarettes out for two hours or one hour, three hours, first thing they do, they are fumbling with their cigarettes when they get out of whatever it is, movie, church, a restaurant. that is now. i mean, you heard testimony from liz and tracy. their daughter was a gifted gymnast, and she had dance recitals and so on. cannot smoke there, now not, not a cute little girl. as soon as there was an intermission, mom and dad were out there smoking cigarettes, because they had the craving, because withdrawal symptoms started. all right. so let us talk about the brain changes. and there was an issue that one of you raised, and it was a very good one, and that is what are short-term brain changes and what are the long-term brain changes. and this is a video of dr. benowitz about three weeks ago in front of you. if you could. (thereupon, the video clip was played and transcribed as follows:) q. "and what are the permanent brain changes called?" a. "well, again" -- (thereupon, the video clip ended.) mr. kelly: your honor, this is from the testimony in court. it is impermissible to show any videos of what occurred in court. a transcript is the only record that can be used. mr. barnhart: the transcript is right here, your honor. the court: counsel can approach. (thereupon, the following proceedings were held out of the presence of the jury:) mr. barnhart: i thought -- i thought you had -- the court reporter: wait, hold on a second, it is so loud in my ear, it is blaring. mr. barnhart: you need a statute, case law without using video -- you have the transcript. mr. kelly: i'd be happy to give it to you. the reason i did not use any of it, i looked to see if there was a rule, and there is 4 one right on point. the court: you have to bring that, yeah. mr. barnhart: it is just one question and one answer. mr. kelly: we gave it to you this morning, your honor. the court: apparently, it is just the one question and answer. so do you want to just move on then? if they are objecting and there is a -- all -- i need time to look at it. (thereupon, the sidebar conference was concluded and the following proceedings were held within the presence of the jury:) mr. barnhart: tell you what, here's what we will do, go ahead and turn off the sound, and we will read it. okay. so here was the question from dr. -- that i posed to dr. benowitz: "what are the permanent brain changes called?" answer: "well, again, the technical term for it is neuroplasticity, which really means that you are developing new brain circuits." "thank you." and we had, if you will remember, we had dr. benowitz -- christine, i do not want to smash you. and i wrote down some of the things dr. benowitz said. and dr. benowitz said, you are most vulnerable to addiction when you are young, when you are a youth. the average age people start is 14 to 15 years, and that eighty percent of the smokers are regular smokers, not experimenting, regular smokers by the time they are 18. and then i ask him, "well, is this an informed decision, based upon all your research, based upon everything you have done, based upon your evaluation with an involvement with the surgeon general?" he said, "no, it is not an informed decision." teenagers -- i mean, do we need an expert to say it? the teenager brain is physiologically not fully developed. they can be big, but the judgment centers are affected, and children's brains top out at about age 20, 21, 22, depending on who you are. that is why teenagers do so many dumb things. their judgment centers are affected. but it is not an informed decision for somebody who is 12, 13, 14, 15. and then he said, "teens underestimate how much they will smoke and whether they will get addicted." right? so that is actually the decision. they see all this stuff. it is really cool. it is really sexy. i want to be cool. i want to be sexy. i want to look good. i want my self-image to be good. but they do not understand how much 15 they are going to smoke, and they have no clue about addiction. and what are the stages of somebody who is starting, a kid who is starting? he prepares. there is a trial and experimental phase. then they start regular use, and within 30 days it is regular use, and most kids are addicted. okay. and he said, look, nicotine is a drug addiction, pure and simple. there is -- and it involves, like any drug addiction, a loss of control. it is a disease of the brain reward centers, the hormones receptors, and the average number of attempts before someone is finally able to quit, the average number is five. five. that is how strong the addiction is. and then he was talking about -- we talk about the cycle of addiction, which we just covered, and then he talked about neuroplasticity, which are the long-term brain changes. and then we talked about rationalization and denial. why with withdrawal do we rationalize? why do we deny something that a nonsmoker today can see clearly? because we want a crutch, as tobacco puts it, a psychological crutch. all right. so let us talk about levels of addiction, if we could. we found out from all the evidence, and i summarize it all right here, that more heavily addicted people start at a younger age; that heavier smokers are more heavily addicted; that a cigarette the first thing in the morning is the hallmark of addiction; and that those who have smoked for a long time are the most heavily addicted and, conversely, the less heavily addicted are just the other way, they are older, they are light smokers. they do not smoke their first cigarette as soon as they get up out of bed or right when they have their coffee. they smoke for less time. it is exposure related, in other words. okay. so where does charlie piendle fit? well, if you will remember the fagerstrom test, based on dr. fagerstrom, you saw it a couple of times. you saw it with dr. benowitz, and then you saw it when liz piendle testified. now, let us go back. this is the fagerstrom test used by people involved in addiction medicine. it is the gold standard, if you will, and let us take charlie through this. how soon, after you wake up, do you first smoke your first cigarette? that is question no. 1 because it is the most important. all right. liz piendle: "we both had cigarettes on the side of our bed." you know, their ashtrays and smoking stuff on either side of the bedstand. smoked at night, they smoked first thing in the morning. ted cabral, babe cabral: "first thing in the morning." 6838 eddie piendle: "first thing with coffee, right away." so within five minutes, maybe six minutes, it is either a three or a two. charlie piendle, most important. so let us go to the second question. "do you find it difficult to defrain -- refrain," excuse me, "from smoking in places where it is forbidden?" we heard liz, and we heard tracy. they could barely sit through tracy's recital. first night out, bang, they would be right outside smoking. third question. "which cigarette would you hate to give up in the morning?" well, we do not have charlie to say that. liz said, "i think it would have been the first one when he got up in the morning." and i'm sure she is right. but let us give them that because we do not have charlie, and i'm sure they never talked about, "charlie, which cigarette is most important to you?" that is something most people would not talk about. let us go to the next one. how many cigarettes per day do you smoke? well, there is evidence back and forth. liz said, clearly, between 31 or more. when they were cutting back, it was less. most of the time it was two packs a day. how do we know that? well, medical records are in evidence, okay? most of these medical records are from the va when charlie piendle went in to be treated for lung cancer, and charlie piendle did not want to die. we can see that in the records. and he told -- he told the doctors that. so what he did to help him, to help his recovery, we hope, is that they give a history to a doctor, and the thing you tell your doctor when he is trying to save your life is the truth. it is long before any lawsuits, long before anything. so what did he tell his doctor? one, smoker, one pack a day, smoked age 16 to 48. that is when you become a regular smoker. 40 to 45-pack smoking history. those are pack years. 40 to 45, packs per day, 40 to 45, 50-pack years. you have different doctors give different things. smoking two packs per day, two packs per day for many years, two packs of cigarettes per day for many years. they just smoked two packs of cigarettes per day for many years, two packs of cigarettes, two packs of cigarettes, two packs of cigarettes, two packs of cigarettes. he smoked a lot. he clearly smoked, going back to the fagerstrom test, the highest amount. let us go to our next question. do you smoke more frequently during the first hours 11 after awakening than during the rest of the day? now, why is that an important question, just like the first cigarette in the morning? because that is when withdrawal is at its most keen moment. right? you do not have nicotine bathing your brain and you crave it, you need it, and that is why it is the most dear. well, what did liz say? yes, in the morning. why? to replenish the nicotine levels. let us go on to the next one. and do you smoke even if you are so ill that you are in bed? okay. so remember what the evidence is about this. charlie piendle had crohn's disease, does not have anything to do with this case, it is an autoimmune disorder, your body attacks your intestinal tract. so what we know from the evidence is, is really painful. there is nothing worse than when your guts are hurting, when you feel sick, when you feel nauseated, when you feel like you have diarrhea, that is an awful feeling. people do not leave the bathroom when it is bad. charlie had severe occurrences of it. he had to leave the marine corps because of the first occurrence. the second occurrence when he had an acute attack and he almost died, he was in the hospital for months, according to liz. that is when they took out his lower colon, that is when he had the colostomy bag. and what did liz say and what did tracy say? liz -- i do not know if tracy was there. what liz said is, even in the va hospital, when he was so sick he almost died, he was sitting there smoking away or lying there smoking away. clearly, he met that standard. so let us go -- let us tally this score. all right. so if you want to give him everything, how soon did he wake up? within five minutes, three points. difficult to refrain, one point. which cigarette would you hate to give up? we do not know. i bet if you ask charlie, it would be that, we will give him that. how many cigarettes? 31 or more a day. do you smoke more frequently during the first hours? you bet. did you smoke when you are sick? he smoked when he was so sick he was almost dead. and so what does the score -- what does the fagerstrom score tell us? over seven. your level of dependence is high. you are not in control of your smoking, it, your smoking, is in control of you. okay. we did not invent this for this lawsuit. that is what is used by nicotine addiction specialists over the world, and as you heard dr. benowitz, addiction involves a loss of control. 22 all right. so what is it? as dr. benowitz said, a chronic relapsing disease. dr. cummings told us eighty percent of current smokers would not start again. whoa, that is customer satisfaction, eighty percent would not start again. 80 to ninety percent want to quit. 96 percent have tried to quit. and so why are smokers still smoking? because they are addicted, because it is tough, because it hurts, because it is miserable to quit, because for some smokers, it is the hardest thing they ever did, and for some smokers, even those who are in the hospital, dying, as dr. benowitz said, from heart disease or lung cancer, they are still smoking, maybe through a trach, they are still smoking because they cannot quit. that is not everybody, but that is how insidious this addiction is. what are the relapse rates, because quitting is only half the story. 95 percent of people relapse as they are on their road to trying to quit, and the average quit attempts, we talked about, it is five. so what does tobacco claim about all this? well, they presented no evidence, not one smidgen. they called no witnesses, not one witness. but they say this: look, this was just a choice. he was not motivated. he was only motivated when he finally quit. they did not throw out the ashtrays. he did not seek hypnosis. he did not go to see a shrink. well, when charlie was quitting, trying to quit, they did not have the patch, they did not have chantix, they did not have anything except nicorette gum by prescription, and what charlie did is he used toothpicks, all along, really, toothpicks and straws and he finally was able to quit it. okay. they say, hey, look, charlie piendle was a marine, he was strong-willed. and i asked dr. benowitz that question, do strong-willed people get addicted? do marines get addicted? do people who read newspapers get addicted? of course. of course. or he could have quit earlier, he could have quit -- you know, he quit. see, they turned it on its head. he quit, so he could have quit earlier. that is what is known as circular reasoning, is not it? he quit, therefore, he could have quit at any time. great argument. people, according to dr. burns and dr. cummings and dr. benowitz, do not just choose to die. they smoke because they are addicted. no one just chooses to die. no one is motivated to die. they smoke because they have to or until they are able to quit. okay. so we have a jury verdict form that is been sitting there all by itself and there are some questions that we have to answer and we are going to go through this. so the 7 first thing, i'm going to combine them, were tobacco's defective and dangerous cigarettes a cause of death? and did the defendants conceal facts about heath and addiction? i'll put them together so it will make it easier. okay. let us go to the findings by the court. if you could show those. these are the instructions of finding, they are actually over here behind me, which i'm sure nobody can see. the first one is smoking causes lung cancer. we cannot go behind those findings, those are the findings from the florida supreme court in the engle case. nicotine is addictive, is the second finding. the defendants, rjr and philip morris placed cigarettes on the market that were defective and unreasonably dangerous, that they concealed or omitted material information not otherwise known or available, knowing that the material was false or misleading and they -- or they failed to disclose a material fact concerning the health effect of -- or the addictive nature of smoking. and then, finally, this is really where all the meat is, but we are going to see this, they agreed to conceal or omit information regarding the health effects of cigarettes. they agreed to conceal with others with the intent that smokers and the public would rely on this information to their detriment. and then they talk about the companies that were involved and they also include the tobacco institute, which we are going to see and you have heard about, and council for tobacco research and so on. so those are findings, we cannot go behind them. so we can only look to see what did philip morris and rjr know and what did they do with that knowledge. what did they know? when did they know it? and what did they do with that knowledge? okay. let us start in the beginning, 1953, the claude teague memo. 1953, a research scientist at r.j. reynolds does this, he studies all of the cancer studies, that is, he does a review of all the cancer articles around the world, and this is what he comes up with, you know, and this is given to the executives, to the top brass. he does not just leave it on his desk. what does he show? studies of clinical data tend to confirm the relationship between heavy and prolonged tobacco use, tobacco smoking, and incidence of cancer of the lung. and what did these articles and the bibliographies say, cancer, cancer, cancer, tumor, tumor, tumor, cancer, cancer, cancer. this was not public knowledge at this time, this was knowledge that they had. but very soon, there was a cancer scare. and we heard about 18 this, there were a number of studies, but the one that really captured the public's attention was when a doctor did a study, painted cigarette tar on the backs of mice and they grew tumors. it was a mouse study and that got a lot of publicity. tv was new, but it was on tv, it was in newspapers. and what do we know? cigarette sales began to fall, they plummeted, really. if we can go to the next one. maybe we are having some technical difficulties. but what happened was, sales began to fall, and that was extremely alarming to the tobacco industry, because the last time they had sales fall was in the great depression. they did not fall that much, according to dr. burns, because people needed their cigarettes. so what they had is an emergency december meeting. are we up there or no? okay. so what happened, they had a series of two meetings. where? the plaza hotel in new york city. now, before this, the cigarette companies were fierce competitors, because everybody was trying to market each other, elbow each other out to capture the share of the market, it was an extremely lucrative business. and what they wanted to do is capture the share of the particular smokers. so this was an extraordinary meeting, extraordinary. and what did they do, right, they had -- they are armed with the knowledge that their products caused lung cancer, and so did they bring their scientists? did they invite world class scientists like the -- back then, equivalent to dr. benowitz or dr. burns? no. did they would bring the surgeon general, the doctor to the united states of america? no. did they bring any doctors? no. who did they bring? the c.e.o.s, the presidents, and a pr firm, and a pr firm, best in the business, hill & knowlton. all right. so at this point, philip morris and rjr had choices. they talk about charlie's choices. they made choices, and they made a choice, a plan, a strategy that was hatched that would go for 50 years. all right. so what was their choice? conceal, cover up, do not link hands with the medical authorities, cover it up, conceal it, never tell the truth, fight every health announcement. and we saw that happen. every surgeon general's report was attacked. false, defamatory, it is unproven, it is a controversy. and then when you fight, reassure, reassure your customers, because if you do not, guess what? people might quit. they might start quitting and they might, even worse, not take it up in the first place. that would be a 3 catastrophe. of course, the millions of people getting lung cancer and emphysema, well, that was not the primary concern. so we have some memos of these meetings, if we could. this -- this is a -- really, this is a unique document. this is the hill & knowlton, the pr firm's rendition of what happened, because they went and talked to people from the tobacco industry. so the author says, the pr guy, the adman says, you will get little real information about lung cancer, but you will get some mighty interesting opinions. one of the men said, it is fortunate for us that cigarettes are a habit they cannot break. whoopee for us. they are hooked, they are addicted. said another, boy, would not it be wonderful if our company was the first to produce a cancer-free cigarette for health reasons? no. what we could do to the competition, how much more money. but there is more here. would not it be wonderful if we were the first to produce a cancer-free cigarette? and what does that statement say? our cigarettes are not cancer free. our cigarettes cause cancer. this is back then. this is not 2010, this is 1953. suppose everybody smoked just one cigarette less a day, that would be maybe 40 billion a year. you know what was on their minds, and it was not the health of their customers, it was not the health of the american public. so what did they do? this resulted in what is called the frank statement, and there was nothing frank about it. you have seen this from the evidence. this frank statement was a pure public relations endeavor that was part of this 50-year plan. okay. so there is only one problem, they say. so what is the problem? health, our customers may be dying? no. it is confidence. public assurance. how do we assure the public, not how do we protect the public, how do we assure them, how to free millions of americans from the guilty fear that is going to arise deep in their biological depths, regardless of any pooh-poohing logic, every time they light a cigarette. how do we make them feel better? how do we relieve them of the fear? that is the question. that was their challenge. so they issued the frank statement, okay. and here is the frank statement and this -- remember the frank statement, it was published in 248 of the leading newspapers in the country and it hit almost everybody in the country. what did it say? medical research indicates many possible causes of lung cancer. conceal, cover up. there is no proof that cigarette smoking is one of those causes, and they did that. they knew there was proof, they knew what 14 caused it, they are talking to the admen. we believe the products we make are not injurious to health, they do not hurt anybody. never tell the truth. we always have and always will cooperate closely with those whose task it is to safeguard the public health. that was a lie too. they never did, not once. all right. so their plan -- go if you could to their plan, and what was the plan? make it easy to start smoking. make it as hard as possible to stop. make it as easy as possible to start up again. easy to start, hard to quit, and easy as possible to start up again, and all the reasons that they did that. okay. so that brings us to some of the new documents, and the first one is from rjr, i believe, the most important type of story, this is when they are setting the plan how to tell the story, the most important type of story is that which casts doubt, casts doubt on the cause and effect theory of disease and smoking. so they are formulating their plan, what we want are how to cast doubt on the science. our basic position, they say, in the cigarette controversy is subject to the charge and may be subject to a finding that we are making false and misleading statements to promote the sale of cigarettes. they are right. they are right. now, this was not intended for public consumption. this was the tobacco institute and all the companies, and there were c.e.o.s or the vice president or whatever, on this tobacco institute, they rotated chairmanship. and what are they saying? look, our position is such that we may be subject to a finding that we are making false statements, that we are making misleading statements to the public, to the surgeon general, to our customers, do not take it from me, take it from them. the clerk: counsel. mr. barnhart: thank you. so what happens is did they know, of course, that cigarettes were dangerous? this is shortly before they sent things on. yes, they knew. they are talking about carcinogens, carcinogens clearly cause cancer. we can skip over that for the lack of time. the physiological requirements of the smoker could be met by the application of the optimum amount of nicotine to be extracted, expanded tobacco. what does that mean? it means that they meet the needs of the addicted smoker by adjusting the amount of nicotine. you put it in, you take it out. you put it in, you take it out. you keep the smoker addicted, take away his choice, make it terribly difficult to stop. 25 okay. so what did tobacco know and what did they -- what did they conceal? they knew, in fact, that tobacco causes cancer. oh, we are still going. okay. this is important. during the past two decades, they say, 1962, rjr, cigarette smoke has been the target of a bunch of studies relating to ill health. the majority of these studies incriminate cigarette smoke from a health viewpoint. well, that is not a surprise, but this is back in the '60s. obviously, the amount of evidence accumulated to indict cigarette smoke as a health hazard is overwhelming. the evidence challenging this indictment is scant. put this in time. this is about -- this is 1962, late 1962. what came out in late 1964? the landmark surgeon general's report. so what they are talking about -- they knew that scientists were working on, and so what they are doing is they are anticipating the surgeon general's report and, of course, we know that they denied any link, but what is happening is they are saying the evidence to indict cigarette smoke is overwhelming, the evidence challenging this is scant. that is what they knew before the surgeon general's report came out. okay. then we have two things. this is, again, close and prior to the surgeon general's report. let us go through that quickly. this is a talk about carcinogen. what is a carcinogen? according to tobacco, it is a substance which applied to the tissue of a test animal causes a tumor. and we have to assume that if a tumor is caused in an animal, it is caused in a human. you have to -- that is their definition. carcinogens are found in practically every class of compounds in smoke. and what is the next document? carcinogens are found in practically every class of compound in smoke. and present technology does not permit selective filtration of particulate smoke. we cannot filter out any of this stuff, they know that. so this is just before the surgeon general's report. and then they send a letter to the surgeon general, because they knew the report was coming out, 1963. right after we just saw their internal document that says that, what did they tell the surgeon general? none of the chemical substances listed, to our knowledge, has been found by scientific research to be harmful to the health of the smoker in amounts reported in smoke. what did they -- what did they know? it was carcinogen, it caused cancer, the evidence was overwhelming, the evidence against was scant, and what did they officially say to the surgeon general? it is not there. it is not 10 there. they lied to the surgeon general. they did not just mislead, that was deceit, but it was deceit with a motive. okay. so then we go on. we know the surgeon general's report did find a link to cancer, and that made big news. so then we come down to 1972 to talk about addiction, because they always denied it was addictive, it is just a habit, just a habit. okay. so what is going on behind the scenes at rjr in this case? happily for the tobacco industry, nicotine is both habituating and unique. if nicotine is a sine qua non, the end all, be all of tobacco products, and tobacco products are recognized as being attracted dosage forms of nicotine -- sounds like a doctor, does not it? write a prescription, what are we doing? we are making dosage -- dosage machines is what we are doing. we are giving our smokers doses of nicotine. we have -- and this follows back the plot. we have deliberately played down the role of nicotine. now, look, defense counsel is going to get up here and say, hey, everybody knew nicotine was habit forming. they talked about nicotine fiend, cigarette fiends, we had this and we had that. look what tobacco said in the privacy of their own boardrooms, we have deliberately, not accidently, not negligently, not inadvertently, we have deliberately played down the role of nicotine. we somehow must convince him, the smoker, with wholly irrational reasons that he should try smoking, in the hope that he will himself then discover the real satisfactions. those are not my italics or quotes. you know what they are? theirs. because you know what real satisfactions are? nicotine addiction. all right. let us go to the next one. so get them to rely, get the people to rely, downplay the addiction. all right. so then we come up to what they know. all right. our next one is an rjr memo and this one says, we -- they are worried about their business, right, so we cannot ever be comfortable selling a product which most of our customers would stop using if they could. again, they knew it was addictive. that is to say, hey, we would lose our business, we would go out of business overnight. we cannot be comfortable marketing a product which most of our customers would do without if they could. most of our customers would do without if they could, but they cannot, and we deliberately downplayed the role of addiction. all right. so was their plan successful? their plan was amazingly successful. you have got to hand it to them, if you are going to hatch a plot, if you are going to conceal, if you are going to mislead, they did a terrific job of it. 21 how do we know? well, they say so themselves. this industry has employed a single strategy, and you have seen it, cover up, while the strategy was brilliantly conceived and brilliantly executed, over the years, it is just a holding strategy, right? so, you know, again, this is not a footprint in the sand. this is a confession. it is brilliantly conceived, it is brilliantly executed. who says so? we do. because we did it. what is our strategy? create doubt. do not take my word for it, take theirs. creating doubt about the health charge, without actually denying it. advocate the public's right to smoke without actually urging them to take it up. oh, it was a good plan, it was a good plan, and it provided reassurance to these addicted smokers over the years and their business went up and up and up. okay. that brings us to the next document, and now this talks about the tobacco institute's successful defensive operation, and then they talk -- because people had not -- are we here? okay. i'm going to have to go through these more quickly. look, if this committee had not been formed, that is their plan, the cigarette industry, by now, would be in a deplorable portion. you know why? because if word had gotten out, they would be in the position people are in now, people still smoke, but it is at a far less rate. what would have happened is people would have tried to quit and many would have been successful and many more, millions more would never have started. okay. so we would be in a deplorable position, instead a very fine job has been counteracting unverified, unjustified, and unsubstantiated claims. it is been a successful defensive operation. go to the next one. the tirc, so what do we have here? let us look at this. nicotine is addictive. we are in the business of selling nicotine, 1963, right before the surgeon general's report. an addictive drug, but guess what? cigarettes, nicotine have some unattractive side effects. gee, that is too bad. what are they? they cause or predispose people to lung cancer. well, that is a bad side effect. they contribute to cardiovascular disorders and they may call emphysema and so on. next one. okay. so what was the tirc? philip morris, happens to be one of their documents. we must, in the near future, provide some answers which will give smokers a psychological crutch and self-denial -- i mean, self-rationale. that is one of the most important documents 6 here. why? because that is the reliance, get people to rely, give smokers a psychological crutch and a self-rationale to continue. excuse me. get them to doubt. get them to rely. that is it. that is the plan. that is the bottom line, make more money, sell more cigarettes, hook more people. then they had a new public relations firm, and this one is, if we could, this is tiderock corporation. and their proposal, which was accepted, reestablished the cigarette controversy. and what is the controversy? it is unproven, we do not know, it is not addictive, it is a choice, but it is going to cost us a lot of money. back in that day, 1967, 50 million a year. it is chicken feed now. okay. did they mislead the public? they attacked the surgeon general in 1972. they attacked the surgeon general in 1964. they attacked the surgeon general again and again and again. let us go very quickly through these if we could. look what they say about the '72 surgeon general's report. it insults the scientific community. and we know from their documents that we just saw that they agreed with what the surgeon general said. they knew the surgeon general was telling the truth. insults the scientific community. the number one health problem is not cigarette smoking. no, it is not. it is the extent to which public health officials, the surgeon general, is knowingly misleading the american public. that lying surgeon general, he is misleading the public, that is the danger, not cigarettes. and we know they knew the surgeon general was right. next one. okay. more continuing controversy. scientists are becoming concerned that the preoccupation with smoking -- no scientists were, none of them, except paid for by grants from tobacco. those were the scientists. becoming concerned with the preoccupation that smoking may become -- may be both unfounded and dangerous. and here's why. here's what they say. it is dangerous because it diverts attention from other hazards. focusing on tobacco is dangerous. it is dangerous. and they knew that was wrong, they knew it was deceit, they knew it was misleading, and they knew that people would get the message. they would -- smokers particularly, they would rely on it. it is time for the parties to admit that there is much that is unknown. there was not anything unknown. you heard dr. burns, there was unanimity in the scientific community. no one knows now a cancerous growth begins. sure, they did. they do not know exactly how, but 17 they knew that cigarette smoking caused cancer. of course they did. okay. let us keep going. 1984. 1984, you may assume the case against smoking is closed, but this is far from the truth. advertising. get our smokers to rely, get charlie piendle to rely, because you know it is tough to quit. they may be right, it may be something else. maybe i do not have to quit, maybe i do not. give me a crutch, give me a psychological crutch. give me a reason, a self-rationale why i do not have to go through withdrawal. because we think reasonable people who analyze this see this not as a closed case, but as an open controversy. and where did that language come from? the pr people. we saw that. an open controversy, with who? cigarette manufacturers and their customers, that is who. we do not say there are no questions, there is just a lot of questions. next one, please. okay. so then we come to dr. benowitz, who is the author of the 1988 surgeon general's report, the one that linked addiction with other drugs, addiction to nicotine with other drugs. and what did they say about that? we know from their documents we just saw. they know that they were giving doses of nicotine, that it was addictive. we know that. they knew it a decade, two decades ago. and what are they saying? the claim by the surgeon general, dr. benowitz, dr. burns, dr. cummings, the claim that cigarette smoking is a drug addiction similar to cocaine, heroin or alcohol is irresponsible. defame, attack the surgeon general, attack the medical establishment, attack medicine, attack science. the message to the american public, and in particular, american youth, that using illegal drugs like crack and heroin has the same risk of addiction as smoking. to convey this message is to invite disaster, disaster, and trivialize a serious drug problem. i mean, you know, that is the point. they are good at that stuff. they were very good at that stuff. and millions and millions of people and millions and millions of charlie piendles relied on this. because, hey, it was up in the air, there was a controversy. okay. let us go to the next one if we could. so what do they say about this 1968 report? the surgeon general's report is shocking. it is a shockingly intemperate defamation of an industry, a blue-blooded american industry. they defamed us, saying that cigarette smoking causes lung cancer. let us go to the next one if we could. 2 so then we go all the way to 1994, a year before charlie piendle is diagnosed with what is going to kill him, his lung cancer. this is in front of congress. they have sworn to tell the truth, just like you swore your oaths as jurors and just like every witness swore to tell the truth in this courtroom. and what do they say? (thereupon, the video clip was played and transcribed as follows:) congressman wyden: let me begin my questioning on the matter of whether or not nicotine is addictive. let me ask you first, and i'd like to just go down the row, whether each of you believes that nicotine is not addictive. i heard virtually all of you touch on it. just yes or no. do you believe nicotine is not addictive? voice: i believe nicotine is not addictive, yes. congressman wyden: mr. johnston? mr. johnston: congressman, cigarettes and nicotine clearly do not meet the classic definitions of addiction. there is no intoxicants -- congressman wyden: we will take that as a no. and, again, time is short. if you could just -- i think each of you believe nicotine is not addictive, and we would just like to have this for the record. voice: i do not believe that nicotine or our products are addictive. voice: i believe nicotine is not addictive. voice: i believe that nicotine is not addictive. voice: i believe that nicotine is not addictive. voice: and i, too, believe that nicotine is not addictive. (thereupon, the video clip ended.) mr. barnhart: that is a lie, it is a lie, it is a lie, it is a lie, and they knew it was a lie. and they lied under oath to congress and they lied under oath to the american people. and what did they say about cancer? (thereupon, the video clip was played and transcribed as follows:) narrator: mr. campbell -- mr. barnhart: 1994. narrator: -- you were also deposed and you said, quote, to my knowledge, it has not been proven that cigarette smoking causes cancer. this is a rather passive and pleasant approach, especially in light of the consensus, not by some, but all of the scientific community. will you ever be convinced and what evidence are you waiting for? and let us have the microphone passed over. mr. campbell: yes, i may be convinced. we do not know what causes cancer in general 13 right now. so i think that we may find out what causes cancer and we may find out some relationship, which has yet to be proven. (thereupon, the video clip ended.) mr. barnhart: that is from the 1950s, stay on the message, keep to the plan, follow the game plan, keep the strategy, convince, confuse, provide a psychological crutch, provide a reason for self-rationale. okay. another deception, and then we will start going through the jury verdict form, is the illusion of filtration. not my word, their word. now, remember, filters came up in response to the 1953 cancer scare. if you could show us the sales. this is the illusion of filtration. it comes from their documents. the illusion of filtration is as important as the fact of filtration. why? remember the ads, clean, ivory white. the illusion of filtration is that people were smoking something safer, and people relied on that by the millions. the illusion of filtration is as important, their words, as the fact -- as the fact. the primary reason stated for smoking or being interested in smoking filter tips are reasons of health. this is their research on what smokers thought. why did smokers go to smoking filter tips? for reasons of health. they thought it was healthy. and did tobacco, and tobacco knew early on, knew that filters did nothing. why? why? because the smokers customize their use and because filters do not take out anything that the smoker cannot overcome. all right. let us go to next one if we could. okay. so what does this say? this talks about what they were proposing to do. "i have observed and generally believe" -- this is 1953, during the cancer scare -- "that the cigarette-smoking public attaches great significance to the visual examination of the filter material in filter-tip cigarettes." this is claude teague, this is their research scientist. it is proposed that filter-tip material such as cotton and this and that be treated so that it turns color. right? they actually -- it turns out they did not adopt this. but what are they looking at? they know that filters do not work, they want to give the illusion of filtration so people think it is safer. go to the next one. and we know all too often that a smoker who switches to a hi-fi, high-filter cigarette winds up smoking more units. remember what dr. burns said? remember what dr. cummings said? this is 1961, early 1961. all too often 24 a smoker who switches to a high-filter cigarette winds up smoking more units, scientific precision, in order to provide himself with the same delivery which he had before. they titrate, the smoker does, unconsciously, subconsciously, to get the nicotine and the tar that they need. they suck it in, they smoke more, they inhale more deeply, they smoke more cigarettes, they puff more often. in short, i do not believe the smoking pattern has changed much, even with the cancer scares and filtered cigarettes. 1961. next one, please. okay. so what happens is dr. burns says, right after that, sales went right back up. introduction of filters before the 1950s, less than 1 percent of the cigarettes sold in the united states were filtered. after that, sales zoomed. are you with me? okay. all right. so what happens is smokers compensate, as they say. they customize their use, they smoke more. the industry knew this. and, you know, it is interesting, what dr. burns said is the medical community denied, and this is one area where it said, unfortunately, the medical community did not, and why? because the cigarette smoker, the cigarette research departments used real people. they watched smokers. the medical community used smoking machines, so they just measured a draw through a filter. and they thought the filters actually helped. so the scientific community actually helped that out. and they did not find out about it until they did the research that tobacco did and used real smokers and found out that people compensate, that they suck in more, that they inhale more deeply. filters deceived people for 60 years and are still deceiving smokers. you heard their expert, tobacco's -- well, he is an employee, the nonmedical doctor, dr. figlar, and he said every product that charlie piendle smoked from the time he started until the time he quit was equally hazardous to his health. all their changes have not done a doggone thing to make cigarettes less hazardous. they are still hazardous, they still kill, and all these filters do is provide an illusion of safety. okay. so did they cause people to rely? of course, they did. they spent billions of dollars, and you can advertise, but you cannot mislead people, you cannot deceive people. it is okay to advertise, but you cannot lie to them. what do they say? it is safe, it is unproven, it is filtered. you can quit. it is a choice. it is just a choice. and that is what smokers want to hear. nonsmokers are different things. remember dr. cummings told us about 9 that? but smokers get reassurance, and that is, remember, going back to their documents, we want to reassure them deep in their biological depths, we want to pooh-pooh any fears they have. 1953. reassure them, provide the rationale, give them a reason to rely to keep smoking, to start smoking, because otherwise we will not sell enough. so why did tobacco do this? well, you-all did not fall off the turnip truck. they did it to make money. and there is nothing wrong with making money, that is the american way. what is wrong about making money is if you make money deceitfully, if you lie, if you conceal, and if you kill people, and you know you are doing it, and you attack the surgeon general, who is trying to protect people, and you attack the medical establishment, that is not right, and that is why you are here. they deceived their customers for money, they killed people for money. they did not go out and shoot them, but they knew they were killing people. they put profits over safety. they put business ahead of the health of mothers and fathers and girls and boys and grandmothers and grandfathers and aunts and uncles and everybody who smoked. so did this coverup make a difference to charlie piendle? the defense will say, hey, we never heard charlie piendle say, "i want to sue somebody." look, if it did not matter to charlie piendle, it did not matter to america. it did not matter to anyone. why? charlie smoked the most advertised brands of his time, the most -- the most popular ones, lucky strikes. they tried camels, but you heard babe, they did not like them, they were too strong. marlboro, winston. he followed the typical prototype of kids his age. he smoked what they smoked. did he rely on it? you better believe it. there was a billboard across the street, the marlboro man, right there across the street from where they bought cigarettes. babe says, "we all wanted to be the marlboro man." indeed they did, indeed they did. they targeted kids, they targeted teenagers. that was their market. you are going to see a bunch of documents in just a minute. it was cool, it was sexy, it was sophisticated, it was the thing to do. that was their market. you saw those letters to the teachers, the principals, actually the students. they made it hard to quit. they made it hard -- they made it easy to start again. you know what dr. burns said, they studied it, they studied it. and subconscious reliance is still reliance, give them a psychological crutch, let them -- let them deny, give them 20 reassurance. that is what they did. of course charlie relied on it. okay. so what is tobacco's excuse? he never said he wanted to sue anybody. i mean, can you imagine this conversation? "well, honey, how are you doing?" "well, you know, i feel like suing tobacco today." that just did not happen, and why? he never knew what they knew. all of the documents that you now know about did not even surface until the engle case and other cases came forward. he did not know what they knew about cancer. he did not know what they knew about addiction. and their plan, the plan they hatched and carried out for 50 years, lasted all the way through charlie piendle's life. he died before it was uncovered. it took courts, it took lawsuits to get these documents out. i mean, these documents were not produced voluntarily by tobacco. they came out of the surgeon -- out of attorney's general suing, out of lawsuits, out of judges telling them, you got to produce your documents. mr. kelly: objection, your honor. that is way beyond the scope of any evidence in this case. the court: i'll sustain. mr. barnhart: not at all. dr. cummings testified about it. the court: i'll sustain the objection. mr. barnhart: then they say, hey, everybody knew. everybody knew smoking was bad. well, everybody -- everybody did not know. people who do not smoke, yes, they knew after a while, after they were addicted. we knew charlie wanted to quit. we know that 80 to ninety percent of the people wanted to quit, but by then it is too late. and then they say, "hey, charlie should have known what we knew. charlie should have known what we covered up." i think you will find the evidence is just -- that cannot be. okay. so what did they do? they called an economist from las vegas to testify about polling, go figure. and what did she admit, hey, there is a big difference between belief and awareness in polls. 99.9 percent of the people are aware of ufos, but a small fraction believe in them. there is a huge difference in misreading a poll. in 1954, one of the polls she showed, 50 -- there were no kids. remember, charlie was a kid. he just started smoking. 58 percent of the adults either did not believe that smoking caused lung cancer or did not know. she ignored the conclusions of the surgeon general's reports. that is a common thread, is not it? ignore the surgeon general's 5 reports. she said under cross-examination, you know, smokers do respond differently to poll questions. smokers tend not to believe. why? reliance, psychological crutch, self-denial. the clerk: counselor, 30 minutes. mr. barnhart: thank you. she relied on these ogg studies, but she disagreed with the conclusions. she relied on a study paid by rjr lawyers, the jones day firm. i'm not talking about these lawyers over here, but a national law firm that underwrote one of their studies. and she admitted that teens do not understand the risks and they regret smoking. then they called a historian, dr. norrell. he is been made a millionaire, or almost, by tobacco. what is his field? american history, not tobacco. he never published a doggone thing on tobacco. his interest was in testifying. you know what he did, he showed articles with no connection to charlie piendle. articles from hartford, not bridgeport. articles from jacksonville and orlando. the reader's digest. the piendles did not read the reader's digest and a kid did not read it, he read sports illustrated and national geographic. and he only showed one side, we saw that when he was being cross-examined. he ignored industry articles, he ignored industry statements, he ignored the billions of ads, he ignored harmful evidence. and then finally has this business about charlie's schools, charlie took a course in health. and then we saw on his grade card he did not take a course in health. well, then he took it in gym. lucille, his best friend, said, "i never did that. i was in the same class as him." probably not the same gym class, but same class. "we never took a health course on smoking." i mean, who are they trying to kid? and then, finally, teens should have known that tobacco was lying. okay. so let me work through this very quickly. was charlie piendle addicted to cigarettes? there is no evidence to the contrary, yes. were the cigarettes placed on the market by rjr a legal cause of his death? yes. were the cigarettes placed on the market by philip morris a legal cause of his death? yes. did he rely to his detriment on omissions, concealment, omissions of material fact, of failure to disclose things? did he rely on tobacco's lies and public relations campaign? that is the answer, that is the question. yes. the evidence is overwhelming. did he rely to his detriment on philip 16 morris's, their campaign, their strategy, the things they did to get him to rely, the statements they made? of course he had, it was his culture. it was all over. drum, drum, drum, beat, beat, beat. all the smokers did, yes. now, look, if we have to prove that charlie piendle read a particular ad and have liz remember it from 20 years ago, no smoker could ever win. but that is not the law, that is not the law. was any act taken in furtherance of an agreement, the conspiracy? we saw that, we just worked through it. yes. and did they do it with an intention that smokers and the public would rely on this information? they spent billions and billions and billions of dollars. of course they wanted to. they say no, nobody relied on it. why then spend billions and billions and billions of dollars on a worthless task? because you know what, they are not dumb business people. they do not do worthless things in terms of spending their dollars. of course they did. yes. were they negligent? you have already seen that. and then was negligence a legal cause of charlie's death? i submit to you the answer is yes. all right. so we are up to speed, and i'm going to jump over these things and rely on your memory. we come to dr. figlar. dr. figlar was -- i believe he is a chemist, and here's what he said. dr. figlar. they had the capacity to reduce tar and cigarettes and they did not. they sold some cigarettes with 19 times the tar that was the cancer-causing agent than others, and all the cigarettes that charlie smoked were hazardous, every single one, despite all this filtration and this and that, poking holes in the cigarette. that brings us to percentages of fault. and what is the percentage of fault? this is this question right here. you-all will be asked to determine the percentage of fault that will cause charlie's death. and we have admitted, charlie has admitted that charlie was at fault. so some percentage is going to go on charlie. and what does it do? let us take a verdict for $100. if you find charlie piendle 5 percent or ten percent at fault, charlie would get $95 or $90. that is the effect of that. you are not supposed to make any reductions, judge rosenberg does that. so i suggest to you this: you have got to consider the time he started, the environment created by tobacco, the massive campaign to 6884 1 target teenagers, the immature teenage brain, the fact that teenagers are more susceptible to addiction, and the fact that cigarettes back then had two or three times the amount of nicotine than they do now. and what did dr. burns or cummings say? teens do not make informed decisions. so in terms of fault, that is something to consider strongly. why? because they feel immortal, they do not understand addiction, their brain changes. let us compare doctors in 1964. remember the 1964 report, you saw the tv, and we are going to go very quickly through that, because we are running out of time. compare charlie -- these are doctors. charlie had a high school education. (thereupon, the video clip was played and transcribed as follows:) mr. reasoner: . . . industry's spokesmen and anti-cigarette crusaders alike -- mr. barnhart: these are the men at the top of their field. mr. reasoner: -- the committee finally assembled -- mr. barnhart: they are like dr. benowitz. they are like dr. burns. mr. reasoner: -- some 14 months ago. these men, each an expert in his field -- mr. barnhart: the cream of the crop the best of the best -- mr. reasoner: -- were brought together from different parts of the country and from different fields of science -- mr. barnhart: -- and they studied it for 13, 14, 15 months. mr. reasoner: -- dr. walter burdette, surgery, university of utah. dr. john b. hickman, internal medicine, indiana, nonsmoker. dr. emmanuel farber, pathology, pittsburgh, nonsmoker. dr. stanhope bayne-jones, j.l. school of medicine, nonsmoker. dr. leonard m. schuman, public health, minnesota, cigarette smoker. dr. charles lemaistre, preventative medicine, texas, pipe smoker. professor william g. cochran, statistics, harvard, cigarette smoker. professor lewis g. fieser, chemistry, harvard, cigarettes and pipe . . . (thereupon, the video clip was stopped.) mr. barnhart: that is enough. you compare what those learned men knew who had studied it, and a number of them, i cannot remember what it was, 25, forty percent of them, i cannot remember, were still smoking when they announced the '64 surgeon general's report. and compare the journalists we saw, learned men, men who had reported on this story since the cancer scare began, men who reported on the 1964 surgeon general's report. edward r. murrow, dead of lung cancer, an addict. 12 harry reasoner, dead of lung cancer, unable to stop. peter jennings, charlie's age, dead of lung cancer, unable to stop. so when we compare all that -- let us compare charlie piendle. yes, he was at fault, he should not have started smoking. i suggest to you that 5 to ten percent is reasonable. and for philip morris and rjr, you determine that. 45, 45, 47, 5, whatever it is, you determine and you fill that in. that brings us to damages. and judge, this is a good time to take a break. closing argument ms. baker-barnes: good morning, ladies and gentlemen. when greg started this morning some time ago, he told you that you have immense power, and you do, you have a tremendous power in this case to make it right, to make it right for liz piendle, and to measure all of the damage and all of the harm that she has suffered and that she continues to suffer every day, and she suffered a tremendous harm. she suffered a tremendous loss. she lost a great man. greg said he was a fine man, he was a great man. he served his country until his body would not let him anymore and he never complained, not one complaint. when his father died in front of him, right in front of him and right in front of his brother, he stood up and became the father, he stood up and became the man. and you heard from eddie, you heard from his brother eddie piendle, he said he was my brother, he was my father, he was my best friend, he was my everything. and he was not everything to just eddie, he was everything to everybody who ever met him. babe cabral, his best friend from grammar school, came in. he told you charlie was my best friend 50 years, 50 years, he was my best friend. you heard from lucille worobel, met freshman year in high school, he was my best friend. everybody who met this man, everybody whose life he touched, he was my best friend. and for liz, after all that she has been through, at such a young age her husband is swept away at sea, she is got a three-month old baby, and charlie comes in and he makes it all better. he fell in love with her, he made her smile again, he made her laugh again, and alan was not her son -- he was not my stepson, he was charlie's son, charlie's son. they read you portions of alan's deposition and what did alan say? what did you call mr. piendle, what did you call him? i called him dad. he was my dad. and they built a beautiful life together, a life filled with family and friends and love and support, support for charlie through his many obstacles. we know he had crohn's disease and there were 15 times when it was so difficult. three months in the hospital, he got last rights twice and almost died, and liz was right there, right there with him every step of the way, for 27 years. and yes, they had some bumps and bruises along the way, as we all do, but what did liz tell you? it made us stronger, it only made us stronger, it only made us love each other more, it only made that bond so much deeper. and members of the jury, they had a beautiful life together raising their family and raising their children and they got to that stage where it was their time. and you heard about the motorcycles and you heard liz tell you that when charlie rode those motorcycles, he felt free. she did not know if he was going to be able to do it, i did not know physically if he would be able to do it, but he did it and he felt free. and she told you and lucille told you it was the best time of his life. and they had dreams, they had dreams to travel this country together, to travel the world together, to grow old together, and those dreams were shattered when charlie got lung cancer. they were shattered and they were cut short, and they were never realized. and who was right there with charlie every step of the way? because he was a fighter. you heard it from both of them, charlie was a fighter. he was a marine, and he fought a valiant battle against cancer, a valiant battle, but it was too much. it spread everywhere. it spread from his lungs to his brain. it took over his body. it did not take over his soul, but it took over his body, and liz was right there with him every step of the way. and there came a time when charlie and liz and everybody realized that the end was near and they took that last trip to connecticut. and you heard about it from eddie, he threw a party with hundreds of family and friends and who was there, lucille was, babe was there, eddie was there, liz was there, their whole family was there, to say we love you, charlie, we want to tell you while you are still here, not after you are gone, we love you. and that plane ride home. and liz is the only one that can tell you what happened on that plane, the only one, she is right there, four stops, three stops to get gas to refuel, and every time they stopped, they did not know if he was going to make it. i do not know if you are going to make it, charlie, but hold on for your kids, i want you to make it home to see your kids. and he did. he made it because that was charlie. he made it. and what did he say when he got off that plane and liz was right there, where is my baby girl? i just want to see my baby girl, and then he was gone. 6901 after 27 years, he was gone. and family was there, liz told you, for a while, and friends were there for a while, but there comes a time when everybody is gone. and that time came for liz and she went back home to the house they built with their hands and they lived in for 15 years. and what did she tell you? it was eerily quiet, dead quiet, and for the first time since i was 17 years old, i was scared and i was alone and i was afraid, and for 14 years, for 14 years, every second, every minute, every hour, every day, every month, every year, she misses charlie, every day she misses charlie. she watches her granddaughter growing up without her grandfather and she misses charlie. they have christmas holidays and celebrations and she misses charlie. she wakes up in the morning and walks out her front door, she misses charlie. and yes, she is dated. the defense has brought that to your attention and made it very clear, she is tried, she absolutely has, she is tried to move on, she is tried to continue with her life, but you know what, none of it worked out, none of it. jorge, she told you about jorge. they asked her directly, how long did you date him, when did you meet him? she told them everything they wanted to know about jorge and everything they wanted to know about anybody else that she dated and she told them, but you know what, she never met another charlie. jorge was a nice man, but he was not charlie. jerry was a nice man, but he was not charlie. and every day, every day she lived without him. so what is it worth? what is it worth to live your life, to have 23 years -- and judge rosenberg has instructed you that that is the time they had, those were their golden years, those were supposed to be the best time of their lives -- 23 years cut short by the defendants in this case? so what is it worth? you heard dr. norrell come to you and come in here and tell you that he is made over a million dollars to come in here and show you some newspaper clips and magazine articles and tv clips, a million dollars. what is it worth to live every day without your soulmate? mr. kelly: your honor, that is an improper argument. comparative valuations are not permitted. ms. baker-barnes: it is a perfectly reasonable argument, your honor. the court: i'll overrule. you may proceed. ms. baker-barnes: what is the value of the time that she would have had with the love of her life, the man who made it all better, 11 the man who took away all her pain? i would submit to you, members of the jury, we would submit to you that you take it one year at time, one year at time and think about every second, every minute, every hour of every day that she has to spend missing not a good man, not an okay man, but a fine man, a great man. and you take that number, whatever it is, is it $500,000 year, is it the million dollars they pay dr. norrell to come in here and show you some newspaper clips, whatever that number is, you take it and multiply it times 23, every year that she has to live without charlie piendle. and you are going to get instructions in this case that you should not base your decision on sympathy, and you should not, and margaret piendle does not want your sympathy, she does not want you to feel sorry for her, she is here for justice in this case. the clerk: counsel, ten minutes left. ms. baker-barnes: she is here for justice. and justice, a just verdict that measures all of the harm caused to liz piendle by the death of what everyone described, everyone who came in this courtroom as a great man, a great man. closing argument mr. barnhart: thank you. we are almost finished. i know it is been hard and i know it is been long, but it is a month-long trial, and we have covered -- in most cases you end at the losses, but this is not such a case. you are called upon not only to view the losses and conduct, but whether or not these corporations should be punished for what they did. it has nothing to do with compensating liz piendle, it has nothing to do with that. it has to do with deterrents and punishment and setting an example, and the law on that -- could we have that law? i'll tell you what, it is right here. no, it is not. mr. kelly: you are blocking it. mr. barnhart: oh, no wonder. give me that extra minute for screwing up. so what happened is, it is any one of these, either/or, either/or, either/or, the conduct causing the loss -- excuse me -- to the plaintiff is so gross and flagrant as to show a reckless disregard of human life or safety. the conduct showed such an entire lack of care that the defendant must have been consciously indifferent. they did not care, they did not give a hoot who they hurt. the conduct showed such an entire lack of care that the defendant must have wantonly or recklessly disregarded the safety and the welfare of the public. well, is not that us, disregarding the safety and the welfare of the public, or their all-mighty treasury. the conduct showed such a reckless indifference to the rights of others 22 as to be equivalent to an intentional violation of those rights. i'm not going to go through the evidence again, but you know what you have seen. there was a clear, deliberate conspiracy, a clear, deliberate plan, and they called it that, and they carried it on for 50 years, for 50 years of kids getting hooked, of people dying, people getting lung cancer and keeping people smoking. so what do we have to show to you? we have to show to you by clear and convincing evidence -- and, boy, if this is not clear and convincing, i do not know what evidence is -- that there was a violation of what, the public trust, of the trust that society has with either individuals or corporations to do the right thing, to do what is right and not do what is wrong and not deliberately mislead people and not carry on a plan, not hatch a plan to keep people in the dark, do not attack the surgeon general, do not attack science, do not cover it up, do not give people a psychological crutch. so if you do find, if you do answer that, yes, there was a violation, and yes, there should be punitive damages assessed against the defendants, then there would be phase ii of the case, and that will be brief, we will not have any evidence. mr. kelly: objection, your honor. that is improper argument. mr. barnhart: not at all. not at all, your honor. the court: on the basis of what? mr. kelly: there is no suggestion that is going to be brief or long or what the evidence is going to be. the court: i'll sustain that. mr. barnhart: there will be a phase after this where evidence will come in about net worth and whatever the defense wants to do. we will call no witnesses. and by way of apology, i would ask that you not say no just so you can get out of here, because this is a very, very important case, and your mission is very important. all right. so what did they do? you know what they did, they covered up, they deceived about cancer, addiction, they conspired for 50 years, they kept millions of people smoking. they hooked millions of kids, they targeted children. and now let us see the actual targets. and you have seen them here. okay. first go back, 1973. excuse me. again, mr. teague, research scientist. what do we want? we want to show adventuresome, adventurous, sophisticated adult images, smoking may enhance one's self-image if one values certain characteristics in specific individuals or certain types, like movie stars, 7 like athletes. then if one also smokes, he is psychologically a little more like that valued image. like frank gifford, or like if you are a girl, like the woman who was singing, like somebody famous, like somebody cool, like somebody sexy. this self-image enhancement effect has traditionally been a strong promotional theme for cigarette brands and should be continued to be emphasized. continued to be emphasized. let us go to the next one if we could. realistically, if our company is to survive, 1973, we must get our share of the youth market. same kind of language, self-enhancement, the fragile developing self-image of the young person needs all of the support and enhancement it can get. so what are we going to do? we are going to support the young person, we are going to enhance their image with cigarettes, with the marlboro man. and we know all the time that we are selling products that are addictive and that kill people. next one if we could. again, another rjr document. younger adult smokers, that is their language, have been the critical factor in the growth and decline of every major brand and company over the last 50 years. and you know what we heard, they are brand loyal. start with marlboro, you tend to stick with marlboro. you start with winstons, you tended to stick with winstons. all right. so what did they do with kids? we know this. if you could. you guys heard this -- well, here's another one. this is talking about high school students, about camel and winston are holding their shares, salem is increasing among high school students. those are not adult smokers, they are kids, they are kids. just like charlie piendle. how are we doing businesswise with high school kids, with the charlie piendles of the world? all right. so you saw those two letters in evidence. it is shocking, really. "dear students" is the first one from 1963. "dear students, despite many years of extensive research, medical science has been unable to establish that smoking has a direct causal link with any human disease." we know they knew that was not true, and they are writing to kids, elementary school kids, i believe it was in this case, your memory will serve you better than mine. "we are firmly of the opinion that there is unanswered questions. our company intends, therefore, to continue to support such research." the only thing they did not do is send free samples to these kids. 18 "dear students, medical science has been unable to establish." their science did, and they knew it. "dear principal." 1990. 1990. "in spite of all the research going on, the simple and unfortunate fact is that scientists do not know the causes, the cause or causes of chronic diseases associated with cigarette smoking." come on, who are they kidding? that was a blatant misstatement, and they knew it. "we appreciate" -- oh, this is the best part. "we appreciate you passing this information, ms. principal, on to your students." so where does that leave us? the evidence is overwhelming, overwhelming. and you do need to be convinced by clear and convincing evidence. the evidence is overwhelming that the actions here were reckless, they acted in reckless disregard of the health and welfare of the citizens of the united states, and particularly their smoking customers like charlie piendle. so what did they do, they targeted children. we are in the business of selling nicotine, an addicting drug. we incorporate chemicals, the filter tip, the fragile developing image of the young person, build it up. you cannot be comfortable with selling a product which most of our customers would stop using if they could. the amount of evidence to indict cigarette smoking as a health hazard -- that was years before they wrote those letters -- is overwhelming. the evidence challenging this indictment is scam. to the successful defense of our present and future suits, you heard that in cross-examination. they removed files, you heard that in the cross-examination of dr. figlar. carcinogens are found in practically every class of compounds in smoke. happily, nicotine is both and habituating and unique. think of a cigarette dispenser as a dose for nicotine. you have seen every one of these documents or heard about them. the clerk: counselor, you have two minutes. mr. barnhart: thank you. give me an extra five if you would. compounds, it is always been a holding strategy of creating doubt. the illusion of filtration is more important. no one has ever became a cigarette smoker by smoking cigarettes without nicotine. boy, they sure are right there, they hit the nail on the head. a cigarette that does not deliver nicotine cannot satisfy, it will give our smokers a psychological crutch, and on, and on, and on. 3 and when you weigh the evidence just like we have done in the scales of justice, i submit to you there is only one conclusion. this is wanton conduct, this is reckless conduct, this is complete disregard of the health and the safety of their customers like charlie piendle. okay. so did philip morris and rjr, before 2000, 2001, ever admit that they were addicting and killing people? no. like dr. farone, remember the short little clip from dr. farone, he was a research scientist at philip morris, i believe he worked there for eight years -- oh, yeah. that would help. (thereupon, the video clip was played and transcribed as follows:) q. good morning, dr. farone. a. good morning. q. would you please introduce yourself to the jury? a. my name is william anthony farone, f-a-r-o-n-e. q. and you worked for philip morris for a time, dr. farone? a. i did. q. and how long did you work for philip morris? a. for eight years. q. did philip morris, during that same period of time, refuse to share what it knew with public health authorities, all that it knew with public health authorities regarding the risks of smoking? a. yes. q. so when the surgeon general said that smoking was harmful to health, during your time at philip morris, did philip morris ever step up on the podium with the surgeon general and say, we agree, we should work together to reduce the harms associated with smoking? a. no, they did not. q. did philip morris make a public commitment to join together with the surgeon general to share all that it knew on addiction and health risks of smoking in order to reduce those risks? a. no, they did not. (thereupon, the video clip ended.) mr. barnhart: and neither did rjr, they never did, they never did what they said they were going to do with that frank statement, join arms with the surgeon general to find out the causes of smoking-related diseases, they did not to it. all right. so what had they done, what did they do? they deny, they deny, they deny. they deny in this trial, they continue on, deny, deny, deny, obfuscate, obfuscate, obfuscate, cover up, cover up, cover up, and blame the smoker, blame the smoker. folks, this is the day, this is the courtroom where you should say no more. on this day in this courtroom, we will not stand 14 for it one time longer, and that really is your mission. there was a 16th century poet named john donne, he wrote, "no man is an island." he wrote during the great plague in england. and he said, "never ask for whom the bell tolls, it tolls for thee." and by your verdict, you should make that verdict ring. you should make that bell toll in richmond, virginia, in the corporate offices of these corporations, so that they understand that this conduct will not be commons. mr. kelly: objection, your honor. it is improper comment in this phase. mr. barnhart: it is punitive damages. the court: overruled. mr. barnhart: your verdict should speak the truth, and it should deter them and punish them for what they did. thank you very much. thank you, your honor. 7092 closing argument mr. scarola: thank you very much, your honor. may it please the court, counsel, cocounsel, liz, and ladies and gentlemen of the jury. you have made extraordinary sacrifices, for which i join every lawyer that has addressed you and thank you. perhaps, some day, if our paths cross outside this courtroom, i'll be able to spend the time, regardless of what your verdict may be, to appropriately express that thanks. for now, my responsibility is to liz and require that i move on very quickly to talk about this case. defense counsel drew an analogy to a jigsaw puzzle, and, indeed, the trial of a civil lawsuit is very much like assembling a jigsaw puzzle. around my house, with 13 grandchildren and five granddogs running around, jigsaw puzzles do not last very long. they get opened up and maybe they get put together once, frequently they never even make it that far, pieces get lost under the couch, pieces disappear and cannot be found anywhere, babies chew on pieces, dogs chew on pieces, the cover picture gets torn off pieces, and this jigsaw puzzle is not unlike that. it is a jigsaw puzzle that, in many respects, is more than half a century old. the pieces began to be assembled in some circumstances back in the early 1900s. through the frailty of the human body, people die, charlie piendle died, the pieces of the puzzle that he possessed left with it. through the fallibility of human memory, people with the very best of intentions do not remember accurately and pieces get damaged. through the defects in human integrity, sometimes pieces get intentionally destroyed. this is a document that was marked for identification, and we dealt with a portion of it during the course of the plaintiff's presentation. it is dated december 18, 1969 from mr. max crohn (phonetic) of the legal department, and it is a memo regarding invalidation of some reports in the research department. what does mr. crohn tell his tobacco industry bosses? we do not foresee any difficulty in the event a decision is reached to remove certain reports from research files. once it becomes clear that such action is necessary for the successful defense of our present and future suits, we will promptly 16 remove all such reports from our files. we invalidate about 15 reports each year for various reasons. the most common reasons for invalidating a report and/or requiring rewriting are confidentiality of content, and several miscellaneous reasons. we can cite misinterpretation of as data -- excuse me, of data as a reason for invalidation. as an alternative to invalidation, we can have the authors rewrite those sections of the reports which appear objectionable. 15 reports per year, for the 30 years that charlie piendle was a smoker. 450 reports intentionally removed from the historical record in anticipation of avoiding litigation problems, countless other reports rewritten in anticipation of avoiding litigation problems. and so what we are left with in assembling this jigsaw puzzle are the fragments that remained, that escaped the intentional effort to cleanse the record of damaging evidence, but that is not unusual. people who do bad things do everything they can to avoid being held responsible for the bad things they do. and if our efforts were to stop because this puzzle has been damaged, if they were to stop because charlie piendle was killed by addiction to cigarettes, if they were to stop because we do not have every document in the historic record, justice could not be done and so we must deal with the evidence that is available and the standard that does not require proof beyond a reasonable doubt, but proof by the greater weight of the evidence. we must construct the best picture that can be constructed from the evidence that is available and deal with the probabilities. now, sometimes those probabilities are in the form of statistics. and as opposing counsel has pointed out, where there is direct evidence, we need not rely on statistics. the fact that eighty percent of smokers do not get lung cancer, they get copd, they die of emphysema, they die of heart problems, they die of a whole lot of other reasons, but only twenty percent get lung cancer. it does not mean that it is not probable that charlie piendle got lung cancer, because the direct evidence establishes that charlie piendle died of smoking-related lung cancer, by stipulation. it was so overwhelming, so compelling that the defendants have not contested the fact that charlie piendle died because he contracted cancer of the lung from 30 years of smoking. i want to begin with an overview of the defense case because, in effect, what they have told us is we manufactured lies. we presented smoking as sexy, sophisticated, safe, a safe source of relaxation, a safe means by which to relieve stress, and that was a lie. but they 7097 1 tell us it was charlie's choice to be stupid enough to believe us. it is his fault that he believed what we were telling charlie and telling everybody else for decades. you can smoke and it is safe because it has not been established that smoking causes cancer. we spent tens and hundreds of millions of dollars every year advertising our lies, but pieces of the truth must have penetrated into charlie's information environment, he must have learned the truth in spite of our lies, so it was charlie's choice to be stupid enough to believe the lies we advertised, to believe the lies we told in full-page ads, in newspapers, in every city with a population of 250,000 or more across the united states. you had to be stupid to believe us. it was charlie's choice, charlie's stupid choice to be influenced by that information in the environment. we promoted the lies through front organizations and even paid the ama $10 million for research at the same time the ama agreed not to support package warnings. do not need warnings on cigarettes, everybody knows. you can shout it from the rooftops and you will not be telling anybody what they do not already know. but as we now know, there is such a big difference between knowing and believing and that is a distinction that the defendants knew, took calculated advantage of, and profited on at the expense of hundreds of thousands of deaths every year. the public health officials, like the surgeon general, they were telling the truth and charlie had a choice as to who to believe. do not blame us because he was stupid enough to believe us. does that really make sense? we denied the lies for 50 years. but charlie had a choice because we were forced to put warning labels on cigarette packages. remember the television interview of the tobacco executive from these defendants who stood up there and said, oh, yeah, the warnings are on cigarettes, it says they may be hazardous to your health. that does not mean they are hazardous to your health, and we certainly do not believe they are hazardous to your health. those warning do not mean anything. and charlie was stupid enough to believe the tobacco industry. because charlie, like hundreds of thousands of others in the words of dr. michael cummings, had had his brain highjacked by nicotine, and he searched the information environment for the psychological crutches and the rationalizations that would allow him to continue to satisfy the need for nicotine that the defendants understood existed and took calculated advantage of to profit at the expense of hundreds of thousands of lives every year. 12 we qualified the lies. we still do not really know for sure, it is not proven, statistical links do not mean causation, maybe it is really genetics or rainfall or air pollution. nicotine occurs naturally. well, you know, it really depends on what you mean by "addiction," but charlie had a choice, because charlie was a tough, strong-willed marine, and anyone can break an addiction. if you have the information, if you know the truth, anyone can break their addiction. was charlie any smarter than peter jennings? was he any smarter than harry reasoner? was he any smarter, any less strong-willed that barack obama? did he have less motivation than the president of the united states who knows he is setting an example for the world, as well as his two young girls, but just cannot break his addiction? we repeat the new lie over and over and over again. choice, choice, choice. but charlie, we know from the evidence, charlie began to lose his free choice after five packs of cigarettes. 101 cigarettes and he began to lose his free choice and move on that line closer and closer to the powerful cycle of nicotine addiction. charlie had a choice, but the choice became more and more and more constrained, the deeper into the process of addiction, he was drawn by the defendants' lies. and it was the defendants' lies that killed charlie piendle. now, i want to try very quickly to go through a pretty substantial number of points that were made by the defense, and this is going to be disjoined and it is going to be fast, but i want to get through as many as i can before i move on to some other things that respond to defense arguments that were made. you were -- you were told that your verdict should not be based on sympathy. you were told that by greg, by sia, by both defense lawyers, and you are being told that by me as well, and i want to draw an important distinction for you and it is this. sympathy, in very simple terms, means you hurt and i hurt with you, and any verdict that is rendered out of a sense of shared hurt is an unjust verdict, you cannot do that. there is another word that is important. in describing not only what you can do, but what you must do and that word is empathy. empathy means you hurt and i understand. to the same extent that a verdict rendered on the basis of sympathy is an unjust verdict, a verdict rendered without a full and complete understanding of the loss, the magnitude of the loss that liz piendle has suffered, is an unjust verdict. no sympathy, but a verdict that reflects a full and complete understanding of the loss that liz has suffered for the last 23 14 years and will continue to suffer through the end of charlie piendle's statistical life expectancy, another nine years, had his life not been shortened by 23 years as a consequence of the misconduct of these defendants. the court will not tell you that a medical diagnosis is necessary with respect to addiction, it is nowhere in your instructions. the court will also not define "addiction" for you, but we know what addiction is. we know that the definition of "addiction" was changed in 1988. we know that that definition of addiction was arrived at through a consensus of the scientific community, and the defendants may not like it, but it is the definition that today we deal with, and under the terms of that definition, there is no question about the fact that charlie piendle, smoking two packs of cigarettes a day for the better part of the 30 years, was addicted to nicotine. the evidence in this case clearly, convincingly, beyond a reasonable doubt, establishes that addiction and it certainly establishes that addiction by way of a preponderance of the evidence. if the defendants really thought -- and, incidentally, they make reference to the dsm-iv. the dsm-iv is not a medical definition. it is used by doctors. it is used by medical doctors. it is used by psychologists. it is used by those individuals who treat nicotine addiction. and if the defendants really thought that there was someone whose credentials you would respect who could come in here and tell you, i have examined the record in this case, charlie piendle is not addicted pursuant to the criteria of the dsm-iv, is there any doubt in your minds that you would have had that individual take the witness stand and you would have had an opportunity to judge his demeanor, to see him subjected to cross-examination and to evaluate the credibility of the conclusion that he expressed? but they did not call any such person, and every individual who addressed the issue of charlie piendle's addiction from a professional perspective told you uniformly, there is no doubt charlie piendle was addicted. you saw repeatedly the definition of concurring cause -- excuse me, the definition of legal cause. what you were not shown is the second half of the definition that also appears, one, two, three, four, five times, and it is basically the same each time, we just substitute in the different word in the front the same way the defendants substituted a different word in the front. addiction may be a legal cause of death even though it operates in combination with the act of another, some 8 natural cause or some other cause, if the addiction contributes substantially to producing such death. that is the burden that we have, that is the burden that we accept. did the conduct of the defendants, did the addiction that they caused, did each of the other elements, defective and unreasonably dangerous cigarettes, concealment, reliance, negligence, did each of those or any one of those contribute substantially to producing charlie piendle's death? and as we go through this, hopefully, i will have the opportunity to take you through it, you will see that the evidence is overwhelming that the defendants' conduct was a substantially contributing factor in every circumstance to charlie's death. withdrawal symptoms. i'm going to skip ahead. there has been a significant attack on the credibility of liz piendle. i ask you, ladies and gentlemen, if liz piendle were a person who was inclined to shade the truth to help her case, do not you think that you would have heard about all kinds of withdrawal symptoms that charlie piendle experienced, if she were a person whose integrity was such that she would alter the facts as she remembers them, there is not anybody who could come into this courtroom and tell you that there were not 20 attempts to quit. liz could have made up some really good stories about quit attempts, efforts on her part and charlie's part to put away the cigarettes, to throw out all the ashtrays, to destroy the lighters, but after 14 years, that was not the truth that liz remembered and was not -- was not an untruth that she was prepared to testify to. she respected her oath. she told the truth. when she was asked about significant relationships, she disclosed the relationship that she continued -- that she considered to be significant, and it is, indeed, unfortunate that having suffered the tragedy, the tragedies in her life that she has suffered, that she must suffer one more tragedy at the hands of these defendants and be accused openly in this courtroom of dishonesty. mr. henk: your honor, i object to that. the defendants are allowed to defend themselves in this case and present evidence to the jury without a conclusion being drawn that this is somehow a personal attack. the court: i'll sustain that objection. mr. scarola: and what if charlie, indeed, showed no blatant, open, and obvious withdrawal symptoms? who was this man? charlie piendle was an individual who had suffered silently for more than half his life. he was stoic, he was tough, he hid his pain, he did not want the nurse changing his colostomy 19 bag because he was proud, even as he laid on his death bed, dying of cancer. this was a man who was not going to complain about insomnia or increased appetite or whatever the other symptoms were that were included on the defendants' list. can i have the half-a-pack-a-day slide, please, jeff. the defense stands up and tells you the medical records reflect that charlie piendle was only smoking half a pack a day. you are going to have a chance to take a look at those medical records. enlarge the top for us, if you would, please. this is the document on the left-hand side that you were shown, charlie piendle's medical record, date of admission 3/17/75, transcribed 3/27/75, 10 days later. this is the document that says down here, "the patient smokes a half a pack per day and has an occasional alcoholic drink." well, let us take a look at what the records really show. the document on the right is the handwritten form that is filled out from which the typed form was transcribed. admission date march 17, 1975, charlie piendle. next page, please. right down here, social history, social history, "smokes one and a half packs per day. occasional alcohol." so the defense comes in and tells you charlie was only smoking half a pack a day, but ladies and gentlemen of the jury -- mr. biersteker: objection, that mischaracterizes the argument that was made, your honor. the court: sustain the objection. mr. scarola: well, you just heard what was said. i leave it up to you to remember the way in which this was presented to you, but there is the evidence. the evidence is not half a pack a day, the evidence is there was a transcription error, somebody goofed. the social history is a pack and a half a day. it is the lowest figure that appears anywhere in not dozens, but hundreds of pages of medical records of charlie piendle where time after time after time it is reflected that charlie was smoking two packs of cigarettes a day. we are going to get to textbooks in a little while. the defense tells you there was no legal obligation to cause charlie piendle and other smokers to internalize the knowledge they were given about the health hazards of smoking. i think i took those words down almost verbatim and they are right. there is, however, a legal obligation not to actively prevent smokers from turning knowledge into belief. there is a 4 legal obligation not to intentionally provide psychological crutches and bases for rationalizations that have no foundation, in fact. there is a legal obligation not to do that. and charlie piendle responded to those psychological crutches and those self-rationales, provided on the basis of lies by the defendants exactly the way in which the defendants wanted him to respond. you are told by both defendants that charlie piendle would have bought someone else's dangerous cigarettes if he were not buying the cigarettes of these defendants. well, first of all, i suggest to you that is true only if charlie piendle did not know the truth and did not believe the truth and only if charlie piendle had become addicted to nicotine as a consequence of having had the truth concealed from him. they tell you there is no evidence that charlie piendle would have smoked less dangerous cigarettes if they were available, but charlie piendle did smoke less dangerous cigarettes when they became available. he smoked dorals and merits, advertised as the lowest tar and nicotine brands. he switched to those -- mr. biersteker: objection, your honor, mischaracterizes the evidence. the court: response. mr. scarola: i believe, your honor, that that is exactly what the evidence demonstrated and the jury, obviously, can rely upon their own notes, if somehow i have not remembered that accurately, but that is not an appropriate legal objection. mr. barnhart did not tell you the design modifications were forced by law. what he told you were that the warnings were compelled by law and that the design modifications, every one of them, if you remember that graphic in your mind about all of the design changes in cigarettes, every one of them was tied right back to profit, every one of them tied right back to profit. two-thirds of male former smokers said it was not very hard to quit. well, they were not the first to say it. it is easy to quit smoking, i've done it thousands of times. you are told that the plaintiff has tried to avoid the effect of the information environment on charlie piendle, and you were also told that with the ability to quit comes the responsibility to quit, and i agree. from the outset of this case, we have agreed, but with the ability to tell the truth comes the responsibility to tell the truth, with the ability to design and manufacture safer cigarettes comes the responsibility to design and manufacture safer cigarettes. with the ability to research health issues associated with a product that you are selling 15 comes the responsibility to research those health issues. remember dr. figlar's testimony, we have never done any research on addiction, we did not even have a research department in spite of everything that was being said about the links between smoking and cancer, did not even have a research department until 1953. we are not the ones who done the research on smoking and health hazards. with the ability to make public health considerations the primary concern comes the responsibility to make public health considerations the primary concern, not consumer acceptability, which when you get right down to it means profit. the number one concern of these defendants, we are told by dr. figlar himself, had historically been and remains consumer acceptability. safety comes second to the question, will our products sell. that is the way it is always been for the defense. that is the way the defendants continue to conduct their business, consumer acceptability is number one, public health falls somewhere low on the list, and nowhere on the list at all, when and if it ever conflicts with profit. with the ability to keep promises made in full-page advertisements, made on television, made before the u.s. congress comes the responsibility to keep those promises. if we ever find out our cigarettes cause cancer, we will immediately tell the general public. (thereupon, the video clips were played and transcribed as follows:) the host: suppose the tremendous amount of research now going on, including that of the tobacco industry research committee, were to reveal that there is a cancer-causing agent in cigarettes, what then? mr. little: well, if it was found by somebody working under the tobacco industry research grant, it would be made public immediately, and just as broadly as we could make it and then efforts would be taken to attempt to remove that substance or substances. the host: are you saying, then, sir, that there are -- there is something toxic about tobacco which are removable by filter? mr. little: well, obviously, a filter takes out certain tar and nicotine. i do not think the industry admits there are any bad elements. if there are bad elements, through our laboratories, through the surgeon general, through the ama, through acts of god and luck, we hope we may find them, and if they have found them, they will be removed, but at this point, we do not know. but we do talk to the question of whether or not cigarettes are hazardous. we do not believe that cigarettes are hazardous, we do not accept that. when, as, and if any ingredient 7114 in cigarette smoke is identified as being injurious to human health, we are confident that we can eliminate that ingredient. the host: do you believe that cigarettes are safe? have they been proved to be safe, mr. cullman? mr. little: i believe they have not been proven to be unsafe. (new video clip played.) mr. stossel: we asked philip morris, r.j. reynolds, brown & williamson, and lorillard to appear on this program. none would. they told us to talk to the tobacco institute, the institute said anne browder will speak to them. ms. browder: the jury has not come in. mr. stossel: it may not be harmful, you are not convinced. ms. browder: it may be or it may not be, we do not know. (thereupon, the video clip ended.) mr. scarola: the defendants stubbornly clung to the positions that they took in the early '60s for too long, for much too long the defense tells you, but charlie piendle had a choice, he did not have to believe us, he was just too stupid not to have recognized the fact that we were lying for decades. so it is charlie's fault, not ours, he chose to believe our lies. you are told the marlboro man did not exist before 1962. well, if you remember the testimony from dr. cummings, who i believe was the one who addressed that subject, what he said was that the marlboro man came into regular use within the company in 1962. the 1956 annual report, the 1957 annual report, and if you take a look at the 1959 annual report that is also in evidence, and i venture to suggest to you every annual report of the company from 1956 on, you are going to see the marlboro man, the same individual that looked down on charlie and his friends every day across the street from the candy store. now, both defendants spent a great deal of time talking to you about whether the information concealed from charlie piendle made a difference, you-all remember that, a lot of talk about that. here are the instructions on the law. if you find that charlie piendle was a member of the engle class, you are instructed as a matter of law that rjr and philip morris concealed or omitted material information not otherwise known or available knowing that the material was false or misleading or failed to disclose a material fact with the intention that smokers and the public would rely on this information to their detriment. well, now what does that mean, "material 11 information"? well, the court, and i think it is the very next instruction in the package that you have received, the court tells you what a material fact is. you have just been told the defendants concealed material facts. a material fact is one that is of such importance, charles piendle would not have acted as he did but for the concealment or omission. as a matter of law, as you have been instructed and as you have sworn an oath to follow those instructions, the information concealed from charlie was of such importance, charles piendle would not have acted as he did but for the concealment. mr. henk: objection, your honor. mr. kelly: objection. that was a misinterpretation of the law, it is a misstatement of the law, and inapplicable argument with respect to the findings. the court: what is your preference to the actual instruction? mr. scarola: that is exactly what i have on the board, your honor, the actual instruction that the court has given the jury, defining what a material fact is. the court: is the objection to the yellow sticky? mr. kelly: sorry? the court: is the objection to the yellow sticky? mr. henk: yes, your honor. mr. kelly: i was not sure what you said, your honor. no, it is to the argument that plaintiff does not have to establish reliance because the findings establish reliance. mr. scarola: oh, i have not said that at all. mr. kelly: it is absolutely improper. the court: why do not you restate what you said with respect to the law, because the instruction speaks to reliance. mr. scarola: what i said is that as a matter of law, r.j. reynolds and philip morris concealed material information. the court tells you what a material fact is, one that is of such importance, charles piendle would not have acted as he did but for the concealment or omission. philip morris, who did not call a single witness, not one, tells us there is little evidence that marlboro was smoked for any significant period of time. and in the division of responsibility, they say philip morris should have none. what philip morris would like you to ignore is the fact that once it has been established that charlie piendle is a member of the engle class, then we know, because it has been established and we are obliged to accept the fact, that r.j. reynolds and philip morris and other tobacco companies that have been specifically identified entered 22 into an agreement. they acted in concert. they concealed or omitted material information. they agreed to conceal or omit information regarding the health effects of cigarettes. what they did, they did together. which brand charlie piendle smoked, i suggest to you makes no difference at all. they acted in concert. they were cooperating to achieve the same result and they did achieve that result. charlie piendle is a tobacco industry success story. charlie piendle began smoking in response to the information environment that the tobacco industry created. now, they will tell you he started smoking in response to peer pressure, but the peer pressure was manufactured by the tobacco industry. it was the tobacco industry that made smoking sexy, sophisticated, powerful, macho, and safe, and they worked together to create that environment to establish an information environment in which peer pressure caused seventy percent of the males in the united states, during that period of time, to become smokers, most of whom, the vast majority of whom began their smoking long before age 18. you are asked if philip morris shut down, would charlie piendle still have smoked? well, if philip morris had shut down, philip morris would not be here. if r.j. reynolds, instead of endangering the health of the general public, instead of concealing the information they knew, if philip morris and r.j. reynolds had both decided they were not going to participate in this agreement, they were not going to sell defective products, they would not be here in this courtroom. the clerk: counselor, ten minutes. mr. scarola: thank you very much. what kind of defense is it to say, if we did not rob the bank, somebody else would have. if we did not break into liz piendle's house, somebody else would have. if we did not kill liz piendle's husband -- mr. henk: objection. mr. scarola: -- somebody else would have. mr. henk: objection, your honor. as you have instructed the jury, selling cigarettes is a legal activity. everything that mr. scarola is describing is illegal. the court: i'll overrule the objection, but that instruction is noted and it is part of what the jury has been instructed on with respect to the legality of selling cigarettes. mr. scarola: my mom and dad used to tell me, i do not care what everybody else is doing, it is wrong and you should not do it. common sense tells us that what everybody else is doing is not an excuse, it is not a defense, it is not a justification for the kind of improper conduct in which these defendants have engaged. 7 what if? what if? what if the defendants really had put people's health paramount over profit and had designed, manufactured, marketed, and sold only the safest cigarettes that science would enable them to have designed in the '50s, in the '60s, in the '70s, and the '80s, instead of the defective and unreasonably dangerous cigarettes it has already been proven that they did sell? what if when the defendants told us in the frank statement, we accept an interest in people's health as basic responsibility paramount to every other consideration in our business, what if they really acted in accordance with those words? but they did not. that was their real number one consideration. what if the defendants' number one consideration was what they told the american people it was in 1954? reader's digest, august 1957, secrecy is the rule in the cigarette industry, research is guarded jealously, developments immediately become highly classified trade secrets. mr. biersteker: objection, your honor. it is not for the truth of the matter asserted. the court: i'll sustain the objection. mr. scarola: i'm not presenting it as in for the truth of the matter asserted, your honor, although i do not believe that there was any limiting instruction. in 1954, people's health was supposed to have been paramount to every other consideration in their business. the brands that sell the best are those with the least effecting -- effective filters and the strongest tobacco, improved filtration might even be unprofitable. mr. biersteker: objection, your honor. he is precisely using it for an impermissible purpose. the court: do counsel want to approach or do you want to move on to the next subject? mr. scarola: i will move on. this is the information that was in the information environment. what if the defendants had told charlie piendle and everyone with influence over him the whole truth as soon as they knew it? what if they told his parents, what if they told his friends, what if they told his teachers? what if they told the united states of america the whole truth as soon as they knew it instead of concealing and omitting material information and failing to disclose material facts concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking, as it has already been established they did? what if the whole truth had been told, instead of polluting the information environment with psychological crutches and rationalizations to keep people smoking, despite the surgeon general's 18 warnings? what if they did not manufacture controversies and acknowledged the scientific truth that had been arrived at by a consensus of every respected scientist in the world? what if they were not advertising and marketing lies? what if, instead of manufacturing psychological crutches and rationalizations to keep smoking -- to keep people smoking, what if they told charlie the truth? what if they did? but they did everything they could to keep charlie and his parents and his friends and everyone in bridgeport, connecticut and everyone in the united states believing lies. what if, instead of telling the public the surgeon general was acting responsibly and engaging in scare tactics, they joined hands with public health officials? we know what would have happened because it did happen, the surgeon general's report came out, cigarette sales plummeted until the disinformation campaign, the pollution of the information environment, the lies, the campaign of misinformation was effectively carried out by the cigarette industry. we know what would have happened because it began to happen, and what if they did not do that? what if either one of these defendants, either one of them had broken ranks with the tobacco industry conspiracy? what if they had said, i'm going to stand up and tell the truth and i do not care what the rest of you are doing? can anyone say that that probably would not have made a difference? because once the conspiracy begins to fall, it crumbles. the clerk: counselor, two minutes. mr. scarola: and it only takes one. what if philip morris had published a pamphlet like this, "raising kids who do not smoke" in 1958? what if the defendants had exercised reasonable care in every aspect of their business instead of having acted negligently with respect to every aspect of their business? mr. biersteker: i object to the last, your honor, it invites speculation as to the findings. the court: i'm sorry, as to the -- mr. biersteker: the last comment invites speculation as to the findings, that argument was acting negligently with respect to every aspect of their business not supported by the findings or the evidence. the court: sustain the objection. mr. scarola: i suggest it is directly supported by the evidence, your honor. mr. kelly: what was the ruling, your honor? the court: sustain the objection. mr. scarola: is not it at least probable 3 that every one of those things made a difference to charlie piendle, made a difference to public health in the united states, and likely would have altered the outcome of charlie piendle's addiction had these defendants done what these defendants should have done. there is probably another hour there, things i'm never going to get to tell you, but things that i am confident that you already know. you have listened to this evidence attentively, you have heard counsel speak of the statute of justice, a strong woman blindfolded, blind to power and prestige, carrying a scale in one hand and a sword in the other, and when those scales are intentionally unbalanced, when there is a reckless disregard for the public safety of hundreds of thousands of people for the purpose of profit, then lady justice is prepared to use that sword. and, gentlemen, i do not mean to disregard you, nor to suggest a gender change for you, but all of you have your hands on that sword as a consequence of the power imposed on you when you took your oath -- mr. henk: objection, your honor. mr. scarola: -- as jurors in this case. mr. henk: i'm sorry to interrupt, but objection. there is an apparent suggestion that the jury use a sword against the defendants, your honor. this is inappropriate. mr. scarola: that is exactly what i am suggesting, your honor. i am suggesting -- mr. henk: then may we approach? the court: do you want to approach? (thereupon, the following proceedings were held out of the presence of the jury:) mr. henk: i'm going to move for a mistrial. he cannot suggest that the jury use a sword against the defendants, that is completely inappropriate argument. he confirmed that he is -- the court: what is the response? mr. scarola: it is the sword of truth, it is the sword of justice, it is the symbolic sword that justice herself carry and entirely appropriate to use in punitive damages that it should be used. the court: i'd like a clarification that it is a sword of justice. mr. scarola: i was about to do that. the court: it is sustained as far as using the word "sword," but -- motion is denied. (thereupon, the sidebar conference was concluded and the following proceedings were held within the presence of the jury:) mr. scarola: the sword you hold is the sword of justice and it is the sword of truth and it is the sword that empowers you to right the terrible wrongs that have been done to liz piendle and to set an example, through your 14 verdict in this case, that this kind of conduct will not be tolerated any longer. thank you so very much.