3 closing argument mr. biersteker: thank you, your honor. may it please the court, counsel, mrs. piendle. and good morning, barely, ladies and gentlemen of the jury. i do not know how i drew the short straw, i'm going to go about two hours, we are going to be hungry, i'm sorry, 10 that is the schedule. we are coming to the end of a long process, and before i discuss the evidence and the issues in this case, i want to thank you on behalf of myself, liza kessler, john wiederhold, will farrell, and especially on behalf of r.j. reynolds. we have kept you here a long time. we have kept you here late many days. you have endured inconvenience, and some of you have had some personal hardships, and you have all interrupted your personal lives. you have paid careful attention and, in fact, you have taken notes, many notes, and you have asked thoughtful questions. so all of that shows just how hard you have been concentrating and thinking as the evidence came in. you have fulfilled your civic duty and played an essential role in ensuring that our system of justice is just. and make no mistake about it, r.j. reynolds is interested in justice too. you have our gratitude, you have our respect, and now the hard part comes for you. you must be fair, impartial, and dispassionate judges of the facts. you must put aside your emotions and your sympathy, and you have got to all -- i mean, we all feel some sympathy for mrs. piendle, who would not, who would not, but you have to put that aside, and you have to be dispassionate and you have to decide this case based upon the evidence in accordance with the law that the court has given you. all right. i told you in my opening statement that this trial was all about mr. piendle and the choices that he made, and i told you that there was four groups of issues. if i could have the next slide, please. class membership, findings and legal cause, i referred to that as the bridge, responsibility, and damages. and i'm going to talk to you in my closing argument this morning and early this afternoon about the choices that mr. piendle made and how they relate to these four groups of issues. but before i begin, i want you to keep two things in mind. first, as the court has instructed you, the plaintiff bears the burden of proof on her claims. she has to prove her case by the greater weight of the evidence, and when it comes to punitive damages, she must meet an even higher burden of proof, clear and convincing evidence. and the court has defined those terms in the instructions that you-all have and you can take back to the jury room with you, but i want to say this, they mean that plaintiff, not reynolds, not philip morris, has to carry the burden of proof on each and every one of the claims that she has presented for you. and the plaintiff basically starts at zero, in the 21 basement, and she is got to build her case brick by brick, step by step, and she is got to carry you with her the whole way until there is a greater weight of the evidence, and for punitive damages, she is got to take you even higher to clear and convincing evidence. second observation i want to make before i discuss the issues, and that is this. the court's instructions, and i know they are hard to read, they are even hard for lawyers, but the court's instructions are a road map to filling out the verdict form. mr. barnhart went through that form probably in about two minutes and just was checking boxes, left, right and center. that is not the way to do it. you have to follow the law that her honor has given you, and the instructions are that law. so from time to time, even though it is not like reading a novel, i'm going to put up pieces of the instructions up on the screen or over here on the boards for you to look at as we discuss the issues in this case. but that is your road map. you cannot fill out the verdict form without following the road map. okay. so now let us turn to the evidence and let us talk about the issues. and the first question on the verdict form, was charles piendle addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine, and if so, was such addiction a legal cause of his lung cancer and death? it has, as we discussed in voir dire, basically -- there is two questions. one is addiction, that is underlined there, and that is the first one i'm going to talk about, and the second was legal cause, and i'm going to talk about that next. all right. so was mr. piendle addicted? the court did not define addiction for you in those instructions. you can read them all day and you will not find it. and you are going to have to decide what it means. and when mrs. piendle was on the stand, i confronted her with interrogatory responses, those signed answers to written questions that she gave when this case was being prepared, and her position was that addiction is a medical issue, which should be a medical diagnosis. addiction is a medical diagnosis, i'm not qualified to say whether the smoker was addicted, medical records, medical records, doctors will have to say, the doctors, all the way through. and we agree, addiction must be medically diagnosed. that is the standard that i would adopt. that is the standard that the plaintiff adopted. and what is the evidence been? let us talk about what the plaintiff presented, because after all, the plaintiff has the burden of 6 proof. and as you heard from dr. benowitz when he was on the stand, there is something called the diagnostic and statistical manual, roman numeral iv, from the american association of the -- the american psychiatric association, the apa, and it is the test that is used by psychiatrists and psychologists to actually diagnose addiction medically. the fagerstrom test that you heard about during the course of the trial, and that was dwelled on a little bit by mr. barnhart in his closing, is not, is not, i repeat, a medical diagnosis of addiction. the fagerstrom test just assumes that everybody who takes the test is addicted. you can be a never smoker and you are still dependent under that test. and dr. benowitz testified it is not a test for diagnosis as that term is medically understood. okay. so plaintiff offered no medical diagnosis that mr. piendle was addicted. and as i mentioned, plaintiff, when she was up on the stand, as mr. barnhart said, filled out the fagerstrom test at trial, even though she admitted she did not know if mr. piendle was addicted at any time that she knew him. but again, the fagerstrom test is not a medical diagnosis of addiction, even if plaintiff and ms. baker-barnes had put on doctors' coats, it does not change it, that is not what the test is for. and speaking of the fagerstrom test, how could mrs. piendle know which cigarette mr. piendle would hate to give up most? how would she really know that he smoked four cigarettes in the morning? remember, she did not even notice that he quit for two days. plaintiff also called three experts and paid each of them a lot of money to review the medical records and the depositions and other materials in this case, but none of them offered the medical diagnosis of addiction. first, there was dr. cummings. of course, he could not give medical diagnosis, he is not a doctor. he did not apply to mr. piendle the dsm-iv criteria that psychiatrists and psychologists use every day to diagnose addiction. he just gave you a nonmedical assessment, it was a rule of thumb, and it was a nonmedical rule of thumb. and it was, you smoke a hundred cigarettes in your lifetime and you are smoking daily, voilà, you are addicted. and frankly, dr. cummings, the health educator, was a little bit out of his league on this subject. i noticed that some of you in your questioning picked up on this. and it had to do with the permanent changes in the brain. and if you will remember, dr. benowitz has published all those peer-reviewed articles and he is done a lot of research on nicotine, and he 17 clearly testified that within a few weeks after quitting, the nicotine receptors in the brain go back to normal. and then it was one of your questions, because you noticed a discrepancy with what dr. cummings said, and he said, well, the number of receptors do not change, talking about after he quit, and once he developed more receptors for nicotine, that is one of the reasons it is so easy to fall back into smoking again. now, ask yourselves, who do you trust more? i think the answer is pretty obvious. so that was dr. cummings, but who, by the way, i do not think ever testified, search your memories, that he had anything do with the 1999 surgeon general's report, notwithstanding the demonstrative that mr. barnhart put up. in any event, that is dr. cummings. let us talk about dr. burns. dr. burns is a medical doctor, but dr. burns also never diagnosed mr. piendle as addicted medically under the dsm-iv criteria. instead, he talked about compulsive use of and you have lost the ability to freely choose the next use of the substance. another rule of thumb, without any evidence from dr. burns, that it is used to diagnose addiction medically, none, he never said that. and in cross-examination, i asked him about his medical practice. and you may recall, i asked him about his own patients. and he said, you know, if a patient comes to me and says, i'm not addicted, i tell them basically, put them down for a month, come back and see me, and if you are not smoking, you are probably not addicted. ladies and gentlemen, that is mr. piendle. all right. let us talk about dr. benowitz. he is the guy who is done a ton of research on nicotine in the brain, he is also a medical doctor. he actually talked about the dsm-iv criteria during the course of his testimony before you. but here's the curious part. plaintiff never asked dr. benowitz at trial to actually use the dsm-iv criteria to medically diagnose mr. piendle as addicted. he too just gave a rule of thumb, and there it is. five cigarettes a day, probably addicted. that was his answer. and again, no testimony that is sufficient to constitute a medical diagnosis of addiction. so not one of plaintiff's experts came before you and said mr. piendle medically was addicted. and for that reason, and because the plaintiff bears the burden of proof, remember that, the defense did not call an expert to come in and apply the dsm-iv criteria to mr. piendle. and interestingly, nor did any of mr. piendle's doctors diagnose mr. piendle as 2 addicted. nor did any of his doctors treat mr. piendle as addicted. you heard that testimony. and interestingly, mr. piendle never said he was addicted either. so in short, plaintiff did not carry her burden of showing that mr. piendle was addicted under the very standard that the plaintiff and her legal counsel in this case adopted at the beginning of the case. but let us say, contrary to the position of both plaintiff and the defense, you decide to use some nonmedical rule of thumb instead of the medical definition of addiction. let us say you also conclude that under some nonmedical rule of thumb, mr. piendle was addicted. then what? well, then you get to the second threshold issue, and that was, was any addiction -- next slide, please, will. -- a legal cause of his lung cancer and death? and i want to spend just a minute before we get into discussing addiction in this connection talking to you about legal cause. it is a very important issue, it comes up when we talk about the bridge between the findings and the companies, and it is all over the court's instructions. so i just want to touch on it briefly. and remember the legal definition. cause means -- if i could have the next demonstrative, please, will. -- basically contributes substantially, contributes substantially, and then it is defined so that it can be reasonably said that but for the addiction to cigarettes -- this language appears time after time, not always addiction, it depends upon negligence or defect, but it appears all the time -- contributes substantially so it can be said that but for the addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine, the death would not have occurred. but for. now, the words "contributes substantially" appear several times during the course of instructions. it is defined the first time it is used in connection with every issue as a but-for cause. it is not always redefined when it is used the next time, but it means the same thing, but-for cause. that is what plaintiff has to prove, and that is true for each and every one of the issues for causation, it is important, and it is important to every issue in the case. again, look at the instructions. that is what it means. all right. so let us turn to the evidence now and on whether addiction was a legal cause of mr. piendle's death. the evidence was that mr. piendle chose to smoke, chose to start smoking. nobody disputes that. he chose to 13 continue smoking. and even though he could quit -- again, not an issue, everybody agrees he could quit. he chose not do so until 1989, and then he made up his mind and he quit. and here is the important part, there is no evidence that it was hard for him to quit, notwithstanding what mr. barnhart said in his closing. search your memories, that evidence is not there. what happened was mr. piendle put them down and he never picked them up again. he quit cold turkey in 1989. he did not need help, he did not ask for help, he did not get help, he just did it. and significantly, when mr. piendle quit in 1989, he did not have the withdrawal symptoms that truly addicted smokers sometimes experience. next demonstrative, please, will. and these are the, quote/unquote, awful withdrawal symptoms that mr. barnhart was talking about. i have to tell you, compared to alcohol and heroin, these are not awful. he had no trouble sleeping, no anxiety, no difficulty concentrating, no evidence he had weight gain or ate more. no headaches, sore or dry throat. there was no evidence of any of that, the classic withdrawal symptoms. and mr. cabral, his best friend, said he did not notice anything different about him. ms. worobel, his other best friend, never said that he seemed different. his brother, mr. edward piendle, said he did not notice anything different about him, except he was always chewing on those toothpicks. the only withdrawal symptom that anybody ever suggested he might have had when he quit smoking was that he was a little moody. mrs. piendle said that. mrs. piendle did not say he was moody because he snapped at her. she did not say that he was moody because he lost his temper over the little things in life. she said he was moody because he talked to her less. that is it. that was the basis for saying mr. piendle was moody. well, he could not have been that moody. again, mrs. piendle did not notice he quit smoking for almost two days. and as you learned from dr. benowitz, the withdrawal effects that somebody has whenever they quit basically are the strongest in the first week after they quit. and you know what, there is other reasons that might explain why mr. piendle was talking to mrs. piendle less after he first quit smoking. now, let us talk about those. there are really two. first, mrs. piendle, as you heard, was upset with mr. piendle for quitting. it was something that she thought they should do it together, and she was a little mad at him that he went off and did it on his own. now, your common sense should tell you that if 24 somebody is upset with somebody else, they might not talk to them as much. second, mrs. piendle told us, hey, you know, in 1989 i was not ready to quit and, indeed, she did not even try. she was still smoking two packs of cigarettes a day at that time. and mr. piendle, at least at first when he first quit, would leave the room when she lit up in front of him. no wonder he was talking to her less. he was not in the room much of the time. all right. that is 1989. what about before 1989? initially, mr. piendle did not smoke where smoking is not allowed. he was able to refrain from smoking without a problem or a complaint. for example -- the next slide, please. -- he did not smoke at church. he did not complain about not being able to smoke at church. he did not leave church in the middle of service to go and smoke a cigarette. same thing for the movies. no complaints, no problem not smoking during movies. did not leave movies in the middle of them to go sneak a cigarette. he did not smoke in bed. you heard about that, except possibly after his meal that he had every evening. he did not get out of bed to smoke in the middle of the night. he did not rush through meals to smoke. you heard all that. you also heard that he did not have his first cigarette in the morning in bed. there is been kind of confusing testimony, but alan cannizzio, who you heard by deposition, he did not come here, mrs. piendle's son, basically said it was disgusting if somebody would smoke while they are eating. and his testimony was mr. piendle smoked after breakfast when he was having his coffee. again, the evidence is a little fuzzy, but that was about the clearest testimony you had. and there is been no evidence that mr. piendle tried to quit in the 1950s or '60s when, according to dr. benowitz, it would have been easier for him. remember, dr. benowitz says, the longer you smoke, the more withdrawal symptoms you will have, at least as a general rule. okay. and, sure, plaintiff did not do so in closing, but during the course of the trial talked a fair amount about those new year's resolutions, as if they were evidence that quitting smoking was hard for mr. piendle. but you heard dr. burns talk about cognitive dissonance, and basically smokers enjoy smoking on the one hand, they know it is bad for them on the other hand, and they are conflicted. they are conflicted. ask yourself: did mr. piendle really want 9 to quit smoking before 1989? what is the evidence that you heard during the course of this trial? remember, those new year's resolutions were not all that memorable to mrs. piendle. she really was not sure how many there were, and she could not tell us in what years they occurred. she even said different things about whether they actually quit or whether they just tried to cut down. the next demonstrative, please, will. there you go. on direct examination, mrs. piendle left you with the impression that for those new year's resolutions, she and mr. piendle would smoke their last cigarette, last one in the pack, and then actually stop smoking cigarettes altogether for a day or a day and a half. but on cross-examination, mrs. piendle admitted that the new year's resolutions in the 1970s and the '80s were attempts to cut back and to limit the number of cigarettes they would smoke, with the idea that they might quit smoking altogether. little unclear whether they actually quit, but this much we do know -- this much we do know, the evidence was crystal clear that the piendles were not doing any of the things that you would expect somebody who was truly committed to smoking -- to quitting smoking that they would do. so -- and, again, you heard this, did not throw away the ashtrays, did not throw away the lighters, never went to a doctor or a smoking cessation clinic, no hypnosis, no prescription of any kind. and, yes, nicotine gum was probably the predominant prescription available at any time. and they never told their friends and family they were trying because they did not want to be embarrassed if they did not make it. in short, the piendles truly were hedging their bets. could you really say that they were committed -- that mr. piendle was committed to smoking in connection with any of those new year's resolutions? and i would say submit that mr. piendle was in control of his smoking based upon the evidence you heard, and it was not the other way around. and that is consistent with everything that we were told about him by all of his family members and friends who came here to testify and who knew him the best. they said he was strong-willed. he was not a weak man. only mr. barnhart said that in his opening. nobody else did. he was decisive. the marines and all the other marines who came after him were wusses. he was a straight and narrow kind of guy. it is all consistent with what plaintiff's expert, dr. benowitz said. if we could have the next slide. next one 20 after this. too many. never mind. also consistent with what dr. benowitz said, and you will remember he said, addiction is really, you know, a control issue. do you have control of use of the drugs? that means, if you want to stop, you can stop. if you want to smoke fewer, you can smoke fewer. mr. piendle had that control. that is what the evidence has been, and nobody has told you otherwise. he could quit. no addiction prevented him from quitting, and he could have quit sooner than he did. plaintiff, in short, has not proven that any addiction so controlled mr. piendle that it was a but-for cause of his continued smoking and his lung cancer. the evidence was that he -- just as he started to smoke, basically to fit in, he decided to quit after many of his friends and family members had quit smoking. mrs. piendle testified that a number of folks they knew had quit smoking and had urged mr. piendle to quit. that included his sister, christy verrelli, and his good friend -- maybe his best friend, lucille worobel. there is another reality here that tracy piendle addressed when she was on the stand. mr. piendle was approaching 50. in 1989, he was 48 years old. that is one year older than his father was when he died of a heart attack in 1966. his dad, i think, was 47, and in connection with that, mr. piendle made some lifestyle changes. he started to go to the gym. he quit smoking. those were some of them. i submit to you that plaintiff does not carry her burden of proving class membership, no. there was no proof that mr. piendle was addicted, if that term is used medically, a standard that the plaintiff herself has adopted in this case. there was no proof that any addiction was a but-for cause -- but-for legal cause of mr. piendle's continued smoking and lung cancer. and because plaintiff has not met that burden, i would ask that you check "no" on the -- in answer to the first question on the verdict form. okay. i'll switch gears a little bit. let us say you disagree with me. it is always a possibility, i know. and you find that mr. piendle was a member of the class and then you have more issues to decide. the court has instructed you on certain findings made by the class action jury in the engle case. and remember the court's instruction that you saw in voir dire, and you have heard twice, i think, since then. it is on the board. it is what mr. kelly referred to as the rest of the story during voir dire, and, indeed, it is. and the court has specifically instructed you that the findings do not mean that the 5 plaintiff is entitled to prevail in this case, you have got to have more. she has got to prove more. and what you are going to be asked to do if you get this far, is to take the findings, apply the evidence you have heard, and decide if plaintiff has met her burden again -- it is still her burden -- of proving that the breach of those duties, the misconduct by the defendants, was a legal cause of mr. piendle's smoking and ultimately his death from lung cancer. and again, i just want to come back to legal cause. you will see this repeatedly in the instructions. it is not enough. i repeat. it is not enough that plaintiff proved that any addiction caused mr. piendle's lung cancer and death. that is not enough. rather, plaintiff must also show -- i have a series of slides here, and they all say the same thing -- must also show that the conduct of the defendants, whether it is negligence -- next one, please. -- whether it is defect, whether it is concealment or agreement to conceal, that still has to show legal cause but for, but for the conduct that was negligence, but for the defect, but for the concealment, but for the agreement to conceal, mr. piendle would not have continued smoking and would not have gotten lung cancer. and legal cause still means the same thing, substantially contributes but for, every time you see it. so plaintiff had to build that causal bridge that i talked about before. she had to link the generic findings on one shoulder to mr. piendle on the other, and show that there was but-for causation in between them. she has to show that the conduct, what -- for example, what reynolds and philip morris did or said or did not say or did not do was a but-for legal cause of mr. piendle's smoking and lung cancer, and i submit that she did not build that bridge. now, the engle jury that made these generic findings that you have seen and that we are going to talk about, did not know anything about mr. piendle. they did not know when he started smoking, they did not know what he smoked, they did not know why he smoked, they did not know whether he quit, did not know how he quit or what he knew about the health risks of smoking. that is your job. your job is to look at this evidence and decide whether or not the plaintiff built the bridge. now, before we talk about each of the individual findings, i want to talk a little bit about mr. piendle and the choices he made, because it would be easy for you to forget during mr. barnhart's closing that this case is all about mr. piendle. 16 you heard a lot of talk about statistics and american public, but not a lot about mr. piendle and not a lot related to the core issue in this case, which is was that bridge built. so let me talk a little bit about mr. piendle and the choices he made, and let us make no mistake about it, they were choices. basically, three of them, although each of them is multiple; the choice to start smoking, the choice to become a regular smoker, the choice to continue smoking until 1989. let us talk about each of those, just briefly. the choice to start. we do not know the precise date on which mr. piendle started smoking. the earliest evidence that he first smoked came from mr. cabral, and he said that mr. piendle smoked when mr. piendle was in the eighth or ninth grade. remember, mr. cabral was one year behind him. however, if you go look at the medical records -- and you should do this. they are in evidence. plaintiff put up some excerpts. and let us see what mr. piendle told his doctors. smoking at age 16 to 48. and that was the legal age in connecticut, when he was growing up. that would have put him at -- i do not know -- freshman, sophomore year, probably sophomore year of high school in 1957. and one of the -- one of the exhibits that -- i just pulled it out of the medical records, was plaintiff had all those two packs a day references up here. but if you go and actually look at the medal records, and i urge you to do this when you deliberate, you will come across this one which says, "patient smoked one half pack per day." different things at different times. all right. everybody agrees that mr. piendle started smoking, and he experimented for social reasons. his parents smoked. you heard all about that. his best friend, mr. cabral; his other best friend, ms. worobel smoked. his other friend smoked. the older kids smoked. he wanted to fit in. there is no evidence, however, that he started smoking because of tobacco advertising. one of the brands that he smoked with mr. cabral early on was lucky strikes, and there was no evidence that lucky strikes' advertising at the time mr. piendle smoked lucky strikes in mid-1950s targeted kids. you saw this ad during my cross-examination of dr. cummings. and after he started smoking, mr. piendle had another choice to make, and that was whether to become a regular smoker. it is a choice that every smoker must make. none of plaintiff's experts told you that mr. piendle became addicted the day he smoked his first cigarette, and there is certainly no evidence 6949 1 that anyone, including the defendants, forced him to continue. he had the ability to decide whether or not he wanted to do that. you also heard that he smoked once in a while and socially in high school. dr. burns testified, based upon his review of the materials in this case, that mr. piendle became a regular smoker somewhere between the age of 16 and 25 between 1957 and 1966. now, you saw the textbooks approved for use in the connecticut schools that dr. norrell showed you. and i just want to take a little detail here. plaintiffs kind of picked on dr. norrell, noting how much he had been paid. but he clearly does his homework. you saw boxes and boxes of reliance materials that were just for this case. the total he had been paid represents the work he did over the course of 16 years. while dr. norrell has testified in -- approximately 15 different times, that pales in comparison to the amount of times that plaintiff's experts have testified. as i recall, and you can go back and consult your notes, dr. burns has testified over 140 times; dr. cummings, i believe, testified over 50 times; and dr. benowitz, over 30. but returning to dr. norrell, it is true, he could not put a specific textbook in mr. piendle's hands when he was in school, but he gave a powerful summary of the information that was available to mr. piendle when he was in high school. mr. piendle, no doubt, had heard on the news or read in the media stories linking smoking to lung cancer, and we know that by the time mr. piendle was in high school, he was calling his cigarettes cancer sticks and coffin nails. now, plaintiff had mr. edward piendle testify that coffin nails was used because cigarettes looked like a nail, not because they had any association with death. it was as if the coffin part was accidental. then they had mr. cabral come in, and he talked about cancer sticks. and he said, nah, it was just a nickname without any meaning. it was as if they call cigarettes sam. and one of your questions followed up on that and asked mr. cabral, hey, mr. cabral, did you ever discuss with mr. piendle cancer sticks? and you know what, you really did not get a straight answer from mr. cabral. they had dr. burns come in and talk about the use of slang expressions. remember, the coronary on a stick, which was the deep-fried butter that they served at the san diego county fair. we talked about that. and dr. burns said the phrase did not communicate a risk to heart health that was internalized by the very people who were taking 12 the coronary on a stick and shoving it into their mouths and using that phrase. really, guys? use your common sense. is any of this credible, particularly against the background, the backdrop of the broader information and environment that was described you by dr. norrell? moreover, there was zero evidence that mr. piendle thought, hey, this will never happen to me. there was no evidence that he had internalized what he plainly knew, smoking causes lung cancer and death. even plaintiff's argument -- even plaintiff's argument that mr. piendle did not think it would happen to him, admits an understanding of what "it" was, and "it" was smoking causes illness. there is some additional points to keep in mind. statistically, it is true, 85 to ninety percent of lifelong smokers do not get lung cancer. that is the debate. you heard that. listen to the court's instructions and review them back in the jury room. you will not find any instructions that the defendant's had a legal obligation to convince every single individual smoker in the united states to internalize the information that they already had. what could the tobacco industry or these defendants have done to convince mr. piendle personally to apply what he already knew, smoking causes cancer and death, to himself, specifically? and is there any evidence in this case that his reaction would have been any different than it was decades later when his daughter came to him and said, dad, smoking causes lung cancer, showed him the warning on the back, and he shooed her away. would his reaction have been any different when his best friend, at least one of his best friends, lucille worobel, came up to him and urged him to quit smoking and he said, i know, i know? or would it have been any different than his response likely was to his doctors? there is no evidence of that. you know, and even dr. burns -- if i could have the demonstrative, please, 26. -- even dr. burns basically says, i have every expectation that mr. piendle was aware of information that indicated that smoking was bad for him. dr. benowitz admitted that even today, even today, with all of the information and understanding that we all have about cigarette smoking, there will be people who start smoking. some of them will be kids, some of them will not be, but people still start. there was no evidence from anybody that mr. piendle decided to become a regular smoker out of ignorance that smoking causes cancer and death. it just was not there. there was no evidence that he chose to become a regular smoker because of cigarette advertising. there 23 was no evidence that he chose to become a regular smoker because of any statement from r.j. reynolds, from philip morris, the tobacco institute, or anybody else associated with the tobacco industry, much less that he relied upon it. there was no testimony to that effect. okay. let me talk about his last choice, and that was the choice to continue smoking. it was a choice that he made multiple times, each day, for years. the choice to take the next cigarette out of the pack, to light it, and to continue smoking, instead of at least trying to quit. you heard all the experts say that just because somebody might be addicted does not mean that they can quit smoking. everybody can quit smoking. there is not really a serious dispute about that in this case. quitting is a question of motivation and commitment, even if it takes more than one try. so let us talk about the 1960s and the choice to continue smoking then. in the 1960s, as you know, the 1964 surgeon general's report came out. there were warnings on every pack of cigarettes starting in 1966, "caution: cigarette smoking may be hazardous to your health." and mrs. piendle testified she was sure that mr. piendle saw that warning. she was sure about it. and mr. piendle ignored the information that was available to him about the health risks and addictiveness of smoking in the 1960s. and why do i say "ignore"? because there is no evidence he even tried to quit once during that entire decade. let us talk about the 1970s and '80s. in the 1970s and '80s, mr. piendle continued to smoke, despite the surgeon general's warnings on every pack, and the warnings were in -- in every advertisement, every ad starting in 1972. these are warnings, 1970, 1985, "surgeon general has determined that smoking is dangerous to your health." and then from 1985 to the present, these rotating warnings, specific warnings about lung cancer, specific warnings that say, "if you quit smoking, it greatly reduces risk to your health." and the court has instructed you that there is no dispute in this case that defendants put that warning on every one of their packs starting in 1966, all the way through to the present. now -- and as i said, tracy piendle testified she showed her dad those warnings when she was -- when she was at home and a young girl and told him cigarettes cause cancer. again, he shooed her away. and mrs. piendle said, you know, if there was any doubt in my mind that mr. piendle 8 had not read the warning or that mr. piendle did not believe that smoking was dangerous to health, she would have told him, but she never did, because she did not have that doubt. he knew. all of the evidence shows that he knew in the 1970s and '80s. and what is plaintiff's response? what is plaintiff's response? it is to ignore all the specific information that we know about mr. piendle, the individual. it is to lump him into a statistical age cohort and to argue that he must have liked -- he must have acted like average people his age, or to talk about -- i wrote the phrase down. i can barely read my writing. but i think mr. barnhart used the phrase "subconscious reliance." i do not even know what that is. "subconscious reliance." and neither of those attempts work. when mr. piendle started smoking, he was among the 35 to forty percent of age cohorts who, based on the adult use of tobacco survey that you heard about, that began smoking before he turned 18, not the seventy percent that dr. cummings tried to claim. mr. piendle really was not an average man. he was the star athlete in high school, and then starting in early adulthood, he suffered from debilitating crohn's disease and then later on arthritis, hearing loss, dizziness, and so forth. he was not average in his brand loyalty or his brand selections. after all, mrs. piendle largely chose the brands that they smoked. and statistics cannot really prove the facts in this case related to mr. piendle. and i think there is a very telling example. if statistics decided this case, mr. piendle never got lung cancer. after all, as i said before, the evidence said that 85 to ninety percent of smokers do not get lung cancer. if you want to decided the case on statistics, let us go home right now, because he never had lung cancer. in short, specific evidence about mr. piendle, not data from age cohorts or anything else, should carry more weight when you go back into that jury room and start deliberating than anything about age cohorts, anything about subconscious reliance. look at the facts that relate to mr. piendle. this case is for him. it is about him. it is about him. okay. now, i want to talk about the specific findings that you are to apply. i want to discuss the burden plaintiff has to show about legal cause as to each and every one of them. i want to talk about whether they built that bridge. i want to start with design. if i could have the next slide, please. okay. here's the finding on design. defendants r.j. reynolds tobacco company and 19 philip morris usa, inc., placed cigarettes on the market that were defective and unreasonably dangerous, and, you know what, that finding does not help you very much. let me tell you why. it does not say what the defect was. it does not say that any of the brands that mr. piendle specifically smoked were defective at all. it does not say when the defendants placed defective cigarettes on the market. and if i could have the next demonstrative. and as her honor has instructed, and you will see in the instructions that you have with you, the findings establish only what they expressly state. you may not speculate -- you must not speculate or guess as to the basis of findings. now, you heard repeatedly during the course of this trial there is no such thing as a safe cigarette, and i'm certainly not about to tell you otherwise. there is also not a single conventional cigarette that burns tobacco that is not capable of causing lung cancer. they all can. but what is the evidence that plaintiff produced that showed that the reynolds and the philip morris cigarettes that mr. piendle smoked had a defect that was a legal but-for cause of his death? well, first, they got dr. cummings to come in, and he said, you know, the only cigarettes that were reasonable to market were those that were nicotine free. but there were nicotine-free cigarettes on the market, including brands manufactured by philip morris. the next brand, the benson and hedges denic. and as the surgeon general observed in 1964, and several witnesses testified, next to nobody bought the philip morris denicotinized cigarettes or any other cigarette that did not have nicotine. and here is the important part: there is no evidence whatever that mr. piendle would have avoided his lung cancer if only the defendants in this case made nicotine-free cigarettes. philip morris did, other companies did, too, and mr. piendle did not smoke them ever. ever. let us say that reynolds and philip morris had made only nicotine-free cigarettes, the only cigarettes they made. what then? does anybody here seriously doubt that mr. piendle would have gone and smoked cigarettes with nicotine made by a competitor? as dr. figlar testified, cigarettes with nicotine all have the potential to addict. but they are legal products. and defendants did not have a legal obligation to go out of business, no matter how much that would have pleased 4 dr. cummings, the general in the war on tobacco, and the only witness who came before you and testified that cigarettes should be banned, the only one. well, next, plaintiff had dr. cummings say that defendants alternatively should not have made any conventional cigarettes at all, and instead, they should have made pure nicotine-delivery devices, something that delivers only nicotine and nothing else. but again, conventional cigarettes -- excuse me, let me get some water. -- conventional cigarettes are legal, and mr. piendle never used any of the pure nicotine alternatives that were available to him, such as nicotine gum, even when he was trying to quit, and i think there is absolutely no evidence to support the notion that if there had been pure nicotine things on the market, he would have used them as a long term means to get nicotine. i do not think he would have done that and i do not think there is any evidence to support that. and when reynolds did invent the cigarette that heated instead of burned tobacco, yielding nicotine, but none of the conventional tar, the food and drug administration threatened to make it available only by prescription, and there is been no evidence that mr. piendle would have bought that product either, that was starting in 1988. so that leaves us with the conventional cigarettes, and they are inherently dangerous. no one disputes that. and they are and always have been legal products. the evidence is that starting in the 1950s and continuing all the way through 1989 when mr. piendle quit and beyond, the public health community encouraged smokers to switch from higher to lower tar in nicotine cigarettes and encouraged cigarette manufacturers, like reynolds, to make them, and reynolds and philip morris responded. as dr. figlar demonstrated graphically, literally with his demonstratives, they steadily lowered the tar and nicotine yield of their existing products and they made new products available as the technology approved, such as the 1 milligram carlton and now cigarettes. did they have the capacity to make a 1 milligram tar cigarette from 1950? sure. you could have put on a super-duper filter, but nobody would have bought it. the trick was with these incremental designs improvements over time. they tried to make a 1 milligram tar cigarette that would be acceptable to smokers. because if you make even a safe cigarette, which is impossible, but if you make even a safe cigarette and nobody buys it, you really have not done any good. 15 and i have to respond to what was said by mr. barnhart, that dr. figlar said that all cigarettes were equally risky. he never said that, he never said that. in fact, he specifically was asked, do you think it is a good idea to have throwback cigarettes that go back to the 1950s without filters? and he said, no, i certainly would not recommend that. and if you will remember dr. benowitz, when he was on the stand, testified that the ultralow-tar cigarettes are, indeed, less hazardous. not safe, but less hazardous than the others. all right. but mr. and mrs. piendle bought their cigarettes based largely on taste and sometimes price, but not safety. and the testimony has been that they never smoked, as their regular brand, any of the lowest tar and nicotine cigarettes on the market, that the public health community was advising smokers to smoke and that the defendants made. they never even smoked the lowest tar and nicotine styles of the regular brands they did smoke. there was no winston light or winston ultra lights, it was the regular winston. and dr. benowitz, as i said, testified those ultra lights were less hazardous. there are also claims that the defendants manipulated nicotine in order to keep smokers hooked. and there were three claims that were made, and i just want to briefly touch on them, i think they were all put to rest. first, dr. cummings said the ph was manipulated to increase free nicotine in cigarette smoke. dr. figlar came in and he presented data to you about the ph of cigarette smoke from reynolds' products specifically and commercial products generally, and it was always below that 6.5 ph level. below that level, the henderson-hasselbalch curve, remember that curve that you saw on a demonstrative from the surgeon general's report, that dr. cummings could not identify even when i told him the name, that curve showed that there is little or no free nicotine in cigarette smoke below the 6.5 ph, and all of the cigarettes were below it. in any event, in any event, even if there were some evidence that the smoke ph had increased, which there was not, which there was not, dr. cummings testified on cross-examination that it is only a theory that increasing smoke ph increases addictiveness. second, you heard dr. cummings talk about tar to nicotine ratios. what he admitted on cross, on cross-examination, and as dr. figlar testified, that altering tar to nicotine ratios was something that was first proposed by the public health community, including dr. russell in the united kingdom and the national cancer 6966 institute's less hazardous cigarette program, and it was proposed as a way to potentially develop a safer cigarette. and the idea was -- remember, it is the tar in cigarettes that cause disease. so if you could increase nicotine relative to tar, you would allow smokers to smoke for nicotine and get less tar and presumably less risk. and as dr. figlar testified, reynolds at least tried, for many years in the laboratory, to work on this idea, but it never incorporated the idea into commercial cigarettes because the smoke was out of balance, it was too harsh, and consumers would not accept it. third, dr. cummings testified that reconstituted tobacco was utilized to control nicotine dosing. gosh, as dr. figlar explained, reconstituted tobacco was developed and used in commercial cigarettes for three reasons: one, you could use the whole tobacco plant, you save some money. two, reconstituted tobacco delivers less tar and less nicotine than the regular leaf does. and three, the smoke from reconstituted tobacco, as tested by the national cancer institute and the less hazardous cigarette program, gives you less tumors on the backs of mice than smoke that comes from leaves. those were the reasons, and dr. figlar emphatically said reconstituted tobacco sheath is not used to control nicotine dosing. dr. burns came in and talked about dark tobacco, and said, gosh, dark tobacco as used in cigars and pipe tobacco might be safer than the american blend, but then there were two important points made on the cross-examination by mr. kelly; the first was that the scientific evidence shows that cigarettes, not cigars, not pipes, but cigarettes made with the dark tobacco are more dangerous than those made from the american blend. and second, dr. burns knew this all along, even while he testified otherwise on direct. you know, one of the things that i found curious, and i actually did not make a note of this before today, but plaintiffs actually put up again that document from the 1950s that somebody at reynolds proposed putting something in filters to make them change colors when they smoked so that people could see it, and from the get-go, everybody has said that that was an idea that was never pursued. so why do we keep seeing it? i mean, am i going to tell you that every memo that any r.j. reynolds' employee ever wrote, and there is been thousands of them over the years, there is 60 million documents, was a good idea? no, of course not. some of those ideas were stupid, that was one of them. but they keep showing it 11 even though they know it was never done, it was never done. all right. so where is the proof that the cigarettes that mr. piendle smoked as his regular brands had a defect, something the defendants could have fixed as opposed to being inherent risks to the product that was a but-for or a legal cause of mr. piendle's lung cancer? i submit there was not any. tobacco products are dangerous by nature, not by design, and, indeed, the defendants' design efforts, as described to you at some length by dr. figlar, were all aimed at reducing the risks of smoking. it is a hard thing to do, you cannot make it safe, but that was the objective. there was something curious that mr. barnhart, i thought i heard, maybe i misheard it, but i thought he said that all the design modifications were enforced by law. i do not know of a single design modification that was enforced by law on cigarettes. reynolds, philip morris, the other cigarette manufacturers all went about this following the suggestions of the public health community, not because they were compelled to do so, but because they wanted to reduce the risks. think about it, why would a company that makes consumer products want to kill the consumers? that is just nutty. the objective was to reduce risk. all right. let us go the next finding. negligence. defendants' r.j. reynolds tobacco company and philip morris usa, inc., were negligent, that is what the finding says. again, i do not think it helps you very much. you cannot go beyond it, you cannot speculate as to what it means, the court has told you that, and it does not tell you what the defendants did that was negligent. it does not tell you when the negligent act or acts occurred. and what was plaintiff's proof that any negligent act by r.j. reynolds or philip morris was a legal but-for cause of mr. piendle's lung cancer and death? well, plaintiff talked a lot about advertising and even made claims that the defendants were targeting marketing at mr. piendle when he was an adolescent. but let us pull up the court's instruction. and this is what the jury instructions say, in part, on advertising. you may not find liability based on the mere fact that the defendants have advertised their product. you may not hold the defendants liable because of who may have found their cigarette advertising or promotion to be appealing no matter how sexy or glamorous or anything else. the only way they get there is false, misleading, or deceitful statements in advertising. let us talk about that. plaintiff had 22 dr. cummings come in and testify that tobacco ads were false and misleading because they do not show sick or dead smokers, and that is nonsense. advertising that shows happy and attractive people is not false or misleading or deceitful. plaintiff claimed that the early filters did not filter very much, but the 1950's data from the page of the exhibit that mr. scarola did not give to dr. figlar when he was on cross-examination, but that i gave to him on redirect, as well as dr. figlar's apples-to-apples analysis of tar and nicotine yields over time show that improvements were made to the early filters very rapidly. i could stop right here. advertising cannot be a basis of liability in this case. but i'm not going to. plaintiff claimed repeatedly that the defendants marketed to youth, you have seen some of those documents, and no matter what you thought when you came in here for jury service, no matter what you thought before you got here, you have to put it aside and focus on the evidence. so let us talk about what that evidence was. okay. the first exhibit that you have seen a couple of times was this 1984 memo from diane burrows of my client, r.j. reynolds, and it talks about younger adult smokers. and the phrase "younger adult smokers" appears in this memo about 200 times, and every single time that it is defined, it is not always, but every single time it is defined, it is defined as age 18 to 24, 18 to 24. dr. cummings was undeferred by that fact, and he would have you believe that the document was all about targeting youth because it included, as an appendix, a table from the u.s. government survey of adults over the age 21, the very same adult use of tobacco survey that you have seen a couple of times during the course of this trial and that dr. riddel testified about in which adults were asked when they started to smoke. that is it. the next document. this was dr. teague's thoughts on brands for the youth market. it was made -- it was authored in 1973, mr. piendle was 32, it was written by dr. teague, who did not design cigarettes, who was not in the marketing department, and who you found out only in the defense case begins this very memo by saying, "at the outset, it should be said that we are presently, and i believe unfairly, constrained from directly promoting cigarettes to the youth market, that is to those in the approximately 21-year-old and under age group." so the memo starts out by recognizing that what he is proposing is against the company's 7 policy. as you also heard from dr. figlar, there is no evidence that dr. teague's proposal, which was against the company's policy at the time, was ever acted upon. finally, we have this document from dr. colby, it too was written in 1973 when mr. piendle -- excuse me, '71 -- '73 when mr. piendle was 32. there, again, you heard from dr. figlar, based upon his review not only of the internal research and development documents, but also on its products that this was ever followed up on. no throwback cigarettes in the 1950s. in fact, you can see that in the tar and nicotine yield data you saw. and if the defendants were marketing their products to underage smokers, where are the marketing plans identifying underage smokers as a target? where are the focus group tests that would have been done with the product or with the ads? i mean, do you think the companies put out ads in a product without ever testing it on the target market? where was that evidence? you did not see it. you did not see it. all right. dr. cummings and mr. barnhart, too, spiced it up in playing winston ads that ran during the flintstones tv show. mr. scarola, as you recall, did not ask mr. cummings about the ad, he just played it. and you had to wait for my cross-examination of dr. cummings, when he admitted, he admitted that when those advertisements ran, mr. piendle was an adult and the flintstones was an adult comedy, it was modeled on the honeymooners. mr. barnhart, i think, misspoke during his closing earlier today when he said it was a kid show. it was not, it was an adult comedy that ran at 8:30 at night. and when the flintstones did move to saturday mornings, reynolds dropped its sponsorship. you also heard today and again during trial ads from r.j. reynolds advertising winston on the beverly hillbillies. but again, dr. cummings, on direct examination, did not share with you the fact that reynolds dropped its sponsorship of the beverly hillbillies in 1967 when mr. piendle was 26, after audience survey show that high levels of minors were watching the show, and he only admitted that on cross. reynolds, moreover, stopped advertising winston on that show two years before mr. piendle even started smoking winstons in 1969 at age 28, and the only reason he started smoking winstons was because mrs. piendle got him to do it. okay. that was her brand. finally, and you saw this again today, dr. cummings talked in his -- in my cross-examination about creating controversy, and one of the controversies he created were the 1990 letters to the willis elementary 18 school principal where dr. cummings, remember, went in and lectured to the students, talked to them about trademark violations, talked to them about the tobacco industry's position, got them to write letters, and reynolds responded. was that a really smart thing to do? yeah. what does it have to do with mr. piendle? i mean, it really was not. where was the evidence that any of the cigarettes that mr. piendle smoked before 1957 when he was 16, remember that was the legal age to smoke in connecticut at the time, were marketed to youth? there was not any. none. moreover, where was the evidence that mr. piendle smoked because of any ad? dr. cummings, of course, came in here and testified about the ubiquitous influence of marketing on mr. piendle's age cohort. and he really did not have a good answer from one of you about the influences on mr. piendle's age cohort that did not decide to smoke, did not really answer that question. of course, everybody is exposed to advertising. advertising does not explain why somebody starts or does not start smoking. and then dr. cummings had little or nothing to say about mr. piendle as an individual. i specifically asked him on cross-examination if he could identify any specific advertisement that mr. piendle saw, read, or heard. answer, no. nor could he identify any advertising that mr. piendle relied on in deciding to continue to smoke. nobody did. nobody testified that mr. piendle started or continued to smoke because of any cigarette ad. to the contrary, let us look at what people actually had to say about mr. piendle. his brother, mr. edward piendle, did not think his brother relied on anything in particular when he decided to start smoking or to continue smoking. lucille worobel never paid much attention to cigarette commercials in the 1980s. mr. cabral, mr. piendle did not make his decisions about smoking because of the marlboro man. nobody said ads were important to him. and, indeed, if mr. cabral -- if mr. piendle experimented with smoking because of the marlboro billboard, why did he experiment with lucky strikes or pall mall instead of marlboro? now, there is mrs. piendle. she testified she did not know why mr. piendle smoked marlboro cigarettes. she admitted that mr. piendle never mentioned any specific advertisement for any cigarette ad and she testified that mr. piendle never blamed his lung cancer on a cigarette advertising. and ask yourselves this, if mr. piendle was a hapless victim of advertising, as 3 plaintiff's would apparently have you believe, what was he doing smoking a woman's cigarette, like virginia slims? if advertising was so important to him, would not that have rubbed against the grain? all right. plaintiff also displayed a frank statement, and we are still on negligence, and they talk about cooperation with the public health authorities, and they pointed to the statement where the tobacco industry said, we always have and always will cooperate with basically the guardians of public health. and i'll talk about the not proven statements later when we get concealment, i want to spend some time on that. but there is been no evidence that mr. piendle ever saw the frank statement. i want to talk about how many newspapers that ran -- the clerk: counselor, one hour. mr. biersteker: one hour. goodness gracious, i'm going to have to talk faster. they talked about all the newspapers it appeared in, but it ran for one day and one day only, on january 1st, 1954, when mr. piendle was 13 years old, and there was no evidence that any of his smoking decisions were based on anything in the frank statement or on any cooperation or lack of cooperation with the public health authorities. and i've got more i'd like to say, but let me just skip to the bottom line. there was plenty of evidence that apart from the not proven statements, let us put those aside and we will deal with them later, apart from the not proven and not addictive statements that the tobacco industry cooperated with public health authorities. they cooperated in important ways. they cooperated in the design of their cigarettes, both in response to the suggestions of the public health community and as part of the national cancer institute's less hazardous cigarette program. they cooperated by publishing research and making presentations at scientific meetings. they cooperated by funding independent scientific research through ctr grants. remember when dr. cummings was on the stand, i think it was dr. cummings, talking about the nobel prize laureate -- nobel laureates would receive grant funding and were free to publish in peer-reviewed literature, talked about the thousands of articles that appeared, talked about how hundreds of them have been cited in the surgeon general's reports. so let us turn to concealment. there are two findings, they are long, i'm not going to read them to you, but i'll show them on the screen. there is the first one, concealment, and the next one, agreed to conceal. 14 now, during this trial, plaintiff cherrypicked from the 60 million pages or so of internal tobacco industry documents that are publicly available, documents from the defendants, from other tobacco companies, documents from the tobacco institute and council for tobacco research, neither which exist anymore, and they called experts to come in and testify about them. and mr. barnhart spent a fair amount of time on concealment in his closing, that is about all he talked about. it is critically important for you to keep in mind that this case is still about mr. piendle. remember, that is why we are here. and that means you must determine what all of those documents had to do with mr. piendle's choices about smoking, where is the bridge? where is the bridge? the court has instructed you on the law as it relates to that question. the court has instructed you that the law requires that plaintiff prove that mr. piendle relied, to his detriment, on a failure to disclose in a statement the information that the plaintiff argues was concealed and not otherwise known. plaintiff has the burden to show all of that, that the concealment of that information also was a legal cause of mr. piendle's death and lung cancer, and that is a tall order, it is a tall order. ask yourselves this, i said this in opening and i'll say it again: does it make any sense to say that what mr. piendle already knew about the health risks of smoking, going all the way back to high school, cancer sticks and coffin nails, did not matter, the warnings did not matter to him. what he must have read in newspapers and seen on tv from the public health authorities, that did not matter. what the surgeon general said did not matter. what his friends and family said did not matter. but it would have made all the difference in the world if reynolds or philip morris had said, hey, mr. piendle, you have got a 10 to 15 percent chance of dying from lung cancer if you smoke for a long time. does that make any sense? does it make any sense that the tobacco industry's denials that nicotine was addictive, which occurred in 1988, that is when the surgeon general changed the definition, we are going to talk about that, in 1988, not before, that those denials had anything to do with mr. piendle's lung cancer? no, there is no bridge. all right. let us talk about the internal documents that relate to the question of addiction. and i'm not going to go through all the documents, i cannot, i'm running out of time as it is. what i want to do instead is i want to review the evidence that will enable you to evaluate those documents when you deliberate, 25 and then i want to talk about one example, and it is an example that plaintiff's focused on repeatedly. and there are five basic points i want to talk about. next slide, please, will. it is long been known it is hard to quit. dr. burns told you that it is long been known that it is hard to quit, it goes back to the days of columbus. dr. cummings told you that once somebody starts smoking, it is been well-known to the public, not just scientists, that it could be hard to quit even before mr. piendle started smoking in the 1950s. dr. norrell testified about the use of slang, he talked about songs, he talked about school textbooks, all this drove home the point that once you start, it can be hard to the general public. and remember that plaintiff introduced no evidence at all that the defendants in this case ever denied that fact, it can be hard to quit. dr. cummings tried. he said that one industry document said otherwise. i can tell you right now, it was plaintiff's exhibit 2510, it was the press release that was issued in connection with the 1988 surgeon general's report. and when you go back and deliberate, review it, read it, it makes factually correct observations, millions of folks have quit, 95 percent without any assistance and so forth. but as they used to say in the dutch dairy farming community, i grew up in wisconsin, you can read that document until the cows come home and you will never find a statement denying that it can be hard to quit, it is just not there. in fact, the only person who said at this trial that it can be easy to quit was dr. cummings in his smart moves brochure that we asked him about during his examination. and remember dr. riddel, she showed you the data from the government's adult use of tobacco surveys that show that two-thirds of male former smokers -- we have the slide, will? yeah, two thirds of male former smokers reported, you add up these two numbers, it is about two-thirds, said it was fairly or very easy to quit, but the point is and remains, it was no secret that smoking can be hard to quit. second, second point i want you to keep in mind when you look at these documents. second point is, as dr. cummings testified, people tend to use the word "addiction," "dependence," "habit," and "habituation" interchangeably. even dr. cummings, a ph.d. scientist, admits that he did just that. so it should not be surprising when you go through millions, tens of millions of pages of internal company documents, you will be able to find examples 10 where the author used the word "addiction" or "addictive," but that does not mean that the author meant anything other than it is hard to quit or that the author knew something different than everyone else. third point, dr. benowitz. dr. benowitz told you that scientists have long known about the pharmacological properties of nicotine, including on the central nervous system. it is something that has been studied since the early 1900s, for decades before mr. piendle started to smoke. in fact, as you will recall, the tobacco industry collected and summarized publications on the effects of nicotine on the body and the green monster, and that was one of the books that was used to help prepare the 1964 surgeon general's report. and there is been no evidence that defendants ever denied that nicotine has effects on the brain. again, not a secret that nicotine has pharmacological effects, including on the brain and, indeed, it was discussed in the 1964 surgeon general's report. the fourth point to keep in mind as you look at the documents, it has long been known that tobacco contains nicotine and that people smoke for nicotine, long been known. and, in fact, dr. benowitz told you that scientists and the public at large have known for over 100 years that tobacco has nicotine in it. and as the 1964 surgeon general's report observed, nobody smoked cigarettes that do not have nicotine, commonly known, not a secret. fifth, i want to talk about this. the whole dispute about whether to label nicotine and addiction as opposed to a habit was about definitions and labels. as dr. benowitz admitted, it came about when the surgeon general adopted a different definition of addiction in 1988, a year before mr. piendle quit. the definition had changed. no longer was there a need for intoxication, no longer was there a need for severe or life-threatening withdrawal, and then they also dropped the requirement for antisocial behavior and, voila, smoking and even caffeine became an addiction just like heroin and alcohol. it was not a change in science, dr. benowitz told you this. put up the next slide. okay. he said, basically, under the 1964 surgeon general's definition, if you apply it to what science knows today, today, about nicotine and smoking, smoking is still a habit. and if you flip it around and you take the 1988 surgeon general's report's definition and apply it to what science knew back in 1964, smoking would have been an addiction. the tobacco industry, including these defendants, were unhappy about getting lumped together with heroin and alcohol. that is understandable, i think. 21 so starting in 1988, the tobacco industry publicly denied that smoking was addictive, citing as my client did, even tried to do in those 1994 congressional hearings, the real differences between nicotine and other drugs like heroin in terms of intoxication and withdrawal effects. but here is the main one, as dr. cummings admitted on cross-examination, the label does not really matter. what matters is the behavior, and that never changed. okay. so i want you to keep those points in mind and i want to talk about just one document that you have seen several times now. it was the document written in 1972 by dr. teague and it concerned nicotine and smoking. the plaintiffs made it sound as if dr. teague had secret information about nicotine that was otherwise unknown. i want you to take a close look at what dr. teague said and when he said it, and compare it to what was said in the 1964 surgeon general's report about the role of nicotine and smoking. dr. teague says, "tobacco products uniquely contain and deliver nicotine, a potent drug with a variety of physiological effects." 1972. surgeon general, eight years earlier. a published document. "the habitual use of tobacco was related primarily to psychological and social drives reinforced and perpetuated by the pharmacologic actions of nicotine on the central nervous system." and take a look at a 1942 paper by lennox johnston. johnston had the exact same theory 30 years before dr. teague wrote his memo, his think piece. dr. teague: "thus, tobacco is in essence a vehicle for delivery of nicotine, designed to deliver the nicotine in a generally acceptable and attractive form." what did you learn about dr. johnston in 1942? smoking was essentially a means of administering nicotine, just as opium is a means of administering morphine. 1942, 30 years before dr. teague wrote his think piece. and dr. johnston was far from the first to write about the compulsive use of nicotine and to draw the analogy to smoking opium. next slide. this was the surgeon general's report in evidence in 1988. as early as the 1920s and '30s, some investigators were concluding that nicotine was responsible for the compulsive use of tobacco products. that theory appeared not only in scientific publications, but in the popular press as well, long before dr. teague ever picked up his pen and wrote this paper. next slide, please. reader's digest, 1938. he wrestles with 6 his addiction. okay. let us return to mr. piendle. that is our focus, that is where our attention belongs. the earliest public statement by the tobacco industry denying that smoking is addictive that is in evidence in this case is from 1988. that is not surprising because that is when the surgeon general changed the definition. by that time, mr. piendle knew how easy or hard it was for him to quit smoking personally because of new year's resolutions that he and mrs. piendle made in '70s and '80s. what difference, the tobacco industry denying that smoking was addicting, what difference would that have made to mr. piendle? he already knew. he already knew based on his own personal experience trying to quit, and there was zero evidence, zero evidence that mr. piendle's choices about his smoking would have been different if only the tobacco industry had said, gosh, quitting smoking can be hard, which mr. piendle must have known, and there is no evidence that he never tried to change his behavior in 1964 when the surgeon general said it was a habit, or that he tried to change his smoking behavior in 1988 when the surgeon general said it was an addiction, no evidence of that whatsoever. let us turn to the last concealment issue, the last bridge issue involving the findings, and that is smoking and disease. and i'm sorry, it is getting late. i'm trying to go as fast as i can. the last bridge issue, the not proven statements relating to smoking and disease. and i'd like to start again by setting a little context, and after that you will again focus on mr. piendle specifically, as we all must, because again, this case is about him. first, as admitted by dr. burns, there really was a dispute among scientists, notwithstanding the available evidence about whether smoking could be said to cause lung cancer before 1964. it was not a dispute about what the evidence was. by the mid-1950s, scientists, public health authorities, the tobacco industry all knew that smokers got more lung cancer than nonsmokers in the studies that had been published. they all knew that cigarette smoke contained trace levels measured at the level of billionths of a gram of carcinogens, no secret, it was in reader's digest. and they all knew that mice painted with tobacco smoke condensate developed tumors. it was in life magazine. everybody knew that. but there still was a dispute about what evidence was sufficient to establish cause, whether you also needed an animal model based upon inhalation of cigarette smoke, or you needed a mechanism. and that is because those 17 are the traditional means of proving cause that medicine and science was accustomed to because they focused on infectious diseases where you can identify the bacteria. and that is what the argument was about. and it might seem silly to us today, but it was not back in the 1950s and early 1960s. there was a genuine dispute then. and that is an important reason -- next demonstrative, please, that is 265. that is why we had a surgeon general's report. "few medical questions have stirred such public interest and created more scientific debate than the tobacco health controversy. the interrelationships of smoking and health undoubtedly are complex, the subject does not lend itself to easy answers." there was a debate, the report says so. and if you have any doubt about what it was about, let us go to the next slide. various means and conceptions of the term "cause" were discussed vigorously at a number of meetings of the committee and its subcommittee. the guys who were writing the 1964 report, and i think they were all guys back in 1964, discussed vigorously what they meant by cause. they were still arguing about it. and even after 1964, as you know and as you have heard, doctors oftentimes did not understand the epidemiological evidence or get on the anti-smoking bandwagon. in fact, i think dr. burns said on cross-examination that the american medical association did not get fully onboard until the late 1960s. and you also heard dr. burns testify that his former boss, surgeon general julius richmond, said he would have no criticism of anybody who said it had not been proven whether cigarette smoking caused disease before 1964. so, for example, in 1954 in the frank statement, the tobacco industry said, "we do not believe our products are injurious to health." you know what, that is also what the chief executive officers were saying to hill & knowlton. here's what they told them a couple of weeks before the frank statement was published. this is the internal document. "the industry is strongly convinced that there is no sound scientific basis for the charges that have been made." what they were saying internally they believed was consistent with what they were saying in the frank statement in 1953 and in 1954. plaintiff talked a lot about a document from my client in 1953 by claude teague. next slide please, will. you know, this was a review of the published literature. i thought i heard 2 mr. barnhart say that this was not public knowledge. all the entire basis, if we go back and look at this exhibit in evidence, every single source that he cites, and he was pretty thorough about having citations, is from published literature. and there is no conclusion, as you saw, i think, on cross-examination of dr. burns -- next exhibit. -- that dr. teague concluded that smoking causes lung cancer, to the contrary. he said, "in spite of observation, research, and theorizing for the past 200 years, the cause of spontaneous human cancer is still unknown." next exhibit that you have seen. you have seen this one too. exhibit 269, please, will. this was the document entitled "critical and objective appraisal." it is in evidence. it is clearly a draft when you look at it. you can see on this excerpt handwritten edits that they are all over the document. and plaintiff a couple of times had read the sentence that immediately precedes it, which basically says the amount of evidence to indict cigarette smoking is overwhelming and the evidence on the other side of the coin is scant. but what they did not read to you is, "however, the evidence from epidemiological, pathological, biological, and chemical studies supporting the proposition that lung cancer is caused by or associated with cigarette smoking is parallelled by similar evidence supporting the proposition that lung cancer is caused by or associated with air pollutants. in some cases the evidence seems to be stronger in support of cigarette smoke as a causative or associated factor, in other instances the evidence seems to be stronger in the support of air pollutants as a causative or associated factor." it does not sound to me like dr. rodgman had it all figured out in 1962, and is it -- it should not come as any great surprise to any of us that in 1962 there are documents in the files of the tobacco industry that talk about smoking and health. after all, the 1964 surgeon general's report was coming out very shortly. okay. what about after 1964? well, the tobacco industry still refused to accept the epidemiologic evidence as sufficient, and it stubbornly clung to the mechanism animal model school of thought, and they did that for too long, for far too long. after 1964, however, that smoking causes lung cancer and other diseases was hardly a secret, and the not-proven statements and concealment of the tobacco industry were the subject of ridicule more than they were reliance. 13 and what difference did any of this make to mr. piendle? and plaintiff essentially ran away from this issue and instead she chose to talk once again about mr. piendle's birth cohort. and you saw statistics and you heard testimony about that. and again, we are not here to try a case about mr. piendle's birth cohort, we are here for mr. piendle. nonetheless, i want to take just a few minutes to talk about some of the statistics, and i want to focus on the period from 1964 to 1974. why do i chose to focus there? 1964 is the year in which the surgeon general attempted to end the genuine scientific dispute about whether smoking caused lung cancer. before that, again, there was a genuine dispute, the tobacco company had pretty good company, including the scientists at the national cancer institute and the american medical association. why did i pick 1974 as the ending? because as you might remember, dr. burns testified that if mr. piendle had quit smoking before 1975, he likely, from a statistical standpoint, would have avoided his lung cancer. okay. now, ordinary people were ahead of the scientists, dr. burns admitted that, and dr. norrell showed you that, even before 1964, there is plenty of evidence that they thought smoking was harmful and addictive. indeed, in 1957, the surgeon general thought no warning was necessary on the cigarettes because the media had done such an excellent job in covering the emerging science. you heard from dr. reynolds. she was here testifying for the very first time ever as an expert witness, and she explained that in 1960, half of the american public believed that smoking caused lung cancer, even though the scientists were still arguing about it and the first surgeon general's report would not come out for another four years in 1964. now, it is true that the point estimates, the precise estimate given for the belief levels of smokers compared to the public as a whole were lower, but dr. riddel explained that she could not say that the estimates for smokers and the public as a whole were really different numbers statistically because of the increased sampling error when you start splitting up the size of the sample. the point is that by 1964, the information available to the public, including mr. piendle's cohort, about the health risks of smoking was overwhelming, as dr. norrell testified. and you may recall, the ama in 1965, 1966, do not hold me to the year, basically said no warning is necessary on cigarette packs because everybody knows. we got the quote from dr. horn a little later in the 1960s. and you 24 heard several times, you could shout from the rooftop, cigarette smoking is dangerous, and you would not be telling anybody anything they did not already know. so what was the net effect, the net effect of all of the information that was out there in 1964, including advertisements, including tobacco industry not-proven statements, what was the net effect on the public's awareness and belief? dr. riddel told you. she went to the 1964 adult use of tobacco survey -- if we could have demonstrative 245, will. -- and 81 percent of adults were aware that the surgeon general's report concluded in 1964 that smoking causes lung cancer. let us look at belief. next demonstrative, 246, please. again, from the adult use of tobacco survey, the government survey, the gold standard, 82 percent thought smoking was harmful in 1964. i do not have a number to show you on lung cancer because that question was not asked in that year. okay. in 1966, we talked about the warnings, they changed. dr. riddel told you 93 percent of smokers saw them, and mrs. piendle said that mr. piendle must have seen them too. in 1970, the warning changed. smoking is dangerous to your health. and what about the ads that plaintiff would have you believe turned everybody into a hapless victim? well, in 1971, they disappeared from radio and television, and a year later, in 1972, the remaining print ads all started carrying warnings. by 1974, the information environment identified by dr. norrell was incredibly rich and it was dominated, dominated by the message from the public health community. and again, what was the net effect on the public's belief of all this information, including tobacco company ads and tobacco company not-proven statements? and again, dr. riddel showed you. i do not have a survey from 1974. we got one from '75. demonstrative 246, please. is this it? and ninety percent of the folks then believed that smoking was harmful. if we look at the gallup poll from 1977. again, there is no survey in '74, '75, and '76, so i cannot show you those. but gallup in 1977. 81 percent of the people believed that smoking was a cause of lung cancer. in short, the statistical evidence shows that despite what the tobacco industry said or did not say, the clear message from a host of sources had gotten through loud and clear to the american public by 1974. 9 okay. let us talk about what plaintiff has tried to avoid. the evidence regarding the effect of all this on mr. piendle, not on his birth cohort, and not just from 1964 to 1974. and let us look at what mrs. piendle told you in her testimony here in court. if i could have demonstrative -- here you go. she could not say for sure what caused mr. piendle to smoke. she did not know if there was anything r.j. reynolds tobacco company or philip morris could have told mr. piendle that would have caused him not to smoke. she cannot say what caused mr. piendle to continue smoking before the time that he became addicted. she does not know if anything r.j. reynolds or philip morris said or did made mr. piendle continue smoking after he became addicted. there is more. she does not know if there is anything r.j. reynolds or philip morris could have said or done that would have made mr. piendle stop smoking any sooner than he did. she does not know if there is anything r.j. reynolds or philip morris could have said or done differently that would have avoided mr. piendle's lung cancer. and even if r.j. reynolds and philip morris never made a single cigarette, she did not know if mr. piendle would have avoided his lung cancer and death. that is pretty powerful evidence, i submit, and it is specific to mr. piendle. there is no bridge, no bridge. all right. third major issue. i've got to move along. third major issue is fault, responsibility. you only get this far if you find that plaintiff has proven, has built that bridge between the defendant's conduct and mr. piendle's lung cancer, but-for clause, if you find that, you get to responsibility of fault. and you saw the verdict form. it asked you to allocate fault as among mr. piendle, reynolds and philip morris. i want to talk about that now. again, nobody forced mr. piendle to start smoking in the eighth or ninth grade. nobody forced him to smoke socially or once in a while. when he was in high school, he knew that cigarettes caused cancer and death, cancer sticks, coffin nails. nobody forced him to continue smoking after he graduated from high school, all the way up until 1989. smokers, even addicted smokers, as you know, had the ability to quit. the basic fact is unchallenged, and all of the experts agree, here is just one example in the interest of time from dr. cummings. you have -- 270, please. he was physically capable of quitting smoking for good during any year that he smoked from the 1950s all the way through 1988, true? sure. sure. and the fact that it can be hard 20 for some, a fact that dr. benowitz has said has been well-known for over a hundred years, does not alter the fact that smokers have the ability to quit. mr. piendle had that ability. you do not have to draw theoretical inferences to reach that conclusion, because we know he did quit in 1989. you know also some statistics, 60 million smokers have quit, 95 percent without any assistance, more former smokers alive today than current smokers. and the vast majority of those former smokers, under the rules of thumb that plaintiff would have you believe is sufficient to define addiction in this case, almost all of them are probably addicted under those rules of thumb. the clerk: counselor, 30 minutes. mr. biersteker: thank you. so let me start with a simple concept, with the ability to quit smoking comes a responsibility to quit. pretty simple and i think true. there was nothing magical about 1989. there was nothing special or unique about how mr. piendle quit smoking in 1989. he quit cold turkey. could have done that anytime. and next demonstrative, 252, please. mrs. piendle agreed, there was not anything new about the health risks of smoking that mr. piendle learned in 1989 that he did not know before. and next slide, please. mrs. piendle had no reason to believe that mr. piendle could not have quit smoking sooner than he did, and she does not know why he did not quit smoking sooner. mr. piendle bears responsibility for not quitting smoking sooner than he did, as well as for having started smoking, and as well as for having chosen to become a regular smoker. the fact that he died of lung cancer is tragic, i'm not going to tell you otherwise, but it does not lessen his responsibility. dr. burns agreed that just because somebody may be addicted to nicotine does not relieve them of responsibility for their own choices. they have to make a decision to quit. dr. cummings, smokers are fully responsible for making the decision to quit. and you heard about the surgeon general's report, smoking is a personal choice of behavior. and mrs. piendle admitted, during cross-examination, that mr. piendle's decision to start smoking was his decision, that he decided for himself to become a regular smoker, and ultimately he was an adult, he could make his own decisions. and based upon what you know about mr. piendle, the evidence suggests that he would agree, he was not the kind of man 5 who sought to avoid responsibility for his actions, the evidence was that he accepted full responsibility for his choices in life, and we know that from mrs. piendle. he never blamed anyone else for his choices, it would have been uncharacteristic of him to do so. we talked about how he never blamed his lung cancer on cigarette advertising. he never blamed the tobacco companies for not having warnings on cigarette packs earlier than 1966. he never blamed tobacco companies for his lung cancer because they did not give him more information about the health risks of smoking or addictiveness. he never blamed the tobacco companies for his lung cancer for any reason. indeed, mr. piendle had the best chance to avoid his lung cancer, he had plenty of opportunities. do not start smoking, do not become a regular smoker, quit any time before 1975. and if he had seized any one of those opportunities, we would not be here today. he has the greatest responsibility for failing to do so, and he should bear the greatest allocation for fault in this case. i submit that unlike mr. barnhart's suggestion of 5 to ten percent, mr. piendle bears at least seventy percent of the responsibility for what happened. that is just a simple acknowledgment of personal responsibilities that we all bear for the choices we make in life, especially when we are aware, as mr. piendle was from the very beginning, of the risks of smoking cancer sticks and coffin nails. let me discuss the responsibility of the defendants, especially my client r.j. reynolds. and at the outset i will say, i do not think plaintiff has built that bridge, i do not think you get here. and if you agree, you will not consider the responsibility of the companies. but if you do get this far, there are some things i want you to consider. the defendants' cigarettes are inherently dangerous. they cannot be made safe, cannot be done. they are still legal products, always have been. defendants tried hard, starting in the 1950s, to reduce the risks of smoking by responding to the suggestions of the public health community, by lowing tar and nicotine yields, and pursuing other reasonable suggestions. and well before 1975, the dangers of legal cigarettes were plastered with warnings on every pack and in every ad. now, in her life with mr. piendle, mrs. piendle, as you saw from the quote -- let us put it up again, 248, please, will. -- he was an adult, he could make his own decisions, and as consequence, there is no evidence that she ever warned him because she had no doubt that he already knew. we know that she never asked him to quit, we know that 16 she selected the cigarette brands, we know that throughout their marriage she bought the cigarettes, we know that she continued to smoke, which no doubt made it harder for him to quit. he was an adult, he could make his own decisions, exactly right, exactly right. and as a consequence, the defense responsibility should be zero or very small, precisely the position the plaintiff takes with respect to her life with her husband. all right. but if you do allocate responsibility to the defendants, i think you should keep in mind the evidence concerning mr. piendle's smoking history. and i want to do this as quickly as i possibly can. okay. in the 1950s, yeah, we know that he smoked some lucky strikes, maybe some pall mall. there was talk that when he was still in high school, before he graduated, he smoked cigarettes in a red pack, could have been winstons, might have been marlboros, who knows. from 1959, when he graduated high school, all the way up through 1967, because remember, he did not meet mrs. piendle until 1968, no one really knows what brands he was smoking as his regular brand. nobody who testified saw him often enough in that period to know. there is no evidence that he was smoking a brand that was manufactured by either of the defendants in this case, and it would be unfair and contrary to the evidence -- remember, that is what you have to decide this case on, in accordance with the law -- contrary to the evidence to assign responsibility to reynolds or philip morris for any of mr. piendle's smoking during that period. okay. mrs. piendle meets him in 1968. at that time, mr. piendle is smoking marlboros, a brand made by philip morris, but there is no evidence about how long he had been smoking it. in 1969, mrs. piendle influences mr. piendle to switch to winston cigarettes, which he smokes until 1974. keep in mind what i said earlier, dr. burns testified if mr. piendle had quit smoking before 1975, just about the time he switches to raleigh cigarettes, which were made by my client, he more likely than not would have avoided his lung cancer from smoking. so in fairness, if you find that the defendant should share responsibility with mr. piendle for his smoking, i would suggest that it might be appropriate to focus on his smoking after 1974. in 1979, he switched to doral, again, a reynolds product, which he smoked until 1985, and then in 1985, a switch again from doral to merit cigarettes, a brand made by philip morris. 7012 1 so if you look at the brand history in this period from 1975 to 1989, it is roughly two-thirds reynolds, one-third philip morris. okay. damages. two kinds of damages. there are compensatory damages and punitive damages. compensatory damages, as you have heard, and nobody really disagrees, are meant to compensate the plaintiff in this case for her injury. and to determine the amount of damages, compensatory damages to be awarded, you should consider what the plaintiff has lost and you should compensate her for that loss if you get this far. the determination that you will make will fully compensate her for that loss. that is why the law provided to you by the court calls these damages compensatory damages. so if you deliberate and decide to award compensatory damages, the amount that you award will be the amount that you all agree is necessary to make the plaintiff whole. if you decide she has met her burden, you must decide how much money it will take to do that. it is our legal system's way. and that is a hard task. this is perhaps the most difficult area of this case for you to separate from your emotions -- if we can have the demonstrative, please, will. -- from reason. the court -- let us talk about that. do not let sympathy influence your decision. it must be based on the evidence that had been received and the law on which the court has instructed you. your duty is to be just and fair. and, again, reynolds is just as much interested in justice as mrs. piendle is. so as the court has instructed you, and you will see when you go to your road map, compensatory damages are only to compensate mrs. piendle for her loss of companionship, starting at the time her husband passed away, and the pain and suffering that accompanies that loss. under the law you are not allowed, as mr. barnhart i think said, to consider the pain and suffering and loss of any other witness who testified here, no matter how genuine and how deep that loss is. you cannot consider tracy piendle, you cannot consider mr. edward piendle, the sole focus is on mrs. piendle. and, again, the sole focus when it comes to mrs. piendle is for her loss of companionship and the accompanying pain and suffering. so there is a couple of things i want you to keep in mind as you think about what would be fair. i think first you should keep in mind the nature of the relationship between mr. and mrs. piendle prior to his death. as of 1975, mr. piendle was one hundred percent disabled due to his 12 crohn's disease. he received va disability benefits, and mrs. piendle continues to receive a pension from the va. he spent his time at home, and mrs. piendle worked for 25 years as a nurse, provided support and services for both of them. and even when they were home at the same time, they spent time apart. you heard the testimony from mrs. piendle, he was kind of a sports nut, she did not like sports. so, when they watched tv, they would do it in separate rooms. she would watch her programs. he would watched his. mr. piendle also worked in the garage with his woodworking. mr. piendle's physical condition, the crohn's disease, the arthritis that prompted their move down to florida in 1980 impacted the quality of their life together, and it would have continued to do so as they got older. now, mrs. piendle is asking you to award money for her loss of companionship after mr. piendle's death in 1996. that means you also need to consider her life after 1996. she continued to work for eight years after mr. piendle died in the same nursing job she had for 17 years before his death. she owned her own business, the lawn business for a while, and she invested in real estate. she started dating about a year after mr. piendle passed away, using online dating services, and she had a ten-year relationship with a man named jorge rodriguez, who she met in 1998, and that is the picture, you may recall, from christmas. now, you heard a little about mr. rodriguez, or jorge, during this trial, and i want to talk about that. if we could have defense demonstrative 250, will. okay. let us talk about it. i think this is confusing, kind of confusing me, and i knew the background. mrs. piendle was deposed in june of 2009, and she was asked whether she had any serious relationships, and she did not mention mr. rodriguez. she also did not mention him when she corrected her deposition transcript in october of 2009. in the meantime, defense had deposed tracy piendle, and she was asked about any serious relationships her mom may have had since her father's death. and tracy piendle -- mr. scarola: i'm sorry, your honor, but i must object. that was not part of the evidence. there was no such question asked of tracy piendle. mr. biersteker: well, it was. tracy piendle, not mrs. piendle, told about mr. rodriguez. now, after tracy piendle's deposition, we sent mrs. piendle written interrogatories, 23 those questions, and the questions followed up and asked about jorge. the interrogatory responses are in evidence. you will have them in the jury room. defendants had to ask those questions, and -- these written questions, because mrs. piendle did not tell us in her deposition or when she corrected her deposition about the relationship with jorge. so in december 2009, she signed her answers to those questions, and in may 2010 she amended the answers to provide a more accurate picture about her relationship with jorge. now, let us talk about what happened at trial. at trial, mrs. piendle admitted on cross-examination by mr. henk that she did not mention jorge in her deposition. and then plaintiff's counsel did a redirect examination of mrs. piendle, knowing that the defendants would not be able to ask any more questions, and they made it sound as though mrs. piendle had been forthcoming about the relationship with jorge all along, pointing to those very interrogatory responses, but not telling you the chronological sequence or the background. and i do not really know a nice way to say what i'm about to say, so i'm just going to say it: that testimony was misleading. so the defense was forced to call mrs. piendle back to the stand in our case, so that you could hear the rest of the story, and that prompted mrs. piendle to testify that her relationship with jorge was not serious because it was not committed. if we could have defense exhibit -- i think it is 255. now -- "well, i was not really ready to settle down again and have a committed relationship." really? this was a ten-year relationship, four years of which involved romantic activity. next demonstrative, please, will, 255a. and this is the interrogatory response. again, you have got it. but if this relationship was not committed, why did mrs. piendle break it off because jorge wanted to date another person? i do not know. it sounds pretty committed to me to see just one person for four years. tracy, when she testified before you, said it was a serious relationship, said it was one that her mother was unlikely to forget. tracy said that mrs. piendle and jorge lived together for four years, which mrs. piendle denies. and you know what, i do not really care whether jorge's mail was delivered to the same house as mrs. piendle's or not. a relationship was serious enough that tracy testified that jorge had become like a grandfather to her daughter. 8 now, this evidence plainly goes to the quality of mrs. piendle's life after the death of mr. piendle. it is a sign that she was moving on starting in 1998. but it is more than that. it is more than that. it goes to the credibility of mrs. piendle. part of your job as judges of the facts is to assess the credibility of witnesses. if i could have demonstrative 275. there it is. you can look at the frankness or lack of frankness of the witness, any interest the witness may have in the outcome of the case, the reasonableness of the testimony of the witness considered in light of all of the evidence. you can reject all or part of the witness' testimony and ask yourself, why did mrs. piendle say "no" in june 2009 in her deposition? why did not she mention jorge? why did she and her counsel try to make it seem like she had been forthcoming about jorge all along. and i submit there is no answers to those questions that does not raise significant questions or issues about the credibility of mrs. piendle. you must consider that. i heard ms. baker-barnes up here suggesting that maybe $23 million was what they wanted. she said a million dollars a year, at least for each and every one of those years. she was up here on the stand portraying her marriage to mr. piendle as essentially perfect, the yin and yang. remember that? never mind the one-year separation, never mind the divorce filing, never mind that she said she was attracted to mr. piendle initially, in part, because he was older and secure in life. the clerk: counselor, ten minutes. mr. biersteker: thank you. finally, mrs. piendle testified she was engaged to a man named jerry medina in 19 -- 2005. that is another serious commitment. that is another sign that someone is moving on with their life. time, in short, has helped to heal, as one would hope it would, mrs. piendle's loss of companionship. the evidence has shown you that she is gone through that healing process following her husband's death 14 years ago. based on the evidence, let me suggest some numbers. it is understandable and reasonable that the first year after mr. piendle's death was probably the most difficult for mrs. piendle. should you decide to award any compensatory damages to mrs. piendle, a fair amount of compensation for that year that you should consider would be $150,000 that first year. mrs. piendle began dating after mr. piendle passed away and met jorge rodriguez 19 shortly thereafter. she had a long-term close relationship with him, four years of which involved romantic activity. if tracy is right, they lived together. it was a serious commitment on her part. her romantic relationship with jorge came to an end, but shortly thereafter she met and became engaged to jerry medina in 2005, and that was an even greater commitment on her part. so this was a roughly ten-year period, from the time mrs. piendle began dating in 1997, and the end of her engagement in approximately 2007 to mr. medina. the healing process continued. i think a fair amount of compensation for that ten-year period would be approximately $75,000 a year for ten years, totaling three-quarters of a million. and finally, plaintiff introduced evidence about the joint life expectancy of mr. and mrs. piendle. it would have gone to 2019, 23 years after his death in 1996. you had the opportunity to hear about her -- the events in her life after the last 14 years since mr. piendle passed away, and from that you have an insight about what will occur for the last nine years of that 23-year period, from now until 2019. so let us talk about the 12 years starting in 2007, nine of which remain. starting three years ago in 2007, roughly after the engagement ended with mr. medina, until 2009, the healing process for mrs. piendle will continue. she will continue to enjoy life, as she did with jorge, jerry, her friends and her family. she will still have the opportunity to travel, visit friends and relatives and live a full and complete life. for this remaining 12 year of joint life expectancy from 2007 to 2019, a fair amount of compensation for mrs. piendle should be approximately $50,000 for each and every one of those years. now, if you add up everything i have suggested, i think it comes out to about $1.5 million. that is a significant sum. i ask that you consider it. all right. punitive damages. i'm in the home stretch. as you already heard, punitive damages serve two purposes, punishment and deterrence. punitive damages are not to compensate mrs. piendle. the compensatory damages are for that. but she, not the american cancer society or anybody else, would receive any punitive damages that you award in order to punish and deter the defendants. as the court has explained in the instructions, punitive damages cannot be imposed for conduct that was not a legal cause of mr. piendle's death. i'm going to say it again. you cannot award punitive damages based upon what you think was bad behavior in the 4 air. the conduct for which punitive damages, if any, should be awarded for conduct, if any, that you find was a legal cause of mr. piendle's death. so just to pick an example, if you find that concealment was not a legal but-for cause of mr. piendle's continued smoking and lung cancer, there can be no punitive damages for concealment. okay. you must focus on that conduct, and you have to focus on the character of the conduct. defendants are liable for punitive damages only if plaintiff additionally proves that the conduct was so great, gross and flagrant as to amount to reckless disregard, conscious indifference. you saw that slide when mr. barnhart was up here. remember that here plaintiff's burden of proof is much higher than for the other issues in the case. it is clear and convincing evidence, again defined in the jury instructions. there is no absolute or automatic right to punitive damages. plaintiff has to meet that higher burden. and let us talk about that. has she done it? i do not think it will surprise you, i suggest the answer is no. let us talk about it. we have already discussed that plaintiff has not proven legal cause. i'm not going to repeat all that, but i want to -- want you to remember mrs. piendle's key admissions on this subject. give it a minute, will. next slide, please. let us talk about the character of my client's conduct, r.j. reynolds. let us talk about the first one, design. reynolds' cigarette design efforts were responsive to the suggestions of the public health community. dr. figlar must have said that two dozen times when he was on the stand, and that includes efforts to reduce tar and nicotine. is not it true that you agree in 1997 -- wait. what is that? wrong slide. wrong slide. as dr. burns testified -- that was right. i'm sorry. i'm getting hungry. that is a sign that i've been up here too long. as dr. burns testified, he thought in 1997 that it had been proven beyond a reasonable doubt that low-tar cigarettes reduce risk of lung cancer. i mean, you cannot look back with the benefit 20-20 hindsight. you heard how dr. burns and some other members of the public health community today do not think that lower tar or filtered cigarettes matter. that is not the environment. we keep hearing it -- well, take it back to the time when mr. piendle was in the 1950s. well, take the defense back, too, and the public health 15 community's clear and consistent message throughout the time that mr. piendle was alive was that the lower tar and nicotine cigarettes were less hazardous. that is true, as dr. burns is testifying here, even after mr. piendle was deceased. were they safe? no. but less hazardous. that is what we thought. all right. advertising. cigarettes are a legal product. they are legal to manufacture, they are legal to advertise, they are legal to sell, and, oh, by the way, r.j. reynolds does not sell directly to consumers, for the most part. their sales are to retailers and wholesalers. you are not here to decide whether it is legal or illegal to sell cigarettes or whether reynolds should be punished for doing so. our society decided a long time ago that it is legal to sell and advertise and manufacture cigarettes, and that is a decision we continue to adhere to. congress, the surgeon general, and the public health community have also made the decision to let the public know about the health risks of smoking and to let every adult decide for herself or himself whether to smoke, just us as mr. piendle did. and advertising was one way in which reynolds and other cigarette manufacturers competed for market share. that is not gross or flagrant or reckless conduct. it is competition. the clerk: counsel. mr. biersteker: how many minutes? the clerk: three. mr. biersteker: shoot. i may have to steal a couple of minutes of my colleague's time, if he will allow me. let us talk about concealment. we talked about that, a genuine scientific dispute up until at least 1964. the tobacco industry's position was one that was shared by others, including the american medical association, the national cancer institute, and scientists at other institutions. after 1964, the fact that smoking caused lung cancer and other diseases was hardly a secret. the vast majority of people, including mr. piendle, knew and believed otherwise and the industry's stubborn adherence to the not proving point increasingly became a source of ridicule. denials of addiction started in 1988. they were understandable. i do not know what they had to do with mr. piendle. and all this occurred against the backdrop of publications of scientific research, innovations and design, presentations to government authorities, cooperation with the national cancer institute, and so forth. plaintiffs did not prove, by clear and convincing evidence, that punishment is warranted. 7029 let us talk about the second function of punitive damages, deterrence. since 1998, there are 60 million pages of tobacco industry documents that have been made public, and the number grows daily. as new documents written now, it added. concealment cannot occur. there is also no need to deter the defendants from making statements to the general public denying that smoking causes disease or is addictive. for ten years, the defendants' web sites have publicly stated that smoking causes disease, including lung cancer and is addictive. you should also know tobacco institute and the council for tobacco research are gone since 1998. the people that authored many of the documents you have seen, claude teague, frank colby, murray senkus, alan rodgman, and my client are gone. mr. scarola: i'm sorry, your honor. i do not believe there is any evidence in the record with regard to those matters. nor is that good conduct allegation appropriate argument for this stage of the proceedings. the court: okay. i'll sustain as to the first basis. mr. biersteker: all right. let us talk about what dr. figlar told you about reynolds, his consistent efforts to reduce the inherent risks of conventional tobacco-burning cigarettes; about premier and eclipse, the tobacco-heating cigarettes; about encouraging smokers who will not quit to switch to smokeless tobacco products, such as camel snus that mr. scarola put on the elmo. the smokeless tobacco products that, as dr. figlar told you, pose lesser health risks, including a lesser risk of oral cancer than conventional cigarettes; about niconovum, whose products, if approved by the fda, will help smokers quit. reynolds, of course, is still a tobacco company. that is legal. but given what you have heard, given its decades long pursuit of reduced-harm products, reduced-harm cigarettes; given its encouragement to those who choose to use tobacco products to migrate to reduced-risk smokeless ones; given the plans to provide assistance through niconovum to those who want to quit; given the position on the company's website for ten years that smoking causes disease and is addictive, i propose there is no reason to impose punitive damages to deter r.j. reynolds from the kind of conduct that occurred decades ago. all right. i got literally one minute. i do not know what mr. scarola or whomever else is going to do the rebuttal case for plaintiff is going to say. and i do not get another chance to talk to you. this is it. i can see that 11 you are all disappointed. but do me a favor, as you listen to mr. scarola, please think about what i might have said in response, based upon the evidence you have heard and the instructions on the law that the court has given you. and let me close where i began: thanks for listening. i know it s been a little bit of a long haul this morning, and you are not done yet. i thank you for being fair, for being impartial, for being dispassionate judges of the facts and deciding this case on the evidence and the law. and on behalf of reynolds and everybody on the defense side, and, i'm sure, plaintiffs, too, thank you truly for your service. we appreciate it. thanks. the court: you are not done yet, but you get a break. so we will have our lunch break now, a little bit late. i apologize. we will be in recess until 3:00 o'clock. so we will be in recess for an hour and ten minutes. please leave your notepads on your chair. please remember the very important instruction not to begin discussing the case with either yourselves or anyone else. you are not to have any contact with anyone associated with the case, not to review any media or listen to any media, should you exposed to it, about the case over the break, and we will see you back at 3:00 o'clock. thank you very much. closing argument mr. kelly: thank you, your honor. i want to make sure your computer is working. the court: okay. start over again. mr. kelly: take two. the court: please give your attention to philip morris' closing argument. mr. kelly: may it please the court. thank you, your honor, and counsel and mrs. piendle. ladies and gentlemen, good afternoon. so good to be able to look you in the eyes for a change rather than pass you in the hallway looking at my feet, so i'm going to take full advantage of that this afternoon. i have, according to our clerk, gina, 58.3 minutes to talk to you this afternoon. so i'm going to get right to it. i think if i'm going to talk half as long as everybody else, i'll get twice as much attention. mr. scarola: is that the way it works? mr. kelly: i want to thank you for that attention right at the beginning on behalf of my client, philip morris, my partner, mr. henk, and i appreciate your patience, and thank you in advance for the rest of the afternoon paying attention. the plaintiff's lawyers in this case, mrs. piendle's lawyers in this case, have suggested to you that you award against philip morris an enormous amount of money because mr. piendle smoked, on occasion, philip morris products during his 30 years of smoking. on behalf of philip morris, our response is that we have, that is, philip morris has no legal responsibility under the evidence you have been presented and the law you have been given to pay mrs. piendle any money whatsoever for the cigarettes that her husband smoked made by philip morris over the course of his smoking history. let me tell you why. there is nothing that philip morris did or did not do that caused mr. piendle to start smoking, no. 1. there is nothing that philip morris did or did not do, other than sell cigarettes, which i'll talk about later. there is nothing that philip morris did or did not do that caused mr. piendle 6 to continue smoking those philip morris cigarettes; and thirdly, there is nothing that philip morris did or did not do that prevented mr. piendle from quitting smoking. when charlie piendle smoked his first cigarette sometime in the 1950s, the marlboro cowboy had not yet been born. when mr. piendle smoked his first cigarettes in the 1950s, they were still selling cigarettes one at a time at the corner store. when mr. piendle started smoking, his family did not have a television set. those are some of the facts in the evidence that you have been given. so much of what you have been told about mr. piendle is based upon the memories that his friends and family have, and those memories date back some 50 years or more, and you are being asked, in large part, to base some of your decisions in this case on memories that go back 50 years. well, memories fade over time. gaps in recollection grow over time. you may think back just in this case, it is just over a month ago when voir dire took place, upstairs in the big courtroom, and some of the things that were said to you about this case then, if you stop and think about it, may not be that clear right now, may have started to fade. things that were said in opening statement, mr. barnhart's representation that mr. piendle started smoking and continued smoking because he was weak until he finally became strong in 1989. some of you may remember that and others may have to search your notes, and that is just 30 days ago. well, imagine, then, the difficulty of remembering things that happened not 30 days ago, but 30 years ago, and to be precise about things that happened 50 years ago. so as you consider the evidence of things that happened a long time ago, not just with respect to mr. piendle, but with respect to many of these documents and events that happened in the '50s and '60s that you have seen, authored by witnesses who are long since dead or left the company, that attempting to figure out not only what happened a long time ago, but why it happened a long time ago is a very hard thing to do. and so you are going to have to figure out when you go into the jury room how much weight on the scales of justice distant memories are going to have. let me give you just one example from one of the first witnesses in the case, mr. cabral, babe cabral. you may remember that some 40 or 50 years ago, he remembered a marlboro cowboy ad in his neighborhood. now, there is no doubt that at some time there probably was a marlboro cowboy ad in his neighborhood. there is also no doubt that the marlboro cowboy and marlboro country campaign did not start until 1962. 1962, charlie piendle was 21 years old, he was 17 in the marines. now, it could be that mr. cabral was remembering some other ad involving a man and a marlboro, that is all possible, but i do remember one of the questions he was asked was, is not it hard to remember back then? and you may remember that he sighed and said, yeah, it is a long time ago, and requiring mr. cabral to remember whether it was 52 years ago or 58 years ago or 56 years ago, i think is asking too much of anybody's memory, trying to go back into their childhood, especially when most of those witnesses would not have thought anything about charlie piendle's smoking until a couple of years ago when this lawsuit was brought. nobody followed charlie piendle around with a notepad, making notes of his awareness and knowledge and beliefs about smoking, making notes about his interest in smoking, why he smoked, why he quit, why he did not quit. nobody's following him around and making notes about what actually he believed or said at the time. there is a lot of memories that you are being asked to rely upon from times gone by. okay. let me address the substance of the claims against philip morris, and what i'd like you to do as i move through the substance of the claims against philip morris is to remember, and bear this in mind, that if philip morris did not exist, if philip morris had never existed, and there never were any cigarettes with the brand names of marlboro or merit or virginia slims, the overwhelming weight of the evidence is that mr. piendle would have smoked other available cigarettes, if philip morris brands never existed. remember that when he started smoking, charlie's father rolled his own cigarettes when he was not smoking nonfiltered, charlie's mother smoked menthols, his friends, including his closest friends also smoked, but none of them smoked marlboros. there is some testimony that he may have smoked marlboros on occasion in high school, but there is no testimony that if marlboro were not available, then he would have quit smoking rather than smoke another available brand. if philip morris, in december of 1953, when they came out of the plaza motel, decided to shut the company down, fire all the employees, cancel all the contracts with the farmers and the wholesalers and the truckers and let all the employees go, is there any evidence, from what you know about charlie piendle, what you have been told about charlie piendle by the plaintiffs, that would lead you to believe he would never have started smoking or would have stopped? now, all the testimony from the plaintiffs is exactly the opposite. there is no evidence 2 in the record that philip morris' marketing targeted young charlie piendle. the only evidence of any male ad is from 1956 or 1957 where there is the really angry smoker in the ad, and there is no indication that charlie piendle ever saw that. you will recall that that was at the time when marlboro was transitioning from a lady's brand to a man's brand, and still six years before marlboro country came into being and the marlboro cowboy rode across the west in marlboro country. you were shown the julie london tv commercial. now, julie london -- and you were not told when it was run, except it was run in the '50s, whether that was for the ladies or the men, i do not know, i certainly liked the ad, and in the 1950s, i'm sure my dad liked the ad, but i do not believe any adolescent liked the ad. and, will, can we have the first slide? and you do not have to take my word for it, this is the plaintiff's expert, dr. cummings. "it is your opinion that the julie london ad singing the marlboro song in the darkened bar in the 1950s was an attempt to appeal to underage smokers?" answer: "i would not say that, no." did mr. piendle's family even have a television in the 1950s? this is his brother's testimony, remember his brother is 11 years younger. so in the '50s, this is what he recalled, "we did not have television. the only thing on the radio were those shows our parents listened to, except once in a while, i listened to floyd patterson fights with my father." those were the only ads you were shown from philip morris before mr. piendle left for the marines and pretty much disappears from the evidence until about 1968. the instructions you have is that the defendants have a right to advertise and they cannot be liable unless there is something false, misleading, or deceitful in their statements. there is nothing false, misleading, or deceitful in any of the ads you have seen from philip morris that are in the 1950s, either the tattoo man or the julie london ad, and there is no connection whatsoever to mr. piendle. so point no. 1, there is nothing that philip morris did or did not do that was a legal cause of mr. piendle's beginning to smoke. if philip morris is not responsible for mr. piendle beginning to smoke, then where is the evidence along the way of any wrongful conduct on the part of philip morris that is connected to mr. piendle smoking? i submit that there is a complete absence of any evidence connecting philip morris and mr. piendle in any wrongful conduct on the part of philip morris. 13 let us review mr. piendle's smoking history with respect -- specifically to philip morris. his friend, babe cabral. they did not smoke marlboro when growing up. he thinks mr. piendle smoked marlboro in the '70s. his brother remembers seeing mr. piendle with marlboro during visits once or twice a year in the '70s. his daughter, who was born in 1970, remembered the marlboro when living in connecticut in the '70s, of course, she would have been less than 10. so she deferred to her mother, admits her mother would have a better recollection of the brands mr. piendle smoked. his sister, christy, seems to recall a red pack that could have been marlboro or another, sometime in high school, and his best friend with whom he smoked in high school has no memory of marlboro. and then his wife, mrs. piendle. when she met mr. piendle in 1968, he was smoking marlboro. within the year, he switched to her brand. throughout their married life, mrs. piendle bought the cigarettes they smoked. so from 1969 on, mrs. piendle bought the cigarettes. she never bought marlboro. there is testimony that mrs. piendle bought merit in 1985 to 1989, and i'm going to talk about that separately in a minute. there is testimony that mrs. piendle bought virginia slims and mr. piendle had a virginia slim from time to time, but when and how much is nowhere to be found in the record. one thing that is certain is that from 1968 on, when mrs. piendle can, for the first time, identify marlboro smoking for that year, there would have been warnings on the packs of marlboros he smoked, just like on every pack of cigarette after 1966. counsel, on opening of the closing, mr. barnhart, mentioned brand loyalty, made a big point about brand loyalty. i think it is an important point too, because in one respect, mr. piendle is very unique. in many respects he is unique, but as a smoker, he is unique in this respect. he apparently had no brand loyalty whatsoever. there is not any history that he has, over his 30 years, where he has latched onto a particular brand of cigarette and smokes that cigarette exclusively. among the brands that he smoked were camel, lucky strikes, pall mall, winston, marlboro, carlton, salem, raleigh, doral, merit, virginia slims, tareyton, viceroy, and capri. so the suggestion that he had a connection to a particular brand because of advertising or marketing of that brand is not supported in this evidence that the plaintiffs presented to you. he did not smoke certainly any of the philip morris brands with any regularity. it did not appear that he smoked any brands with 24 any regularity or loyalty over the course of his smoking history. so let us go back to the 1950s. and assume that mr. piendle walks into the corner store in connecticut when he is 16 and legal age, and he can buy cigarettes at 16 in connecticut back then, and he goes up to the counter and he asks the clerk if he can have a pack of marlboro, and the clerk says, i'm sorry, sir, i do not know what you are talking about, philip morris does not exist. if philip morris did not exist in the '50s, would mr. piendle, based upon what you know about mr. piendle from the evidence the plaintiff's gave you, say, thank you very much, i'm going to quit smoking, or would he say, i think i'll take another brand? in the '60s, in the '70s, in the '80s, throughout his entire smoking history, on those occasions when he would have a marlboro, and there were occasions when people saw him smoking marlboro, if marlboro were not there, would he have quit smoking or would he have smoked another available brand of cigarettes? if he had never smoked marlboro and just smoked other brands, is there any evidence in the record that those other brands would have been somewhat safer somehow? was there anything unique or unusual about marlboro that made marlboros somehow more dangerous or less safe than other brands? well, here's what the plaintiffs told you on that point. are all commercial cigarettes equally dangerous? dr. burns, yes; dr. benowitz, yes; and dr. cummings yes. if he had never smoked marlboros, if marlboros never existed and he chose other available cigarettes, would those other cigarettes have been less addicting than marlboros, or did marlboro have some special or unique feature that made marlboros somehow more addicting than other brands? again, the plaintiffs provided you with this information. are all commercial cigarettes equally addictive? dr. burns, yes; dr. benowitz, yes; and dr. cummings, yes. from my demonstratives, probably too much of an eye test for you to see, but i have got the trial transcript citations down at the bottom. the point that i'm making is a point that all the lawyers you heard from so far have made, and that is, how do you apply the concept of legal cause to the evidence that you have been provided? legal cause is what defines legal responsibility in this case. legal cause is that principle of law by which some wrongful conduct or some product that may have caused harm is connected to legal responsibility to pay for that harm. 9 and it is defined very specifically in the instructions, and i think we remember 30 days ago, we may have had a discussion about the need to understand the definitions, whether it is a definition of addiction or now a definition of legal cause before you try and reach a conclusion about whether legal cause exists. so legal cause has a portion of the instruction that repeats itself throughout the instructions. so in this blank spot you might see addiction or negligence, for example, and then the definition of legal cause. so let us say negligence is a legal cause of loss, injury, or damage if it directly and in natural and continuous sequence produces or contributes substantially to producing such loss, injury, or damage such that it can reasonably be said that but for the negligence, the loss, injury, or damage would not have occurred. that is a mouthful, and it might take a while to understand it, so i've broken it down a little bit. a is a legal cause of b if it directly and in natural and continuous sequence produces or contributes substantially to producing b, such that it can reasonably be said that but for a, b would not have occurred. all right. we are getting maybe a little bit more simplified. but for cause in the chain of causation, a is in the chain of causation leading to b. the question for legal cause is, if a goes away, does b go away? if a goes away and b goes away, then a was a but-for cause of b. if a goes away and b does not go away, then a is not a but-for cause of b. let me give you an example. i've got to be at work at 9:00 o'clock in the morning, so i get up and i shower and i have breakfast and i read the paper and i go to the train station and i get on the train on the marlboro car, and i ride to work and i get to work at 8:30, half an hour early. the question is, is getting on the marlboro car a legal cause of my getting to work early? well, the answer to that question, you take a away and see what happens. well, i got up, showered, breakfast, paper, went to the train station, did not get on the marlboro car, got on the other cigarette car on the train, arrives at the train station the same time, i arrive at work at exactly the same time. so if there is another cigarette car available for me to take on that train, the fact that i took the marlboro car is not a but-for cause of my getting to work at 8:30. all right. let us bring it back to this case. mr. piendle got on the cigarette train in the 1950s, and from time to time got on -- got on or got in the marlboro car on that train. he did not stay in there very long. he 20 got in a lot of other cigarette cars on that train over the course of his 30-year history. is getting on that marlboro car or getting in that marlboro car on the occasions he did a but-for cause of his getting lung cancer, or if marlboro did not exist, if marlboro and philip morris never existed, would b still have happened, would he still have smoked, would he just have chosen other cigarettes, or would he have quit because he could not get marlboro? all the evidence you have in the case suggests that he would have selected one of the many other brands he was wanting to smoke. there is no indication that if philip morris brands were not there, he would have stopped smoking. marlboro cigarettes are not a legal cause of mr. piendle's death because they can be removed from the chain of causation, and the result would not change at all. legal cause requires but-for causation, and the evidence just will not support the conclusion that but for smoking marlboros, mr. piendle would have been just fine. did any of the plaintiff's experts, dr. burns, dr. cummings or dr. benowitz, testify that smoking marlboro on the occasions he did was a substantial contributing factor and a but-for legal cause of mr. piendle's lung cancer? check your notes for those three witnesses, but i'll tell you what i think you are going to find, they did not. mrs. piendle's witnesses never attempted to tie the marlboro smoking as a legal cause of mr. piendle's lung cancer. in fact, the only witness who was asked a question that was somewhat similar was dr. benowitz, and i asked dr. benowitz this question. "all right. now, in 1964, if philip morris and reynolds had removed from the market all of their cigarette products, were there other cigarette products remaining?" answer: "yes." question: "were those cigarette products that remained in the absence of philip morris and reynolds products addicting?" "yes." "just as addicting as philip morris and reynolds products in your view?" answer: "yes." and i told you i was going to talk to you very briefly about merit. whether or not merit is a legal cause is also dependent upon not anything the defendants said, but what dr. burns said. you will remember dr. burns said that the lung cancer was caused by a long-term exposure to cigarette smoking, and that to have avoided getting lung cancer, mr. piendle would have had to have stopped 5 smoking in 1974. by 1985, by 1985, when -- i'm sorry, 1984, when mrs. piendle bought merits for the two of them, dr. burns indicated that mr. piendle had gone beyond the point of no return for his lung cancer. and so when you look at the chain of causation and you see the merits way down the end of the chain of causation, toward the end of the 30 years, dr. burns' testimony indicates that if you take out all of the merit smoking from '84 on, mr. piendle's lung cancer still occurs, and that is the information provided by the plaintiffs that you put into the legal cause standard to try and assess whether the smoking of philip morris products are a legal cause of mr. piendle's lung cancer. there is also some testimony about virginia slims, but there is not any evidence of how much or when sufficient to allow you to determine whether it is a legal cause of the lung cancer, where it fits into the chain of causation at all. and that is the plaintiff's burden to establish, legal cause is the plaintiff's burden to establish. none of what i've talked about so far does the defendants have any burden to establish. these are all elements the plaintiff has to establish. all right. new topic. plaintiffs made claims about philip morris and the claim that philip morris concealed information from the public health community. and i'm going to start this discussion, if i could, with one of the jurors' questions to dr. cummings after he finished his entire day and a half or so of testimony. "what responsibility do you believe the public health community or u.s. government agencies have to smokers of the '50s and '60's, and if so, what?" and dr. cummings said, well, their responsibility was to support research, the smoking, and basically put out information that they had based on that research and regulate the -- based on the findings from that research, as was made public to them as to the actions that would affect the public health's health. and then he said the job of the government is to protect the government's health. when you go through the evidence, please remember that the public health community consists of a lot of different people and organizations, and over time it is not particularly clear that all those organizations, all those members of the public health community agreed with each other about what was the best way to protect the public's health. and certainly what they think today is different than what they thought back in the '50s, '60s and '70s. 16 so when you talk about -- when you assess and talk together about assessing the philip morris conduct with respect to the public health organizations, please remember what the public health organizations were saying at the time the conduct was going on and not at a later time. here's some examples. with respect to denicotinized products, dr. cummings supports it, the council for tobacco-free kids called it the most dangerous product on the market, and the tobacco working group thought rather than denicotinizing cigarettes, the nicotine should be increased. you may remember that from the nci tobacco working group testimony. should cigarettes be banned? dr. cummings says sure, and the companies should be driven out of business, but the surgeon general and dr. burns recognize that society accepts smoking as a legal adult personal health choice. this may have surprised some of you. with respect to whether smoking causes an increase in lung cancer risks for women, dr. cummings says the health risks were established by 1958. dr. burns, check your notes, says there was confusion up until the surgeon general's report in 1980. two members of the public health community coming up with completely different opinions. back to the '50s. dr. burns agreed that the public health community in the '50s was promoting the development and marketing of low-tar and nicotine cigarettes. dr. wynder had recommended that -- in 1957, that in the '60s, tar and nicotine levels should be reduced by forty percent. and you saw that indeed they were. and that was what was supposed to be done back in the '50s and '60s, that is what the companies did in response to the public health community's urging them to do so to protect the public health. then plaintiff claimed that philip morris concealed from the public health community the fact that people who switched to a lower tar and nicotine cigarette may smoke differently or smoke more cigarettes. please remember, the 1979 surgeon general's report in which the surgeon general noted that the preponderance of the scientific evidence continues, as in 1966, to suggest that cigarettes with lower tar and nicotine are less hazardous. it has become clear in the years since, however, that in presenting this information to the public, they should be warned that in shifting to a less hazardous cigarette, they may, in fact, increase their hazard if they begin smoking more cigarettes or inhaling more deeply. so the surgeon general of the public 7063 1 health community was not uninformed about this issue in 1979 or in 1966. in 1981, the point was reinforced once again. the plaintiff claims that philip morris knew and concealed from the public health community the fact that the smoking machines that measured the tar and nicotine yields do not smoke like people smoke. philip morris knew that, but did not tell the public health community. here is a letter to the ftc concerning smoking machines in which the government is informed, the ogg method, one of the methods for measuring tar and nicotine, does not and cannot measure these many variations in human smoking habits. it does not measure particulate matter or nicotine in the smoke generated while the cigarette is not being puffed. it does not measure all the particulate matter or nicotine in any cigarette, but only that in the smoke drawn in the standardized machine smoking according to the prescribed method. these basic standardizations are well-understood by all technologists in talking about any testing method. and philip morris is one of the signatories on that letter. we talked a little bit about the national cancer institute's tobacco working group, 1968 to 1978, which recommended design changes for a less hazardous cigarette, including reconstituted tobacco, expanded tobacco, porous paper, ventilation on the filter, improved filters, all of which were incorporated in philip morris brands through the '60s, the '70s, and '80s, and throughout that time period and into the '80s -- throughout the '80s, the tar and nicotine levels were driven downward for the products that were made available. the clerk: counselor, 20 minutes. mr. kelly: i'm sorry? 20, thank you. and there is no design improvement that has been identified by any of the witnesses, dr. burns, dr. cummings, dr. benowitz, that was not incorporated into a product by philip morris. we will talk a little bit about the denicotinized cigarettes that philip morris designed, manufactured, marketed. dr. benowitz, dr. cummings talked a lot about it. put them on the market, nobody smoked them. they went into storage for years. dr. benowitz needed some low-nicotine cigarettes for his research, asked philip morris for them, and they provided them to him, no strings attached. that is -- i do not think that can be characterized as not cooperating with the public health community, especially somebody like dr. benowitz, a noted researcher in the field of nicotine research. 12 let me talk a little bit about some of the documents you have been shown. this is a 1961 dr. wakeham document that had the carcinogens listed that had been reported in literature. you were told that philip morris did not provide the surgeon general's committee with a list of carcinogens that were contained in this document. that is why we had dr. farone's videotape testimony provided to you in our case, to establish that, yes, indeed, a list of carcinogens consisting of almost 99 percent of all the carcinogens they were aware of, or that were known, was provided to the surgeon general's committee by philip morris. there is a claim that philip morris concealed information about nicotine, and i'm going to go through this very quickly, without speaking too fast, i hope, but in summary form. in 1972 -- actually, in 1969, document in evidence, philip morris' research chief asked the board of directors for funding to do scientific research into why people smoke. by 1972, the seminar in the caribbean organized by the tobacco industry inviting all -- inviting independent scientists and researchers, many of whom wrote with dr. benowitz on future papers, attended the seminar in 1972. the papers presented there were compiled in a book edited by dr. dunn of philip morris, and which were the subject of his speech in october of '72 and his newspaper interview in october of '72 containing the latest research on nicotine and its effect not only on the biology, but the psychology of smokers. articles in there that dr. benowitz found helpful when he began his research in 1975. the reason i bring that up is that this is the absolute opposite of concealment, going to a seminar, publishing a book, giving a speech, and giving interviews. plaintiffs have the burden to prove that mr. piendle relied on some statement from philip morris that was somehow concealed and would have made a difference if it had been removed from the chain of causation. mr. barnhart admitted in his closing, we cannot prove that mr. piendle relied on any particular statement. well, if that is the case, and i think that is the case, then he cannot meet mrs. piendle's burden of proof to establish that mr. piendle relied on a statement containing information that had been concealed. i mean, we got that admission in -- it came directly from mr. barnhart, i do not dispute it, there is no evidence that mr. piendle relied on anything that philip morris said throughout his smoking history, certainly not when he began, nothing in 1968, and after that, there is not even any indication that he was smoking philip morris 23 products on a regular basis. a word on the punitive damages claim. the plaintiffs have to establish by clear and convincing evidence. and i was listening to her honor as she read the instruction, and it is a very powerful and significant instruction when clear and convincing is defined. it is evidence that is precise, explicit, lacking in confusion, and of such weight that it produces a firm belief or conviction without hesitation, without hesitation. the evidence that the plaintiffs were going to show you to convince you that philip morris had some liability in this case was based upon the testimony from a dr. farone that mr. barnhart -- who mr. barnhart identified in his opening statement. dr. farone was a former executive with the company who was going to come in and testify in the plaintiff's case by videotape of the various alleged misdeeds the plaintiffs would be relying upon to prove punitive damages and liability in this case. dr. farone never testified in the plaintiff's case. when we brought him in our case -- mr. scarola: excuse me, your honor, i'm sorry. it is entirely improper for counsel to say what our intention was in calling dr. farone. there simply is no evidence of that, and we did not need to call dr. farone because the defense called them. mr. kelly: that is -- mr. scarola: i would ask the court to instruct the jury to disregard those comments. the court: i'll sustain the objection as far as suggesting an intention on plaintiff's part. mr. kelly: let me restate it then. in plaintiff's opening statement, you were introduced to dr. farone, an executive from philip morris, who was to be called in the plaintiff's case, according to plaintiff's opening statement. he was not called in plaintiff's case, he was called in the defense case to proven an allegation -- to disprove an allegation the plaintiffs made about submitting information to the surgeon general. he did not provide any detail about his time at philip morris with respect to the individuals he worked with, the documents he was involved with, the programs he was involved with, philip morris' intentions or activities with respect to the cigarettes that he worked on, nothing, absolutely nothing. all you are left with with respect to philip morris are documents from which snippets of catchy phrases have been taken and put on the scales. you look at those scales that mr. barnhart made use of in his opening, and i'd like you to do this. if plaintiff wants to 8 put all the little snippets and the catchy phrases from those documents on their side of the scale, then i think you ought to put in the entire document, the rest of the story, the document that puts those little snippets into context on the other side, and you would see that the full documentation completely outweighs the little snippets. when all is said and done with respect to whatever philip morris cigarettes you find that mr. piendle may have smoked, the basic claim is that philip morris manufactured and sold them and mr. piendle smoked them. the law is the manufacture and sale of cigarettes is a lawful activity; therefore, her honor instructs you that the defendants cannot be held liable merely for manufacturing, selling, or advertising cigarettes. gina, about how much time do i have? the clerk: ten minutes. mr. kelly: all right. perfect. thank you. now, i'm sure in the rebuttal closing that the plaintiff has, that they will spend a lot of time on the punitive damages aspect of the case and not very much time on the compensatory claim of mrs. piendle. the compensatory claim of mrs. piendle does not have a lot of evidence that the plaintiffs put in that they can spend much time talking with you about. it is the compensatory claim by mrs. piendle for the loss of her husband's companionship and the pain and suffering that accompanies that loss, that is the basis of the money claim in this case by mrs. piendle. now, you are not going to get to this issue if you find that the legal cause hurdles have not been overcome. but let me talk a little bit about the claim for compensatory damages. plaintiff has the burden of proof on this issue as well. this is -- this is kind of a unique issue for the plaintiff, because unlike the other claims in the case where you can -- you can call in documents from a website, for example, for this particular claim of mrs. piendle's loss of companionship, mrs. piendle and her family have pretty much all the evidence that is available. what is happened over the last 14 years, 14 years of holidays and birthdays and vacations, family gatherings, the defendants do not have any of that information. mrs. piendle has all that information. her family has that information. her daughter has that information. so this is an issue in which the plaintiffs have the burden of proof and all the evidence. you have to ask yourself whether when you were presented with the plaintiff's case on this issue, you were shown all the pieces of the puzzle that makes up 19 mrs. piendle's life over the last 14 years. when the plaintiffs were done with their case, did you know really anything at all about mrs. piendle's life over the last 14 years, or did you have to wait for the defendants to try and put before you evidence that is of a very difficult nature to inquire about, it is a very personal area for mrs. piendle, but -- but it is the claim that is being made that requires the evidence. mrs. piendle is making a claim, the defendants are not, but the defendants have an obligation to bring the evidence before you if we can, hopefully in a respectful, dignified way. i hope that is the case. i hope that is how you took it. but the burden of proof is on mrs. piendle. one of the jurors asked the question at the conclusion of her testimony: "how has your lifestyle been affected by charlie's death?" and mrs. piendle answered: "i have -- i do not have any best friend anymore." i'm sorry to repeat this, ms. piendle. "my daughter used to call us yin and yang. i do not have -- i do not have any more of my yang anymore. it is very lonely. i do not know how else to explain. it is not same." i do not believe there is any doubt that that is all true, just as i -- i do not think there is any doubt that all this is true as well. and this comes from the family and it -- it starts -- it is more piece of the puzzle, if you will, that the family had available to bring to you that we obtained and provided, things like when mrs. piendle began dating, her four-year relationship with mr. rodriguez, and the testimony from her daughter is that they lived together. that is what her daughter said. we presented that to you. her engagement to mr. medina, the end of the engagement, her continuing friendship with mr. rodriguez. i'm not suggesting that this is the complete picture of the -- of the puzzle over the last 14 years, but it is what we have available to provide you for your consideration. so when you consider, if you get to this point in your deliberations of how to value the loss of companionship, i think if you take what mrs. piendle provided and you take what mrs. piendle and her family provided over the last 14 years, i think it is reasonable to conclude that, respectfully, the loss of companionship and the loss from the loss of companionship, the pain and suffering from that loss is greater initially, and then begins to diminish over time as other aspects of her life begin to partially fill that void, and that we see over time that actually occurring. so the figures that mr. biersteker 4 provided you, i think, are consistent with the evidence provided over time, certainly over the last 14 years. there is no precision to the numbers he provided, but the sense and the logic of those numbers is consistent with what the evidence is. and so i would suggest to you that following that method, more damages would be allocated soon after, in 1996 and 1997, but as relationships begin to grow, the amount is lessened. now, whether it is a million or a million and a half over all of this time, i could not be that precise. but those numbers reflect the reality that we have been provided in this case, the evidence concerning what is been mrs. piendle's life from 1996 up to the present time. let me talk just a little bit about apportionment. the clerk: counsel, two minutes. mr. kelly: thank you very much. as dr. benowitz said, addiction is all about the loss of control, and the loss of control can only be assessed when someone attempts to exert control. the only time mr. piendle actually exerted control, as he is capable of doing, was in 1989. and when you look at the consequence of his exerting control and the lack of any physical withdrawal symptoms, the lack of any relapse over the balance of his life, the extent to which he was in control becomes apparent, and there is no explanation from the plaintiffs as to why he could not have exercised that control before 1989, 1988, 1987, except that he did not want to. mr. piendle, in his late '40s started riding motorcycles, started going to the gym, started changing his life. one of the things he did was quit smoking because he wanted to. that is the kind of person he was. nothing the defendants did and nothing philip morris did prevented him from quitting anytime sooner. it was his responsibility. counsel admits a partial responsibility. i think if you asked charlie piendle who is responsible for your smoking, and who is responsible for your quitting, charlie piendle would say, i am. i'm a hundred percent responsible. who else? now, plaintiffs have the burden of proof in this case, so plaintiffs get one more opportunity to try and convince you on all the issues that they are required to convince you on under the burden of proof. one thing i want you to remember is that no matter how impassioned or emotional or loud closing argument becomes, that you as jurors must remain detached, unemotional, objective. the lady justice is blind. she is blind to 15 emotion and she is blind to passion. she is also deaf to volume, but she hears the value that is in there. so please bear that in mind as you hear the rebuttal argument. we do not get a chance to rebut the rebuttal, as hard as that will be, but we do have the evidence you have seen, the evidence you have received. we have the law that her honor has given you. we have your unemotional, fair, objective assessment that you will begin tomorrow morning, next door, and that is enough for us. so i thank you very much this afternoon for your attention and your patience and your attention and patience over the last month we have been together. thank you very much. thank you, your honor.