mr. reilly: thank you, your honor. good afternoon, everybody. hope you had a good lunch. and thanks to ursula for letting me go first again. that is not lady-like, right, but... you know, i want to begin my closing argument just as mr. alvarez did, by thanking you guys for your service. we have taken you away from your homes, your jobs, your normal lives for three weeks. and you guys have asked great questions. you have paid wonderful attention. and of course this trial, that is exactly what we hoped you would do as jurors, so thanks. now, when i ended my opening statement in this case, i said to you that i was confident that what i was telling you in my opening statement was what the evidence was truly going to be. and i warned you that i was going to bring many of the same boards -- you probably cannot see them back there -- but many of the same boards that i used in my opening statement i was going to be using again in my closing argument because that is how confident i was that that is exactly what the evidence was going to be. i have more boards now but many of them are the same ones that i used in my opening statement because the evidence did turn out to be just exactly what i said. and now i'm going to supplement those with additional boards. same timeline with a few little additions to it. that is what i'm going to do. also, i warned you at the end of my opening statement that judge murphy was going to read to you a set of instructions that was going to be many pages long. you have them now and they are. and i said they would be filled with legal terms. and they are. and i said you would get a multiple-page verdict form as well and that that would be filled with legal terms too, and it is. now, i said to you that i thought we could condense all that down, and i used this same board, into just those two words, control and responsibility. now, aside from the medical issue in this case -- and because she put on all the evidence about it, ursula is going to talk to you about the medical issue in this case, aside from that that is exactly what this case turned out to be about. and this is not a class action. i realize that mr. alvarez in his closing argument talked about what he perceived to be a lot of misconduct on the part of -- he talked about the american public and americans in general. this is no longer a class action, ladies and gentlemen, and you know that now. you have the instructions. you have the verdict form -- or you will have the verdict form. you have the instructions. you know this is a case brought on behalf of one person and one person only. and it is about one smoker's decisions and one smoker only. and who is that? paul pollari. so the question then becomes control. who was in control of mr. pollari's decisions about how he lived his life? who was in control of mr. pollari's decisions about whether he would become a smoker, whether he would continue to smoke, whether he would become a regular smoker and whether he would stop or not and what level of motivation if he thought about stopping would he apply to quit smoking, or would he decide he wanted to continue to smoke. i said that is really what this case was really all about. and i said when you -- of course there is a claim in this case that philip morris and rj reynolds had some level of control over the decisions that mr. pollari made. and i said once you knew about the personal story of mr. pollari then you could address the second question that this case is really about, and that is responsibility. who, if anybody, other than mr. pollari was responsible for the decisions that he made about his own smoking? you remember -- i used this board too -- i suggested to you that as the evidence came in you would think about who was in control of his decisions about smoking, who controlled where, when, how much he smoked? i could add who he smoked with. did he ever lose control or did he continue to demonstrate control throughout the entire time he smoked, including the ability to control whether he smoked on the job or not? and did anything that philip morris or rj reynolds said or failed to say about the health risks of smoking have any -- have a substantial impact on mr. pollari's decisions about smoking? and you remember i said, you know what, in order to know the answer to that, all those questions, which really those -- the questions in your instructions are really all about that. i said you are going to have to know how mr. pollari lived his life, right? and even now in this closing argument that mr. alvarez just made how much time was spent talking about mr. pollari's life and how it is spent? out of that whole presentation, an hour and a half. well, where did the information come from in this case that dealt truly with mr. pollari? well, of course, mrs. pollari came. her children did not come. claudia and richard did not come. her daughter-in-law cindy came. and that, ladies and gentlemen, is it in terms of witnesses who came who actually knew mr. pollari. that is it. that is it. well, so i said in my opening statement that i was going to spend the bulk of my time talking to you about how mr. pollari lived his life. and i said i was going to just walk you through mr. pollari's life. and i used this very same timeline. and what i want to do right now is -- because i'm pretty old-fashioned, not too high tech. this is that same timeline. and i started in the '30s and i went straight on through to the end of his life in 1994, right? and you remember i said this timeline is divided into things above the timeline related to mr. pollari and his life. the things below the timeline are things that were going on here in the united states about smoking and health. and now what i've got over here, these are -- i've hidden the court reporter from you, i apologize, but every word that i say, every word that his honor says, every word that a witness says is all taken down by the court reporter. and it is transcribed -- they are very fast. it is transcribed every day. we get what they call daily copy. so we can tell you line by line, word by word what every witness has testified to. and that is exactly what i'm showing you right here when it says "trial tr," that is trial transcript. that is the page. that is the line. so what i've done here is i've taken out excerpts from the actual trial testimony to show you what mrs. pollari and her daughter-in-law actually said in this trial about mr. pollari, what he knew, what he and she talked about, the true history of mr. pollari's life in connection with his smoking in this case. you learned that mr. pollari was born in brooklyn in 1932. his parents were nonsmoking italian immigrants that had a clothing factory, right. 1932, and you remember they brought in dr. robert proctor, the history of science professor. he is been paid almost 3 million dollars to testify in cases. what did he make this week? what did he tell me? made like $50,000 this week, $60,000, and he was not through yet. but he acknowledged three or four basic facts for sure. one was from the very beginning of cigarettes, from the very beginning of tobacco, tobacco has been a source of pleasure. why? for a very large part because there is nicotine in the plant, there is nicotine in the leaves, and there is nicotine in every tobacco product. it is like alcohol in beer. it is like alcohol in wine. why do people drink it? why do people smoke it? why do people chew it? they are looking for the effect that nicotine brings. and is that some secret? dr. proctor acknowledged that that is been known for 150 years. there is no secret about it. second basic fact, people have associated cigarettes and tobacco products of all kinds with danger, danger to your health for a very, very, very long time, since the beginning of these products. now, the danger has changed over time. you remember way back at the turn of the 19th century to the 20th century cigarettes were illegal because they were thought to be dangerous, not because of lung cancer, for other health reasons. so pleasurable, dangerous and guess what, the third one is, if you begin to use a tobacco product, including cigarettes, it can be very difficult for some people to quit. whether you call it an addiction, whether you call it a habit, does not matter. remember the joke we shared about mark twain? mark twain said it is easy to quit, i've done it a thousand times. that is the 1860s. so there you go. and i said, you know what, 1930s, was there information out there readily at the fingertips of anybody if they wanted to go read it? and world book encyclopedia, i've put the pages in evidence, what the 1930 world book encyclopedia said about nicotine, cigarettes, tobacco, it is all there. it was no secret. reader's digest, another nice source of information. you have got articles, we put them in evidence, showing nicotine shortens your life, hard to quit but you can quit if you really want to. it is all there. and it is in evidence if you want to take a look at it. all right, well, what did we learn about mr. pollari's life growing up? almost nothing. almost nothing. and as far as smoking is concerned, all we learned was that at some later point in time after he got married to mrs. pollari he told her that he had his first cigarette when he was 12 or 13 years old. that is it. that is it. we did not learn anything about his -- why he smoked that first cigarette. we do not know anything about what his parents thought about it. did he hide it? did he get punished for it? we do not know any of that. and for sure we do not know that there was -- we do not know what kind of cigarette it was. we do not know who made it. and one thing is for sure, nobody said, that knew mr. pollari, nobody came here and said that philip morris or rj reynolds had anything to do with him beginning to smoke. nobody. nobody that knew mr. pollari. all right. did people -- did anybody in the pollari family know from 1946 that smoking came with a health risk? sure. remember, i asked mrs. pollari about her own brother, 20 years older than she. and i said, is not it true that in 1946 your brother as a smoker developed a very bad cough, went to the doctor, the doctor said, your cough is due to your smoking, you need to stop and he stopped just like that? and i said, mrs. pollari, how old were you then? 20 years old. and i said, you have known since you were 10 years old that smoking could be bad for your health, have not you? and she said yes. she said yes. do we know when mr. pollari became a regular smoker? no. do we know how many cigarettes he smoked every day? no. and there is the story of her brother carl. it is all right there in the trial transcript. mr. pollari left school in the ninth grade. mr. alvarez described him as a school dropout, right? but i asked mrs. pollari, your husband was not some guy that was not smart, she said, oh, no, he was very intelligent. that is her testimony. he was very intelligent. so we are not dealing with a guy who could not make it in school. what did he do? he left school to go join his parents working in their clothing factory. was he a bright guy? absolutely. that is what we are told. let us go to the '50s. mr. pollari turns 18 in 1950. why do i tell you that? mr. alvarez put up a bunch of documents saying, hey, these documents show that philip morris or rj reynolds was targeting underage people. the reason i show you that is because this is the instruction that judge murphy gave you over and over again whenever they showed a document like that. the judge said, evidence relating to alleged youth smoking and marketing after 1950 when the decedent became an adult and alleged misconduct after he passed away in january of '94 is not relevant and it cannot be considered by you in determining everything -- every question on that verdict form until the very last line, cannot be used. so why is he telling it to you? to make you mad, get you mad, that is why. because it does not have anything to do with mr. pollari. he is 18 and ready to buy cigarettes legally. and we do not even know if he is smoking at this point. 1950 starts that what their dr. proctor described as an avalanche of information flowing to the american public about the health risks of smoking. it starts with the wynder and graham statistical study and builds over time. was this some secret from the american public? absolutely not. was this some secret from the pollaris? absolutely not. how do we know? well, we know that mr. and mrs. pollari meet in 1954 at the butcher shop. they have a romance that is very quick. they get married. she sees that he is smoking camel. she has no idea why he was smoking camels. it is made by rj reynolds. did he ever tell her, you know what, rj reynolds influenced me to buy this pack of cigarettes? no. nope. did he ever tell her philip morris did something to me, said something to me that caused me to begin smoking or to continue smoking? never did. there is no evidence to that effect in this case. and, again, this is not a class action. this is about one smoker's decisions and that is it. now, part of that avalanche of information included television programs. and you remember that there was a program that you saw little bits of called see it now hosted by edward r. murrow. and i have to take this down for just a minute. because, michael, would you just put up... i think dr. proctor said this was a two-hour program or it was an hour two nights in a row. and mrs. pollari actually remembered watching that program. here's her testimony. she remembers watching the 1955 see it now program. remember, they were married and she said they had that little tv and she loved to watch the see it now program and she could actually remember this program about watching -- "you remember seeing the see it now program that covered smoking that we saw here in this courtroom? "yes." let me just show you a quick segment. (video clip was played and taken down to the best of the reporter's ability as follows:) voice: it is now established, in my opinion, beyond a reasonable doubt that cigarette smoking greatly increases the probability of developing lung cancer. in my opinion people should be warned of the dangers and they are being warned. what they then want to do, whether they wish to smoke or not, is their own business. (video clip concluded.) mr. reilly: that was e. cuyler hammond from the american cancer society. mrs. pollari could not recall whether or not her husband was sitting beside her at the moment because obviously that is 60 years ago, but she said it would have been the normal thing for him to be sitting right beside her at the end of the day after work and they watched tv together. and mrs. pollari can remember that program from 60 years ago. that is how impactful that program was. and there was e. cuyler hammond talking directly to the pollaris saying, hey, it is up to you now. if you do not smoke, you should not start. if you smoke you have to make up your mind whether or not you are going to continue to smoke. now, for the rest of that decade i asked mrs. pollari, "in fact, throughout the '50s you really never even talked to him," meaning your husband, "about smoking, did you?" and what was her answer? "no." now, i realize that mr. alvarez put up a series of questions where he asked her, did your husband think this? yes. did he think this? yes. did he think this? yes. and i'm not her lawyer and i asked her flat out, did you talk to him the rest of the '50s about smoking? and that was the answer right there. no. people are quitting by the end of the '50s. what did dr. proctor say? he said a million people a year are quitting smoking. we just saw e. cuyler hammond say, it is up to you to decide whether you are going to quit or continue. there you go. what did mr. pollari decide? he decided, no, he was going to continue to smoke. 1956 is the year that lorraine is born and mr. pollari is working as a butcher. michael, could i get you to come take some of these away? thank you. thank you very much. so let us go to the '60s. lots happens in the '60s. 1960 their son richard is born. here we have the number 13 million americans have quit smoking by the early '60s. 1962 unfortunately mr. pollari's mom died from cancer. she was a nonsmoker. she has liver cancer. what is important about that in connection with mr. pollari's story? well, what we learn is that mrs. pollari notices that he is smoking more because of the stress of having his mother die. and i said, "after she died, after a period of time, as the stress relaxed, your husband went back to, in your observation, smoking about as much as he had before, right?" and her answer was "yes." so now you know people smoke for a variety of reasons. here's one of the reasons why mr. pollari smokes; it helps him deal with stress. and there it is in black and white. he also knows in 1962 about watching someone die with cancer. and he knows -- the pollari household knows in 1955 that if you smoke you run the risk that you too could develop cancer. all right. let us go to 1964. that is the year that their daughter claudia was born. that is also the year that the surgeon general's report came out. and you saw the news coverage of the surgeon general's report and so did mrs. pollari and mr. pollari. here's the testimony. "you remember seeing the media coverage of the surgeon general's report in '64? "yes. "it was big news, right? "yes. "you saw it -- you had a television. "yes. "would it have been your normal practice to have spoken to your husband about something like that? "yes. "but that would have been a normal conversation for you and your husband to have, right? "yes. "about that time your husband began to try, at least make those quitting gestures of throwing away his cigarettes, throwing away his ashtrays, throwing away his" -- but she said an hour later he would light up again. do the pollaris know that the surgeon general has determined that smoking presents the risk of lung cancer? sure. '64 surgeon general's report came out, mrs. pollari told mr. pollari, this is her statement to him: "when the surgeon general's report came out, you were worried about his health, were not you? "yes. "you said to him you wanted him to stop smoking because you wanted him around for a long time, did not you? "yes. "you were worried that his smoking would shorten his life span? "yes." yes. she said absolutely, no question about it. but her and his awareness does not stop there. we know that around this time he switched from his camels to kools. did he ever discuss with his wife why he was switching to kools? no. we have no idea. 1966 the first warning went on the packs of cigarettes. it said, "caution: cigarette smoking may be hazardous to your health." that was big news. it was on every package of kools that mr. pollari bought and smoked. mrs. pollari remembers the warnings, the '66 warnings. she told mr. pollari that smoking was hazardous to his health just like it said on the package. "yes. "he did not deny that, did he? "no. mr. pollari, "he did not tell you he thought cigarettes were safe in the mid '60s when he was making these quit-smoking gestures, did he? "no. this is mr. pollari's smoking decisions. this is mr. pollari's life. how about the public service announcements? bill talman. let me put this down. it is a mixed blessing to have these boards. here's that bill talman public service announcement. i do not want to play the whole thing, just a little tiny bit. y'all remember. (video clip was played and taken down to the best of the reporter's ability as follows:) voice: this is the house we live in. this is billy. he is pretty handy to have around. steve, home from college. barbie, looking after her brother timmy. debbie -- (video clip was stopped.) mr. reilly: that is enough. you remember this. this is the one where he says, hey, i do not want to lose this fight. i've got lung cancer. if you do not smoke, do not start. if you smoke, quit. do not be a loser like me. did they see that public service announcement? absolutely they did. did they talk about that public service announcement? you bet. they watched the bill talman public service announcement and talked about it. "do you remember that? "yes. "in fact, you and your husband saw it -- that ad together, did not you? "you talked about it. "and it was upsetting to both of you, was not it? "very." very. does this sound like a gentleman who was being influenced by the tobacco industry, by philip morris, by rj reynolds, by ads in magazines or on television? mr. and mrs. pollari told their children, do not smoke, it is dangerous. you know, you do not even have to listen to what he says to his wife; you can listen to what he says to his children. "when your children were growing up you told your children do not smoke, did not you? "you told them, it is dangerous, i do not want you to do it, it can be very hard for you to quit." i do not care whether you call it an addiction or habit, very hard to quit. "you told them all that stuff, did not you? "yes. "and so did your husband, did not he? "yes." this is the story. mr. pollari is still making those quitting gestures but he is not quitting. those psas continue to run. by the end of the '60s there are 30 million ex-smokers here in this country, according to their expert dr. proctor. the '70s. 1970 there is a new warning on the packs of cigarettes. you know, some people might ignore the warnings, but not the pollaris. here is mrs. pollari remembering that the 1970 pack warning changed and she talked about it with mr. pollari. and i said, "so he was completely familiar with this change in the warnings, was not he? "yes." 1971, you heard that the tobacco companies, the cigarette manufacturers, took -- voluntarily took all cigarette advertising off of television. that was said to you i think just yesterday, maybe the day before. mrs. pollari remembers that. this was big news, too. and so did mr. pollari. by 1970 -- "you moved in 1971." this is when they moved to florida, right. "...all the advertising for cigarettes on television stopped, did not it? "yes. "and you observed that it stopped. "yes. "and you knew why"... "because cigarettes were known to be dangerous and that is why they were taken off the air as ads or television programs, right? "yes. "and you talked to your husband about it and you said, hey, look, they have taken ads off of tv, have not they? "yes. "and he understood why the ads were taken off tv too, did not he?" what was the answer? you know the answer. the answer was "yes." the answer was yes. that warning in 1972 went on all the remaining print advertising, whether it was a billboard, a magazine, a newspaper, that same warning was right there. they have now moved to florida. mr. pollari changes brands to marlboro reds. any testimony about why he changed to marlboro reds? no. no. something that philip morris said about marlboros? no. no testimony about that. mr. pollari is working as a butcher in various small grocery stores. 1978, that was a very interesting year because that is the year that their daughter claudia was diagnosed by the doctor with very severe allergies. and the doctor said, your daughter should not be around smoke, should not be around smoke. now, two things happen in 1978, or right in that time frame, the pollaris decide that there will be no more smoking in the house. mr. pollari begins to smoke outside. and that is the same time when mrs. pollari begins to smoke herself. she is 42 years old and she begins to smoke socially with her husband when he is -- he is still making those quitting gestures when you are snagging cigarettes from him. yes. she said, well, i only smoke socially. i said, "so you say socially. what kind of social event would it be where you would snag a cigarette from him? oh, "if we were sitting outside, you know, just like that." "out on your patio? "yes. "all right. so if the two of you were just sitting outside at the end of the day and he was smoking a cigarette you would say, give me one of those too, something like that. "yes. "all right. and he would give you one. "yes. "and then you would smoke together. "yes." now, ladies and gentlemen, you have got to ask yourself, 42 years of age, you have told your children, do not smoke, smoking is dangerous, it can be very hard to quit once you start, and what you have been telling us is that your husband has been trying, seriously trying to quit for all these years and now you are asking him for cigarettes and smoking with him. one of the pleasures that people have from smoking is the social aspect of smoking. so not only can it relax you, not only can it help you deal with stress, but people smoke because it is a social thing to do. and there you have testimony from mrs. pollari about her deciding at age 42 to smoke. that same year is when the pollaris meet their future daughter-in-law cindy, and cindy's dad had died a year or two or three earlier of lung cancer from smoking. and cindy came and told you that mr. pollari knew that her dad had died from lung cancer from smoking. yes. yes. that is cindy's testimony. the next year -- so does mr. pollari know that if he continues to smoke he is running the risk of developing lung cancer? of course. that is undeniable. at this juncture that is flat undeniable. that same year -- or the next year, sorry, 1979, he went to work for albertsons. and you know that they had that very serious no smoking policy. you guys asked a great question about whether it was complete, you could not smoke on the premises anywhere, or could you take a smoke break, could you go outside in the parking lot. mrs. pollari i do not think knew the exact limits, but one thing is for sure, mr. pollari could not smoke on the job and that meant, what did she say, he worked an eight-hour day and he worked five days a week. now he is going to work from 1979 to 1982 until he gets fired not for smoking on the job, but because poor work performance. so he is going to work for three years with no problem complying with whatever the exact limits of smoking were. let us go to the '80s. and by the way, here in the '70s that is when -- what is coming up is this idea that philip morris or rj reynolds said something about you ought to smoke lights or low-tar cigarettes because they are safer. they are not going to show you an ad, there are no ads where philip morris or rj reynolds put an ad on television like cindy thinks she remembers. you know who put the ads on television recommending that people, if you are going to continue to smoke, smoke a lower tar and nicotine cigarette? it was the american cancer society, the public health organizations. and you will remember this ad because you saw it. could you play just a little of that james earl jones. (video clip was played and taken down to the best of the reporter's ability as follows:) voice: before we begin, a few moments of silence for people who are still smoking. now, if you are still smoking, here's the next thing to think about: just how bad is your cigarette? it matters quite a lot. you see, bad as they all are, some are worse. there are 118 different kinds and brands of cigarettes. short ones, long ones, longer than longs, cotton filters, air filters, activated charcoal filters and some with no filters at all. you can buy yourself all kinds of trouble. up to 31 milligrams of tar, up to 2.2 milligrams of nicotine, the least you could do, and goodness knows it is not much, is get a low-tar and nicotine cigarette and cut down. here's the tar and nicotine list. send for it. it is free. get to know your enemy before you strike a match. (video clip concluded.) mr. reilly: let us go to the '80s. in spite of the recommendations of -- or the admonishment of their parents their daughter claudia began smoking around 1980. remember i said that part of the pleasure of smoking is the social aspect of it. remember that mr. pollari was fired from albertsons in 1982. he opened his own fish market that same year, 1982, and there he and his daughter worked and they smoked in their own fish market together. now, he could smoke as much as he wanted because he owned the place, right? so now he and his daughter are smoking together in the fish market. you remember -- we will get to it here in a little bit, but you remember their world-class expert dr. drobes said that one of the telltale signs for him that mr. pollari must have been addicted was because he was taking the risk, the health risks of filleting fish while he was smoking. and so i asked mrs. pollari whether or not mr. pollari thought it was dangerous for him to be smoking and filleting fish since he was an expert meat cutter. and i said, "did your husband ever hurt himself smoking and cutting fish? "no. "did he ever report to you that it was dangerous for him to be smoking and filleting fish? "no. he was an expert meat cutter, was not he? "yes. "i mean, very talented. "yes. "and it is what he loved to do." did mr. pollari control his smoking when it was required to do so? absolutely. he goes back to work -- he closes pisces. he goes back to work at albertsons where they have that restricted policy, right? 1983 he went to that smoking-cessation seminar. any chance going to that smoking-cessation seminar that mr. pollari has any doubts about whether or not smoking presents a health risks for him? the testimony was that when he went to that no-smoking -- i'm sorry, when he went to that seminar that they showed him pictures of blackened lungs and they made him smoke a whole bunch of cigarettes in a row to make him hate cigarettes, right. they were telling him how dangerous cigarettes were to convince him to quit smoking. come on. all right. you heard about him talking with dr. bonnano, the gynecologist, and dr. bonnano telling him, do not smoke, smoking is dangerous for you. but mr. pollari did not ask dr. bonnano to assist him in any way in quitting smoking. mrs. pollari said that she was subscribing to the sun sentinel, seeing articles in the paper about the health risks of smoking and pointing them out to her husband. "you would point those out to your husband, would not you? "yes." they saw the yul brynner public service announcement. can you just -- i do not want to play it all, just a tiny bit just to refresh everybody's recollection. (video clip was played and taken down to the best of the reporter's ability as follows:) voice: ladies and gentlemen, the late yul brynner. voice: i really wanted to make a commercial when i discovered that i was that sick and my time was so... (video clip stopped.) mr. reilly: you guys remember it. was that impactful? sure. sure. mrs. pollari said right about the time of the yul brynner public service announcement in 1986 that is when she decided, you know what, i'm not going to smoke anymore. she had now been smoking with mr. pollari for about, what, eight years, eight years of snagging cigarettes whenever she wanted to and smoking with him. and now she said, "you talked with mr. alvarez about the yul brynner public service announcement. "yes. "you and your husband both saw it together. "yes. "do you remember that it aired in about 1986? "uh-huh. "and that is the time you quit smoking. "yes. "and i'm asking you whether or not that public service announcement influenced your decision to never smoke -- "it could, yes. " -- again. pardon? "i said, it could, yes. "all right. you talked with mr. pollari about the public service announcement. "yes." what happens? several things happen. mrs. pollari said she did not know that her son richard smoked until she went to his wedding, because he lived at home until right then. he lived at home until he got married. and then when he moves into his own home, he begins to smoke at his own home. and what is he smoking? marlboro reds. so what do he and his dad smoke together? because they do smoke together. they both smoke marlboro reds. mrs. pollari and cindy both remember that mr. pollari was smoking marlboro reds at richard and cindy's wedding in 1986. cindy stated that mr. pollari switched to marlboro lights in '87, '88, '89 and '90. "do you know whether it was the same year or the next year or the year after that? "i do not recall. it was shortly sometime after, whether it was a year, within a year or two. "so it may have been '87, it may have been '88. "correct. "it might have been '89. "correct. "all right. could it have been '90? "i do not know." i do not know. we do know that from a photograph or two that they showed you that at some point mr. pollari was smoking marlboro lights. and this is the discussion. here's mrs. pollari under oath. "all right. because sitting here today you actually do not remember talking to your husband about why he switched to marlboro lights, do you?" you can see her answer, "i do not recall." i do not recall. and mr. alvarez read another part of the transcript where mr. mcpharlin asked her, did anybody know your husband better than you? no, nobody knew her husband better than her. but i asked her flat out, did you ever talk to your husband about why he switched to marlboro lights? i mean a direct question, not an indirect, did anybody know him better than you? and that was her answer, "i do not recall." cindy said mr. pollari knew that his cigarettes were unsafe and dangerous. i asked her flat out, mr. pollari knew that his cigarettes were unsafe. "yes. "he knew that they were dangerous. "yes." cindy stated that mr. pollari knew that marlboro lights were still going to be dangerous and hoped that they would be a little less dangerous. "and he knew that marlboro lights were still going to be dangerous. "yes. "all he was hoping was that maybe they would be a little less dangerous. "yes." but then cindy noticed that mr. pollari was smoking more after he switched to marlboro lights and she told him about it. she said, hey, you are smoking more cigarettes. you are defeating the purpose of switching to a lower tar and nicotine cigarette. "that is the kind of conversation you had, is not it? "yes." was this some secret to mr. pollari? absolutely not. all right. let us go to the '90s because we are about through with our walk. he got fired in 1990. he had worked for albertsons for, what is that now, seven years. you know, if you worked for a company and you spend 2,000 hours that is a 40-hour work week, he is now spent, i do not know, 2400, 2500 hours working at albertsons following their rules, not violating them. and, yeah, he messes up three times and he gets fired. what does he do? does he go home and say: mrs. pollari, i cannot hack it; i cannot work in an environment where i cannot smoke; i'm not capable of controlling my smoking? no. he turns right around and goes to work at winn-dixie where they have the same kind of policy, the same kind of policy. there it is. in that same time frame -- mrs. pollari could not remember exactly when -- mr. pollari did talk with dr. george about the patch, but she said it did not go any further than just talk. was he really serious about quitting and quitting for good? really? that is her testimony. here's some general information. mrs. pollari would tell mr. pollari smoking was dangerous and he did not deny it or say cigarettes were safe. i asked her flat out, "and you would say, hey, look, it says right here, smoking is dangerous, right? "yes. "and he would not deny it, did he? "no. "he would not say, oh, no, that is wrong, they are safe, i'm fine. he did not do that, did he? "no." the conversation with cindy i just read to you. here is -- i mean, this is flat out direct. i asked her, "he did not say, oh, the cigarette company's telling me it is okay. i've seen ads for marlboro. he did not tell you, i've seen an ad for marlboro, these are safe, i'm okay, did he? "no." what was her answer flat out? no. now i'm going to take you right to the verdict form because that is where we are. before i get there, though, i want to show you instruction number 18. because i think it speaks volumes about -- so what do we know about mr. pollari and philip morris and rj reynolds? well, we know that he bought cigarettes manufactured and sold and advertised by philip morris and rj reynolds. and instruction number 18 tells you, this is the law, this is the law that judge murphy has given you, "the manufacture, advertisement and sale of cigarettes are lawful activities. the defendants cannot be held liable merely for manufacturing, selling or advertising cigarettes." he also has given you instruction number 19. it says, "the warning labels placed on cigarette packs by reynolds and philip morris comply with the federal law. philip morris and reynolds and other tobacco companies have no obligation to place any additional warnings on their cigarette packages further as long as the cigarette packs bear the federally-mandated warnings. cigarette advertising after july 1, 1969 cannot be the subject of any claim that the advertising undermined or neutralized the warnings or made them less effective." that is the law, ladies and gentlemen. not only that, did you -- in that walk through mr. pollari's life was there ever any intersection between mr. pollari, i mean really mr. pollari, not the american public, not things spoken out in general, not programs, not clips from programs on nightline or things of that nature, things that mr. pollari actually saw that you heard mr. pollari actually saw actually influenced him? because that is the testimony. all right. so what is the first question? mr. alvarez correctly read it to you and he correctly stated that there are four pieces to this first question. was mr. pollari addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine, and if so, was the nicotine a legal cause of death by primary lung cancer? so there are four questions there. was he addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine? that is one. if so, was such addiction a legal cause of death by primary lung cancer? so there is... third question is, did it cause his death? and the fourth question was, was his death by primary lung cancer? ursula is going to talk to you about 3 and 4. i'm just going to talk to you about 1 and 2. and it is true that neither ursula nor i brought a separate addiction expert here because when i gave you my opening statement i said, look, we appreciate your time as jurors and i promise to use your time efficiently. and when i got through cross-examining dr. drobes, i knew that what i wanted to do with you guys in connection with this first question and the second question was to simply walk through what i established in cross-examining dr. drobes and then let you guys decide. it is true that judge murphy does not give you a definition of addiction. and he does not give you a criteria for determining whether or not mr. pollari was addicted or not. it is for you guys to decide. but when i was cross-examining dr. drobes, i said, hey, he has been -- dr. drobes referred to nida, the national institute -- mr. alvarez: excuse me, mr. reilly. i'm sorry. i apologize. i have an objection about this demonstrative. if we could just approach. i apologize. the court: sure. no problem. counsel, do you have a copy of the demonstrative? ms. henninger: yeah, i've got it. (a discussion was held off the record.) mr. alvarez: judge, i worked it out with mr. reilly. mr. reilly: you need to stop the clock. the court: it is running, mr. reilly. mr. reilly: i'm only kidding. so what happened? nida, the national institute on drug abuse, they have definition of addiction, they have statements that they make about how you determine whether someone is addicted or not, right. well, here's what they said and this is what i cross-examined dr. drobes with. i said, look, nida says that there has to be a distinction between physical dependence and addiction, right, because physical dependence is not addiction. i said, nida says you specifically -- it specifically provides that just being physically dependent is not addiction. that is in nida's definition. just having withdrawals or cravings does not mean someone is addicted. in order to determine whether someone is addicted or not you need to look at more criteria, and they recommend the diagnostic and statistical manual-5. and that is exactly what dr. drobes spent a great deal of his time going through and what i spent a great deal of time talking about on cross-examination with him. and you remember he said, well, in order to satisfy -- he said, hey, i never use this. i'm not a clinical psychologist who treats patients. he is a researcher. but he walked through it and he gave you the reasons why, and he said, you know, you have got to have six of these, you have got to satisfy six of these in order to actually be addicted under the dsm-5. and so what i did was i wrote on this board the things that he said for eight of them. one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight. i said, let us take a look at how you decided that he met those criteria. the first one it says, assumes -- i'm sorry. first one is "tobacco taken in larger amounts and over longer period of time than intended." he said, i admit that i have no idea how long mr. pollari intended when he began smoking to continue smoking. he said, but many young people when we interview them they do not have an idea of how long they are going to smoke. so i gave him that one. so he had no basis to give him that one because mr. pollari never said how long he intended to smoke. the third one, number 3, "great deal of time spent on activities necessary to obtain or use tobacco." well, there was not any time taken in obtaining tobacco, but he said, look, the guy smokes a lot. and mr. alvarez said, hey, he smoked a lot. so he spent hours a day smoking. and he did spend hours a day smoking, but is that really what this calls for, really? because what he is doing when he is smoking if he is working and smoking if he is cutting fish, filleting fish, what is he really doing? he is really filleting fish. he is really working, right. so does that really satisfy number 3? that is up to you guys. but what we do know is that he could also go for long periods of time without smoking, without smoking at all. number 4, did he have craving or strong desire or urge to use tobacco? on direct examination dr. drobes said that when he gave his deposition he said, i do not have enough information to meet that criteria so he did not give it to him, but when he came here to trial with no new information he said, oh, no, i've changed my mind. he meets it. i've thought about it some more, he meets it. how about number 5, "recurring use resulting in failure to fill major role obligations at work, school or home"? he said that comes from being fired. did he pay any attention to the fact that he spent all those years not having a problem? nope. number 6, "continued use despite persistent or recurrent social or interpersonal problems caused or exacerbated by effects of tobacco." what dr. drobes said was that he concluded that there was tension in the household because mrs. pollari wanted him to quit and he did not. did mrs. pollari come here and say that to you guys? no, absolutely not. as a matter of fact, what did mrs. pollari end up doing? snagging cigarettes and smoking with him. but the doctor concluded that he satisfied that one too. mr. pollari could not attend church, eat out at restaurants or attend a movie because he needed to smoke. i asked mrs. pollari about that and she said, oh, he could attend mass without a problem. what he did not like doing was going to confirmation or first holy communion. he had three children. he had three confirmations, three first holy communions. i said, well, did he go? oh, yeah, he went to all of them. so how in the world did he satisfy that? and i asked, did he go to restaurants? yes. did he go to movies? she said, you know, he did not smoke in movies after no smoking was allowed in movies, but we would go to the movies. so did he really satisfy that? no. this is the best one, probably. number 8. "recurrent use in situations in which it is physically hazardous." there he is. hazardous? no. he said, look, the guy was cutting fish and smoking. and his daughter claudia said that was dangerous in her deposition, right? and you saw what happened when i asked mrs. pollari about that. and finally, he said he meets the withdrawal criteria even though he never even walked through the withdrawal criteria. so you guys have to decide for yourselves does he really meet these criteria? here's the testimony. oops, i think i took the verdict form down. just so you see it. he could sit through a meal without leaving to smoke? cindy remembers mr. pollari would sit through the family dinners without smoking, he would have a cigarette after dinner with her husband. and he could sit through a regular catholic mass without smoking. there it all is. so what is the answer to this question? well, you guys have to decide whether in light of what nida says that having cravings or having withdrawal or both does not make you addicted. and i asked dr. drobes whether or not under the dsm criteria fifty percent of the daily regular smokers do not -- are not addicted. he disagreed with it, but he said, yeah, that is what they concluded. for him virtually every regular daily smoker was addicted. everybody. so did he find mr. pollari to be addicted? of course he did. you guys have to decide whether he is addicted or not. but even if you unanimously, and it has to be unanimous, even if you did, you then are only halfway down with the addiction question, you have to find that addiction was a legal cause of why he developed lung cancer. and you have got a big instruction about legal cause. what is it require? it requires that you guys find that if he was addicted his addiction was so substantial cause of why he continued to smoke that it is what they call -- what judge murphy calls a "but for" reason, that, frankly, he could not control his smoking. he smoked involuntarily. but for addiction he would have quit and quit and avoided getting an illness and dying. that is their burden of proof. have they satisfied you about that in this case? there is no more evidence. right now have they satisfied you about that? because if they have not then the answer to this question is no. if they did not satisfy you that he was addicted the answer is no. if they did not satisfy you that addiction was the legal cause of death the answer is no. and ursula, when she gets through talking to you, if they did not satisfy you that either he had a primary lung cancer or that was the cause of why he died, then the answer to this first question is no. and, frankly, some of you might say, well, i do not think he was addicted. others might say, i do not think addiction was the legal cause. and others might say, i do not think it was primary lung cancer. and others might say, i do not think that is why he died. it does not matter. but collectively you have to unanimously decide whether the answer to that whole question is yes. and if you unanimously do not decide that the answer to that question is yes then the answer is no and you can go home. and that is that. all right. let me go through the rest of the verdict form. only if you all answer every aspect of that question yes do you go on. and it asks -- the second question is whether or not cigarettes manufactured by philip morris or rj reynolds were a legal cause of mr. pollari's death. the only way that could be true would be if you found that cigarette smoking cigarettes manufactured by philip morris were a "but for" reason why he developed lung cancer and died, if that is what you conclude, but i do not think you will. same for reynolds. so let us drop down to number 3. only if you have answered all these questions yes do you even get to number 3. please state the percentage of any fault that was a legal cause of mr. pollari's death that you charge to reynolds, philip morris and mr. pollari. in light of that personal story, i saw that mr. alvarez wrote down 5 percent of the responsibility is on the shoulders of mr. pollari. ladies and gentlemen, was there anybody else in the mirror every day when mr. pollari woke up, like everybody does, looked in the mirror and decided how he was going to live his life that day? really and truly? is there somebody else that was responsible for how he took care of his body? really? of course i leave these numbers to your sound discretion, but really and truly in light of all that history mr. alvarez said, oh, a 12-year -- mr. pollari was not making -- did not stop making decisions when he was 12. he made decisions about smoking his entire life. so really and truly when you have a history of awareness like that, is there a number here that is not one hundred percent? is not ninety percent -- i mean, really and truly. but i leave that to your sound discretion. you have good judgment. the court: approximately 10 minutes, counsel. mr. reilly: thank you, your honor. only going to say one thing about the total damages. mr. alvarez said 11 million dollars. ladies and gentlemen, that is $100,000 a year for 110 years, 110 years. let us look at these fraud questions. i told you the story. what they have to show is that something that philip morris or rj reynolds said or did was relied on to his detriment, and after may 5, 1982. anywhere in that whole story was there any indication that mr. pollari was relying on anything that philip morris said or did not say or reynolds said or did not say? it not only has to be relied on, but it has to have been so important that but for it he would have quit smoking and quit in time to avoid dying. that is their burden of proof. you get a big old instruction about it. it includes the concept of legal cause. here's legal cause. it has to have had a direct -- he not only has to have seen it but it has to have had a substantial impact on his decisions about smoking. how substantial? but for it he would not have smoked, he would have quit, never started, would have quit. he would have avoided getting lung cancer. same for this agreement question. what are the answers to these questions? in light of that story, they are all no. and for goodness sakes, after may 5th, 1982 in light of the story that i showed you, the answer is clearly no. all right. finally, you have to answer the question, and you only answer the question, this question if you have answered questions 5 and 7 or 5, 6, 7 and 8 yes. otherwise you do not go to these questions at all. are punitive damages warranted against philip morris and rj reynolds? obviously that was a huge focus of mr. alvarez's. that is where he would like you to go, punitive damages. get there any way you can. in these instructions you get told it can only relate to some wrong that was done to mr. pollari. and they have to carry their burden of clear and convincing, which is a much higher standard than the regular standard, which i already showed you they did not qualify for that. some of the things they criticized. dr. proctor said you ought to make cigarettes that are uninhalable, you ought to make cigarettes that have no nicotine. well, philip morris made cigarettes that have no nicotine. you just heard dr. farone, the guy that got fired from philip morris, say cigarettes ought to be nicotine free. well, nonaddicting, there they are. guess what? they did not sell. nobody wants them. and the public health community criticized philip morris for even making them. filters. do filters work? here's the international agency for the research of cancer. they say filters do reduce the health risks of smoking. they reduce the health risks of smoking for lung cancer, for pharyngeal cancer, for esophageal cancer. now, there is not complete agreement within the public health community about whether they work or not, but there is the world's largest medical organization, the world health organization covers the whole world. and they say yeah. bill farone, dr. farone, said, yeah, they actually make a safer cigarette. this is a highly filtered cigarette. he said, they do not spike cigarettes with nicotine. that stuff about polonium, here's the surgeon general in 1971 saying in reported levels polonium-210 is not causing anybody any harm. how about the ph, that idea that manipulating nicotine by adjusting the ph actually makes them more potent in terms of nicotine? here's the surgeon general in 1979 and 1983 saying, hey, look, that is what was called the unprotonated or what they call freebase nicotine. here's the surgeon general way back 30, 40 years ago saying, hey, there is only protonated nicotine in smoke. there it is right there twice. this is no -- how about the end of the tobacco working group? they were really critical -- dr. proctor who wants uninhalable nicotine-free cigarettes that no one will ever buy and no public health organization has ever endorsed his uninhalable nicotine-free cigarettes. he was critical of philip morris and rj reynolds' involvement in the tobacco working group yet here's dr. farone who worked at philip morris who testifies against philip morris saying he was in favor of the tobacco working group and he thought -- "you went to philip morris, you thought it was a good thing. "i thought the process was good, yes." all right. so what is the answer to this last question? the answer is no, there is no reason to be awarding punitive damages in this case. all right, ladies and gentlemen, that ends my closing argument. obviously you have been very attentive for me. i greatly appreciate it. i'm going to sit down now and ursula is going to get up and make her presentation. and then you understand that mr. mcpharlin has an opportunity to talk to you for i think as much as 30 minutes. so i do not know what he is going to say. he is probably going to criticize philip morris and rj reynolds some more. but just ask yourself, you have heard the story now of mr. pollari. where does philip morris and where does rj reynolds and whatever he is complaining about fit into the real story of mr. pollari? thanks. the court: counsel, thank you. ladies and gentlemen, my understanding is that ms. henninger needs a minute to set up. so we are going to take a short recess. remember the admonition. you are not to discuss the case. do not form any opinion about the case. do not allow anyone to discuss the case in your presence. just leave your notepads and your jury instructions on your chairs. we will be back with you shortly. thank you. ms. henninger: thank you. counsel. mrs. pollari. good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen. well, guess what, i'm not last today because there is one more after me. so this is really the first time i've had an opportunity to talk with you and i'm not last and i'm very excited about it. i'm going to try to slow down because, as you guys know, i can be a very fast talker. and i want to start kind of where i started with opening statements that this is mr. pollari's case. it is not a case about smokers in general. it is not the engle class action. and remember when i came in here and did opening statements, i told you that every question on the verdict form would have mr. pollari's name in it. and it does. when you get the verdict form, his name appears in all of these questions except for the last one, and that is because it is his case. now, i also did something in opening statements; i told you that there were five key facts, and i used this very same board, if you remember. and these five facts i told you the evidence would show, and it did show these five key facts, and these facts answer every question you have to answer or will help you answer every question you have to answer in this case on the verdict form. so let me remind you of what these are. mr. pollari did not start smoking because of anything rj reynolds or philip morris said or did. mr. pollari knew that smoking was dangerous and addictive decades before may 5th, 1982. despite knowing smoking was dangerous, mr. pollari continued to smoke. plaintiff cannot prove that mr. pollari had primary lung cancer. and mr. pollari died with cancer, not because of cancer. we started out there and i wanted to start out here today. and i'm going to walk through the verdict form in this case. i'm not going to repeat things mr. reilly said. he did a good job going through the evidence in this case, but as he told you, i have some special issues to talk about as well. so let us start with something that was told to you the very first day you walked through that door. mr. alvarez told you that plaintiff has the burden of proof in this case. and plaintiff has to prove -- meet her burden with evidence presented in this case, evidence about mr. pollari. plaintiff failed, failed to prove her claims against rj reynolds. plaintiff failed to prove her claims against philip morris. now, i'm going to run through just some quick slides that say some very bold statements that are important for you to remember when you go back and look at the verdict form and deliberate. there is no evidence that mr. pollari based any of his smoking decisions on anything rj reynolds or philip morris said or did. as mr. reilly said, there is no intersection between the evidence you heard in this case and mr. pollari's life. mr. pollari quit smoking rj reynolds' cigarettes in 1971, 44 years ago. rj reynolds' cigarettes did not cause mr. pollari's death. we are going to talk about that in a little bit. and for decades, you heard about some of the philip morris products, but you also heard dr. farone and dr. proctor talk about how rj reynolds has worked for decades and has spent more than 1 billion dollars trying to make a safer cigarette. now, mr. reilly showed you this instruction. it is very important, because you may not like cigarettes. you may not like cigarette advertising. but they are legal. and as mr. reilly told you, philip morris and rj reynolds cannot be held liable merely for selling, manufacturing or advertising cigarettes. so you might remember when i started my opening statement i said, you are going to hear a lot of evidence in this case and it is important to keep your eye on the ball. so hopefully you remembered that. because i said, ask yourself as you hear the evidence, what does this have to do with mr. pollari? do not get distracted. well, there were some distractions in this case related to cigarette design. i want to talk about what those distractions were before i get into the verdict form. first, dr. proctor and dr. farone told you that despite everything they said about inhaleability, nicotine, freebase nicotine or ammonia they said that cigarettes are dangerous and addictive by nature. they said that roll-your-own cigarettes and cigarettes from the 1800s, before philip morris or rj reynolds ever existed, were just as dangerous and just as addictive as manufactured cigarettes. inhaleability. both dr. farone and dr. proctor talked about inhaleability, but cigarettes were inhalable decades before rj reynolds or philip morris ever made a cigarette. cigarette inhaleability was never a secret. it is been known since the 1860s. and, ladies and gentlemen, an uninhalable cigarette does exist. it is called a cigar. now, another distraction -- keep your eye on the ball -- youth marketing. in mr. alvarez's closing he showed you a lot of documents from the '70s and '80s regarding youth marketing. but the fact of the matter is is that no one knows when mr. pollari became a regular smoker. and the first witness in this case, the very first witness to see him smoke, he was 22 years old. the documents that you were shown about youth marketing were when mr. pollari was in his 40s. there is no evidence as to why he started to smoke and there is not even a shred of evidence as to what advertisements mr. pollari saw when he was a youth. there is no evidence that youth marketing had anything to do with mr. pollari. do not be distracted. so let us talk about the verdict form. and the very first question on the verdict form is class membership. you might remember these three hurdles. i broke out in opening statement class membership into three components, medical causation, addiction, addiction causation. i think mr. reilly broke out medical causation into cause of death and primary lung cancer. for the purposes of this argument i'm going to keep it into one box. so there is three hurdles, three things plaintiffs must prove to get a yes on the first question, and they have not been able to do that. so let us start with the first one. this is one that i presented some evidence on recently, the last two days or last day of court, i believe, last two days. plaintiff failed to prove medical causation. and in this plaintiff must prove that mr. pollari died from primary lung cancer that was caused by smoking cigarettes. plaintiff did not prove that mr. pollari had a cancer that started in his lungs. plaintiff did not prove that mr. pollari died as a result of primary lung cancer. what evidence did they provide to you? well, you did not see any medical record saying where the cancer started. what you did see were two medical records, and you saw that mr. pollari was hospitalized for 13 days for reasons unrelated to his cancer. you saw that he had an acute hemorrhage with a massive bleed days before he passed away. and he was released from the hospital with an infection. he goes home because he wants to go home, and he dies less than two days later. you got testimony from dr. abel, who is the doctor who signed the death certificate, but he does not remember mr. pollari. he does not remember what he did to determine the cause of death, but he said he does not make house calls, he did not see him after he left the hospital. he did not say he talked to mrs. pollari to find out anything about how he died. he checked out of the hospital and that is the last involvement dr. abel had. now, plaintiff has the burden of proving her claims in this case. and they brought you dr. abel. and mr. alvarez talked about how he was involved in the care and treatment of mrs. -- i mean, mr. pollari, and he was. there is no doubt his name is on the medical records. but he does not remember a single thing about mr. pollari outside of what those medical records say, not a single thing. now, mr. alvarez said that dr. abel was the only doctor to testify that he ever met paul or rose pollari. well, he does not remember that. he also said that he was the only doctor to testify that diagnosed mr. pollari with any medical conditions. he does not remember that. he said he is the only doctor to testify that he ever examined or provided treatment for mr. pollari. mr. alvarez: excuse me, object to this demonstrative, judge, where it says "where are they?" the court: sustained. take it down. ms. henninger: can you take off the header, please? he said he was the only doctor to testify who was involved in trying to save mr. pollari's life. he does not remember that. he said he was the only doctor to testify that had access to mr. pollari's medical records. he does not remember that. and he cannot tell you what medical records he specifically had. now, there were other doctors involved in the care and treatment of mr. pollari. you see their names in the two medical records we have. you have the cytologist. you have the radiologist. you have the vascular surgeon. you have the thoracic surgeon. there is another cytology. dr. abel said there was probably a gastroenterologist and a radiation oncologist. plaintiff has the burden of proof. maybe those doctors remember something. mr. alvarez: judge, i object to this. it is inappropriate. the court: thank you. i'd sustain the objection. let us move on, counsel. ms. henninger: now, plaintiff has the burden to prove, let us start first with primary lung cancer. because remember, there is two components to medical causation, primary lung cancer and cause of death, all right. so it is crucial for you to remember that the defendants do not have any burden of proof in this case. there is not a burden for philip morris or rj reynolds to bring you evidence to prove or disprove that mr. pollari had this cancer or that cancer. now, we did bring you some experts so that you could help understand what records we do have, and we have two. one is a cytology report. so we brought you a pathologist, somebody who is trained to interpret and read cytology. the other record we have is related to a gastric hemorrhage, or gastric ulcer hemorrhage, so we brought your a gastroenterologist, the kind of doctor who actually treats those hemorrhages. and we are going to talk about what they had to say, but before we do there is one thing the experts, both dr. abel and dr. peterson agree on regarding the cancer; cancer is more likely to spread to the lung than to start there. the majority of cancers found in the lung have spread to the lung from somewhere else. cancer from virtually any organ in the body can spread to the lung, and there are a number of cell types that can originate in the lung. and both doctors told you that neither of the two medical records we do have available to us in this case say the term "primary lung cancer." so the one record we have that relates to the cancer at all is the cytology report. you guys have seen it. you probably have it memorized because it says one thing. it says poorly differentiated carcinoma non-oat cell type. both dr. abel and dr. peterson told you that is not a cell type of cancer. dr. peterson said that tells us nothing about the primary site of the cancer. so let us look at what it does tell you. dr. peterson, a pathologist, an anatomical clinical pathologist, a forensic pathologist, the only doctor who came in here and told you, hey, i've taken training to read cells under a microscope. let me tell you what pathology is. let me tell you what this cytology report says. and what he said is poorly differentiated carcinoma, it is simply another way of saying you cannot determine the cell type. poorly differentiated carcinoma is not, it is not the same thing as saying lung cancer. non-oat cell cancers can arise in organs other than the lung and they commonly do. and non-oat cell cancer is not, is not another way of saying lung cancer. now, the objective evidence we have in this case is the -- are the physical records, something that you can actually look at. and you will have them. they are the exhibits, and they will go back with you to the jury room when you deliberate. dr. abel came in here, and he was the treating physician. and he cared for mr. pollari. there is no doubt about that. but what is important to remember is he does not recall anything about his treatment of mr. pollari outside of the objective evidence, and the only objective evidence we have is the cytology report, the death certificate and the hospitalization, those lab reports. so because dr. abel does not have any objective evidence to support his opinions and tell you what he did exactly for mr. pollari he speculates and he says, i must have done these things because this was my normal standard and care. but dr. abel did not tell you specifically, i remember doing this to mr. pollari. i remember giving him a cat scan. i remember ruling out cancers in other places. he cannot say that, and he did not say that. now, if you believe that mr. pollari had a primary lung cancer, there is still some other important things that you have to consider. plaintiff did not bring you any evidence of what cell type of cancer was in mr. pollari's lungs. plaintiff did not bring you any evidence that the cell type of cancer was one that is in those instructions you have, instruction number 11 lists out the cancers that the engle jury found were caused by smoking. there is no evidence that mr. pollari had one of those. and for that reason plaintiff cannot meet their burden of proof that mr. pollari had a primary lung cancer, much less a primary lung cancer caused by smoking. so let us move on and talk about the second component of medical causation or the hurdle, and that is the cause of death. mr. pollari died with cancer, not because of cancer. and, again, remember, there is no burden on the defendants to prove that to you. in fact, the plaintiff has to prove that mr. pollari died because of cancer. now, mr. pollari died less than two days -- he went home on the 10th and on the -- oh, sorry. he went home on the 8th and at 1:15 in the morning on the 10th he passes away, less than two days after being discharged from the hospital for a hemorrhage that was unrelated to his cancer. now, what is more likely -- you have heard a lot in this case about statistics and generalities and the fact that 90, 95 percent of smokers get cancer because of epidemiology. well, dr. haines said something that is very important because -- he said, "because of the proximity to an acute life-threatening illness, as i've described, that there is a probability based on likelihood that he died of a complication related to that." now -- oops, sorry. getting a little ahead of myself. so he goes in for the hemorrhage. he is discharged. the proximity -- remember he tried to explain it. if you leave the hospital and you have a complication or you die within a certain amount of days, i forget the exact days he said, it is presumed it is because of a complication of that hospitalization. so let us talk about what those complications could be. and, again, i cannot emphasize enough that defendants do not have the burden of proof, but we brought you a doctor, a gastroenterologist, to talk to you so you can understand what happened to mr. pollari in the hospitalization based on the laboratory data we have. so plaintiff has the burden to prove that mr. pollari did not die of a complication. there were three complications that dr. haines talked about, if you remember. the first one was a cardiac event. he said that because sometimes when you hemorrhage -- mr. alvarez: excuse me, judge. this is improper. the court: sustained. mr. alvarez: can you take that down? ms. henninger: remember, he talked about, okay, if you have a massive hemorrhage it can put stress on the heart and that causes sometimes a silent heart attack. he used the fancy term "myocardial infarction," if i remember correctly. that is just another way of saying heart attack. so he used that term and he said that is one of the possibilities. but then he talked about two other possibilities that i want to go into a little bit more detail on, and that is, one, the risk of a re-bleed and, two, the risk of infection. now -- so mr. pollari goes to the hospital. it is determined at some point, we do not know exactly how, but that he has a hemorrhage of a gastric ulcer. dr. abel told you on the stand that he did not know how long mr. pollari had that gastric ulcer. but he had it at a point where he started hemorrhaging. and under the best of conditions, dr. haines told you in response to one of the questions, under the best of conditions a bleed of that magnitude would have taken two to four weeks to heal. now, gastric ulcers that have hemorrhaged have a great propensity to re-bleed. i want to talk briefly about the causes of gastric ulcers, because you heard today a little bit of mention of steroids. dr. haines, the only doctor that has treated gastric ulcers his entire career, i think he said he does hemorrhage once a day, sometimes three or four hemorrhages a day of gastric ulcers, if i remember correctly, he said that it has been absolutely shown that steroids do not cause ulcer disease and do not cause bleeding. at one time even he was taught in medical school that they did. but in the '80s and '90s science evolved, it changed. you see how science evolves and changes just through some of the evidence in this case. and in the '80s and '90s they discovered that h. pylori, that bacteria, and the use of nsaids are the true causes of gastric ulcers. and there is a scientific consensus now steroids do not play a role. some of that old-school thinking is still around, but steroids do not cause gastric ulcers. so that is the evidence with regard to whether or not mr. pollari possibly had a re-bleed. now, can anybody -- we did not bring dr. haines in here to tell you that he did have a re-bleed. i want to make that clear. because why? i do not have a burden of proof. philip morris does not have a burden of proof. rj reynolds does not have to prove to you that is what happened. so when dr. haines comes in here and says, yeah, that is a possibility based on the evidence i have, that is exactly what we are doing, is raising the possibilities for you, because plaintiff has not met their burden. so let us talk about infection. you saw this chart. you guys are probably sick of seeing the lab data all the time. so dr. haines came up with this chart, and basically what it shows is the white blood cell counts and the band levels. and what you see based on this chart is at some point, i do not even know how to use a pointer, but at some point between january 1st and january 5th -- you see he has normal white blood cell counts on january 1st, but then when they go and check him on january 5th they have shot way up, as have his band counts. so some point between that time he develops an infection. now, everybody that came in here, haines, abel, peterson, everybody that came in here said, yeah, you can have an increase in white blood cell counts for a variety of reasons not just infection; that is true. but as dr. peterson and dr. haines explained to you they showed you the band count. and remember, the band count looks at immature blood cells. so when your body has an infection it creates those immature cells and it pushes them out, i think the term is, pushes them out, it creates a high band count and that shows, what, your body is responding to infection. so the band count is important because it shows mr. pollari had an infection at least as of january 5th. now, dr. abel did not even mention the band count. and that is significant. why? because he took the stand and told you he did not believe that mr. pollari had an infection at all. he did not believe -- when he was in the hospital, he looked at this data and he said, i do not believe he had an infection. there is no bona fide evidence that he had an infection. he did not look at the band counts with you. he did not explain them. now, he denied he had an infection. he did not talk about the band counts. mr. pollari wanted to go home and he was sent home. and dr. abel discharged him. and unfortunately, he passes away less than two days later. and dr. abel, keep in mind, dr. abel did not see him on the 9th or the 10th. he does not make house calls. he told you he does not do any postmortem examination. the next day after he dies he finds out he died. we do not know exactly how. but he finds out he died and he writes down what he had just been treating him for. he told you he had been treating him for lung cancer. he puts that down and he also puts down the hemorrhage. but he did not know, he told you he did not believe, he did not know he had an infection, he did not consider these other complications, so of course dr. abel put that on the death certificate. now, judge murphy gave you an instruction about the death certificate, and that is instruction number 10, and it is that the death certificate is prima facie evidence of certain things. and that is defined for you, fact, place, date and time of death and the identity of the decedent. so i wanted to apply that law to the facts of this case in more of a visual way for you. so what i did is i highlighted in yellow everything that the death certificate is prima facie evidence for, okay. what is not it prima facie evidence for? what is highlighted in red, the cause of death. plaintiff has the burden of proving that to you. and plaintiff has not met that burden. for those reasons they do not get over the first hurdle, which is medical causation. so mr. reilly talked about, discussed addiction in spades. i'm not going to talk about dsm criteria or the definitions of addiction. i have three things to say about addiction. no doctor who treated mr. pollari diagnosed him as addicted to cigarettes. fifty percent of daily smokers are not addicted. and dr. drobes told you, i believe that all smokers can quit. so he does not get over the first hurdle. does not get over the second. there is one last hurdle in the first question, and that is addiction causation. "plaintiff must prove that addiction to nicotine was a legal cause of mr. pollari's primary lung cancer and death." mr. reilly also talked about this with you. he read you the instruction. i just want to focus on what dr. proctor told you because he told you that millions and millions of americans quit smoking. and that correlated with the information, by the way, that the public health community was putting out about the dangers of smoking. 10 million. he told you these numbers. 19 million. it increased over time as awareness increased over time. and what is very interesting is he said that the worry about health, the fact that people were worried about their health was the number one reason why people were quitting by the millions. he also told you that these smokers were also heavy smokers. heavy smokers, addicted smokers, and they quit, 60 million have. is mr. pollari any different from the 60 million of smokers in this country that have quit? no. because his cigarettes were not any more addictive, no evidence of that. his brain was not affected any differently than smokers who quit. he was not exposed to any different advertising than smokers who quit. he was not exposed to tobacco company statements from philip morris or rj reynolds any different than any other smoker who quit. and he did not smoke more than smokers who quit. so for that reason plaintiff cannot get by the first hurdle much less the second or the third hurdle. so when you get to this first question on the verdict form, ladies and gentlemen, i submit to you that the answer is no. and if you answer no, the case is done, you do not need to go further in the verdict form. but again, kind of like opening statements, i have a job to do so i'm going to march forward a little bit, all right, and i'll try to do it as quickly as i can. the second question on the verdict form is what i call brand causation. plaintiff must prove that smoking cigarettes manufactured by rj reynolds or philip morris was a legal cause of mr. pollari's death. now, i want to talk a little bit about the instruction on this because it is going to say the next issue for your determination is whether smoking cigarettes manufactured by each of the defendants was a legal cause of death, just like i had in that hurdle there. rj reynolds, he stopped smoking either product, camel or kool, by 1971, 44 years ago. now, mr. alvarez read you some questions that he asked dr. abel about whether or not smoking of reynolds' cigarettes were -- that 17-year period would be a substantial contributing factor. but dr. proctor also had something to say about that and so did dr. abel. but dr. proctor told you, remember he talked about the epidemiology, and he said based on the epidemiology smokers lose 10 years of their life, okay, or they die 10 years earlier. if you quit smoking by the age of 30 you get 10 years back. you go back to baseline. if you quit smoking by the age of 40 you get 9 years back of your life. if mr. pollari had quit by 1971 when he was 39 years old, which is when he stopped smoking rj reynolds' cigarettes, he would have virtually eliminated all of his risk. dr. abel put it a different way for you. he said that if mr. pollari had quit smoking when he stopped using rj reynolds' products he would have been unlikely, he would have been unlikely to develop cancer. so for that reason the answer to the second question, and i'm just going to speak for my client on this one, for rj reynolds is no. so what happens next? well, the third question relates to comparative fault. i'm going to skip that one for a second and come back to it at the end, but i want to go on to talk about questions number 5 through 8 which relate to concealment and conspiracy. got a lot of instructions on this. i'm trying to point some of the important ones out to you or some of the instructions, both sides showed instructions, but jury instruction number 15, which happens to be on page 16 of your packet, has the language about concealment. and it says some key things. i've highlighted them for you. i'm not going to read the whole instruction, but "reasonably relied to his detriment," "material information not otherwise known or available" and "whether such reliance was a legal cause of mr. pollari's death." we are going to talk about that as we go through, but there is another really important part in instruction number 15, and that is material fact. a material fact is one that is of such importance that paul pollari would not have acted as he did but for the concealment or omission of that fact. material fact but for. so let us talk about plaintiff's concealment claim against reynolds and against philip morris. the question really is, did mr. pollari die because he relied on something rj reynolds or philip morris said or did that was not already known to him? mr. reilly walked through a timeline showing you all of the things that mr. pollari knew. evidence specific to mr. pollari, not to smokers in general, but specific to mr. pollari. remember the chain. used this in opening statement, and i said, at the end of the case plaintiffs are not going to be able to link that chain, they are not going to be able to link the concealment or agreement to conceal with mr. pollari's primary lung cancer or death, and they are not going to be able to link that chain because mr. pollari knew that smoking was dangerous and caused lung cancer for decades. mr. reilly just spent a better part of his closing argument laying that out for you. now, no witness in this case told you that he started or continued smoking because of anything rj reynolds, philip morris said or did. no witness told you he ever saw or read an advertisement by rj reynolds. no witness ever told you he smoked kool or camel because of anything rj reynolds said or did. there is no evidence that rj reynolds influenced his smoking decisions one way or another and there is no evidence for philip morris either. i want to talk specifically about mrs. pollari. she is the only witness who came in and talked about the camels or the kool cigarettes. cindy the daughter-in-law did not know him when he smoked those products. let us look at what mrs. pollari said. i asked her, did you ever talk to him about why he picked camels? no. did he ever in the 40 years of marriage you had, did he ever mention camel advertising? no. what about kools? well, it is a little confusing at some of the kool questions because mrs. pollari told you that she had no idea why her husband smoked kools. she told you she had no idea why he smoked kools. but she does remember that kools were filtered. and i asked her, because once i heard that i was like, well, could you say that you and mr. pollari, did you ever talk about the fact that filters or kool were filtered cigarettes? and she said, no, i do not recall. there is no evidence in this case that mr. pollari ever saw an ad for kool cigarettes. that is mrs. pollari's testimony. so let us talk about conspiracy. instruction number 16 also contains some information regarding plaintiff's claims for conspiracy against reynolds and philip morris. i've highlighted some of the important language. but remember key language, "not otherwise known or available." and here you have got to remember that dr. proctor told you a couple things. he told you that the conspiracy was limited to the health effects of smoking and the addictive nature of smoking. and that is what the conspiracy is. it is not a conspiracy to market to youth. it is not a conspiracy to market filtered cigarettes. it is not a conspiracy to market low tar. not that any of that, none of that had to do anything with mr. pollari. so let us look at this same question. i added something new. anybody be able to tell what it is? it is the date may 5th, 1982. because you remember, you have seen the verdict form now, you have seen that some questions are just asked generally and some have a specific date, and that is may 5th, 1982. and i want to read to you the part about the verdict form, which is also in number 16, that talks about that date. and it says, if your verdict is for the plaintiff on that issue you will then be asked to determine if any act, if any act on which mr. pollari reasonably relied occurred after 1982. it is not whether or not they argue that he relied after 1982. there has to be an act after 1982 that he reasonably relied on. mr. alvarez: objection, not the standard. the court: ladies and gentlemen, i gave you the instructions. those are the instructions you are to rely on. this is counsel's argument. proceed. ms. henninger: now, that is why, same question, i included the date in here because i'm going to focus a little bit on pre 1982. mr. reilly focused on the whole story. he went from the beginning all the way to the end. i'm going to stop in 1982 in the interest of time. but some things are very important. the warning labels in 1966 and then 1970. mrs. pollari said that the warnings were powerful and impactful. she told mr. pollari things like they are hazardous to your health, just like it says on the pack. these were not just things that were on there that there is no testimony about. they talked about them. he knew they were there. and she told her husband, you have got to quit smoking. i do not want you to die from lung cancer. that was her testimony when she took the stand and mr. reilly was asking her questions. so you have to keep in mind not already known or available. now, i had a timeline you guys might remember that i used in opening statements with all of the information that mr. pollari had available to him prior to 1982. remember it had some little pictures on there. well, this is not the same one, because it has a lot more information now based on the testimony. and fortunate for me mr. reilly covered all of it. but i'm going to just remind you of a couple things that he did not say. the first evidence of mr. pollari that anybody saw him smoke was 1954. that is when he met his wife. one year later they watch that see it now program that mr. reilly played for you, one year later. there is warnings in magazines or articles in magazines, newspapers even before that time about the dangers of smoking. they taught it in schools, et cetera. there is '64 surgeon general's report. we have heard all about that. we heard about how they knew it. they saw the news reports. they talked about it. and then the warnings. you watched the bill talman psa. i'm not going to go over any of that again except for one thing is that when they watched it -- remember mrs. pollari took the stand and mr. reilly was asking her questions about it. she said, we watched it. mr. reilly said, you discussed it. and she said, yes. she said, paul, look at that, you have got to quit smoking, i do not want you to die from lung cancer. so that bill talman thing was very powerful, and they talked about it. clearly the warnings changed. you have heard about it. what is this green line? 1971. they moved to florida. he quit smoking rj reynolds' products. the information continues all the way to 1982, and as mr. reilly pointed out to you, it does not stop there. it continues. but mr. pollari knew that smoking was dangerous and addictive decades before 1982. look at all the information on this chart. so for that reason you get to four questions. i get to do four questions at once, so we are going to do 5 and 6 together, because did mr. pollari "reasonably rely to his detriment on rj reynolds and/or philip morris' concealment or omission of material information not otherwise known or available concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes and, if so, was such reliance a legal cause of paul pollari's death?" now, the answer to this one is clearly no. i'm going to check it for rj reynolds. it also checks "no" for philip morris. the next question is virtually the same, it is just asking the question about was there an act after 1982. again, "no." seven and 8, not going to read the whole thing, you are probably tired of seeing the verdict form that you guys have not gotten yet, but you are going to get it soon, i promise. but essentially 7 and 8 are versions very similar to 5 and 6. and for both rj reynolds and philip morris the answer is "no." so we have gotten through up to 8. i skipped 3, right? so i told you i'd come back to 3 and that is the comparative fault question. and mr. alvarez talked about that and mr. reilly talked about that and i'm not going to say much except you have to look at the instructions on that and remember what dr. proctor and dr. farone both told you is that rj reynolds tried to develop and market safer cigarettes. they analyzed smoke chemistry, they published about it. the surgeon general cited some of their analytical studies in the '64, '79, '81 and '89 reports. and dr. farone said rj reynolds devoted historically a tremendous amount of financial resources and scientific talent to try to develop a safer cigarette. so let us talk a little bit about the law. and you heard the court's instructions, they are in this big packet, you are going to get it -- well, you have it already. but the assignment of fault relates only to actions that were a legal cause of mr. pollari's death. rj reynolds and philip morris cannot be assigned fault for actions that were not a legal cause of mr. pollari's death. the court: five minutes, counsel. ms. henninger: okay. plaintiff has the burden of proof. i'll submit to you that reynolds, philip morris, reynolds is zero. so let us get to the final question. punitive damages. let us look at this, because punitive damages the instructions will tell you can only be awarded for concealment that was a legal cause of mr. pollari's death. you may not punish the defendants for harm suffered by anyone other than mrs. pollari. punitive damages are in addition to damages that compensate mrs. pollari. and they can only be awarded to her estate. and they cannot be awarded for harm to other smokers. now, this is a very important point and the instructions tell this to you. plaintiff has the burden of proof. we have all said it a thousand times, you are probably tired of hearing it, but the burden of proof for entitlement to punitive damages is bigger. it is clear and convincing evidence. you can find that in your instructions on instruction number 21. plaintiff must prove entitlement by clear and convincing evidence. punitive damages are not warranted against rj reynolds because it is published its research, i just talked about this, and it was cited in four surgeon general's reports. and you have heard dr. proctor say, i've seen documents that reynolds scientists genuinely believed that filter and low-tar cigarettes were safer. reynolds developed and marketed safer cigarettes. and there is jury instruction number 21 that is on page 24 of your instruction booklet, it talks about mitigating evidence. and it says, "mitigating evidence is evidence which may demonstrate there is no need to impose punitive damages against the defendants." well, you heard a lot of mitigating evidence for both philip morris and rj reynolds through dr. proctor and dr. farone. i'm going to focus my last few minutes on my client and let us look at what dr. farone told you. he says that reynolds has a website that tells smokers who are concerned about their health that the best option is for them to quit. he also talked about, remember that ingredients list, but he also talked about how reynolds voluntarily discloses its ingredients on its website. and they have given the list of ingredients since 1986 and never has anyone said take this one or that one out. both dr. proctor and dr. farone talked about how reynolds invented new technologies to try to reduce cancer risks from smoking. and reynolds has succeeded in lowering the levels of carcinogen. and they spent a lot of money trying to develop that heat-not-burn cigarette. remember both dr. proctor and dr. farone talked about them. premier was the first one, it was the first one that came out. they did this big 743-page monograph. it contains a lot -- oops, got it upside down and turned around -- lots of studies, there is animal studies, mutagenicity studies, all of the studies that dr. farone told you should be done were done on premier and published in this book. and some people said, you know, it could be a safer cigarette, some people said -- they attacked reynolds for it. the fact of the matter is when it was marketed consumers hated it, it did not taste right. but reynolds did not stop there, they went on with eclipse. eclipse is the second heat-not-burn. that one's still on the market, it is not doing too well. reynolds has not given up because it is now trying something called rivo. dr. proctor told you about that. he also said -- you know what, they both talked about all of these products. well, dr. farone had been deposed a long time ago, he did not talk about rivo, but dr. proctor did. dr. farone then told you about a different kind of product that reynolds is marketing and selling and that is snus. it is a modern kind of smoke-free tobacco product. it is not inhaled. it is that little pouch that dr. farone talked about. and he said it was a very, very good step toward the reduction of risk and it was a viable harm reduction strategy. both dr. farone and dr. proctor, the two experts plaintiffs called in on company conduct and cigarette design said that reynolds was always innovating. they showed you a document in closing today, it is plaintiff's exhibit 1820. remember that number because remember i showed it. and they use it to say the exit gates would suddenly open if people figured out how to quit. and then what that document says is it goes on and gives three options. the third option is develop safer alternatives. look what they did. look what they are doing. and dr. proctor told you they are even selling e-cigarettes. so for that reason punitive damages are not warranted against rj reynolds tobacco company. now, i did not start by thanking you because i knew that is how i wanted to end. and luckily i have saved enough time to thank you guys. it is been a long trial. you guys have paid fabulous attention, everybody in this room appreciates it. thank you for the opportunity to let me present my evidence.