mr. alvarez: may it please the court, counsel. good morning. first of all, on behalf of ms. pollari and the rest of the -- her lawyers, and people who have been working on her case, i want to thank you very much. i know you have given up three weeks of your lives every day to come here, and it is important work that you did here, because it upholds the civil justice system, and it is very important work to serve as a juror. one of the things i told you at the beginning, when i first met you all -- it seems like ages ago, but it was only a few weeks ago -- was -- and i think it was received with a little bit of skepticism, when i said, if you are one of the lucky seven, at the end of this case, i think you are going to feel that, you know, it enriched you in some way, that you learned something. and i hope that is the case. we went through great effort to bring you world-class experts to teach you some things that you probably did not know when you walked through this courthouse a few weeks ago. and i just wish they could give college credits for that, because it is an interesting experience. there is a lot of information over these last few weeks that you have learned, that i think have changed the way you view things and see things. and now that you know the science, now that you know the facts, now that you know the medicine, you know, i think it puts you in a much better position to evaluate the case today. okay. so i have some time, and i'm going to tell you that i'm going to go for a while, so if you need a break, please do not hesitate to raise your hand. you know, you are not going to hurt my feelings. we will -- the judge will see it, and we will stop. i do not mind having my presentation, you know, stopped because someone has to use the -- you know, the facility. i do not have a problem with that. so it is not a problem. so let us get into it. you are going to get a verdict form with nine questions, okay? nine questions. it seems like a lot, nine questions. and every single one of them is very, very important, okay? but the first one is the most important, because we cannot go forward unless you answer the first question "yes." the case ends after -- if you say "no" to the first question, okay? so let me tell you what the first question is, and let me explain what it means. so the first question is: was paul pollari addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine; and, if so, was such addiction a legal cause of death by primary lung cancer? so there is several things going on in that question, okay? the first part of that question is, was paul pollari addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine. that is the first determination you have to make, was he addicted, okay? and we are going to talk about the evidence in this case and the science behind this case and the medicine behind this case that supports that, okay? the second part of it is -- is, if so, was such addiction a legal cause. and we are going to go through that instruction about what "legal cause" means. i told you a few weeks ago, in opening statement, what it meant; the judge read it to you today. we are going to go over it a little bit more in context with the facts of this case. and then the next part of it is, did it cause a death -- his death, right? did it cause his death? was -- was the addiction a legal cause of his death by primary lung cancer? meaning, did he have lung cancer that started in the lung, that caused his death? was he addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine, was that the legal cause of his death by primary lung cancer, okay? it sounds confusing, but it is really not that confusing. you know, we have to word it this way for legal purposes, but i'm trying to explain it to you as simply as i can, okay? that is what it means. and if you answer "no" to that, the case is over, we go home, and that is it, okay? if you answer "yes" to that, then we move on to the next questions. okay. so let me tell you the evidence behind that. let us start first with the definition of "legal cause." addiction is a legal cause of lung cancer if it directly and in natural and continuous sequence produces or contributes substantially to producing such lung cancer, so that it can be reasonably said that, but for the addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine, such lung cancer would not have occurred. what does that really mean? lung cancer -- i mean, legal cause, if it directly produces or contributes substantially to producing lung cancer... contributes substantially. did it play an important part? did it play an important role? but for the addiction, the lung cancer would not have occurred. if he had not smoked, if he had not -- if he was not addicted to nicotine, would he have smoked two to two-and-a-half packs a day for over 40 years and not develop lung cancer? did it play an important role? was the addiction an important role? why -- what kept him smoking? that is all it means, did it contribute substantially. so let us apply the facts to the law, okay? he was addicted, it caused him to smoke, and the smoking caused his lung cancer. directly produces or contributes substantially to producing lung cancer, okay? now, when you saw the instruction -- let me go back to it -- what word is missing there? "choice." "choice" is not in the instructions. whether he chose to smoke does not make -- is not a factor on whether he was addicted, okay? we are going to get to choice and where that applies, but it does not apply to the first question, which is, is he a class member, is -- was -- did he have an addiction, and was that a legal cause of his death by primary lung cancer, okay? choice has nothing to do with that. you do not find it anywhere in any of the instructions, okay? well, let us talk about addiction. it is an important factor. what does our government say about addiction? in 1988, the surgeon general found, in its major conclusions, that cigarettes and other forms of tobacco are addicting. nicotine is the drug in tobacco that causes addiction. the pharmacological and behavioral process that determine tobacco addiction are similar to those that determine addiction to drugs such as heroin and cocaine. i mean, nicotine addiction is a problem. it is a very addictive drug. that is what keeps people smoking. nicotine addiction is a fundamental reason the individual persists in using tobacco products, and this persistent tobacco use contributes to many diseases described in this report. the 2010 surgeon general report, the conclusion: nicotine is the key chemical component that causes and sustains the powerful addicting effects of commercial tobacco products. the powerful addicting effects of commercial tobacco products are mediated by diverse actions of the -- of nicotine at multiple types of nic -- nicotinic receptors in the brain. nicotine is an addictive drug. by the way, the other thing we are going to have to show you is, was he addicted, right? that is one of the things. you are not going to have a definition of "addiction." the judge, in all those instructions he gave you, there is no definition of "addiction." you know why? because you guys decide what it is. you use your own common sense to decide what "addiction" means. there is no definition. you might have -- let me go -- this is the definition that dr. drobes -- you know, we brought in a world-class expert to talk about addiction. this is the definition that he uses. and it is widely accepted among scientists that study nicotine addiction. "addiction" is defined as a chronic, relapsing brain disease that is characterized by compulsive drug seeking and use, despite harmful consequences. okay. how does that fit with the facts in this case? how does that fit? okay. he continued to smoke. let us talk about paul pollari. what are the facts in this case to show that he was addicted? he smoked for over 50 years. he smoked not only two packs, up to two-and-a-half packs a day for the majority of that time. he smoked first thing in the morning. and why is that important? because you heard from dr. drobes that when you are sleeping, you are obviously not smoking; but when you wake up after several hours of being asleep, your body is in withdrawal from nicotine. so the quicker you go for a cigarette in the morning after you wake up is the strongest indicator that you are addicted, because you are in withdrawal and you need that drug, right? what is the first thing this man did every morning when he got up? he grabbed his cigarettes off the nightstand and lit up. he smoked everywhere. he smoked in bed. he tried countless times over the decades to try to quit. he tried quitting on his own. he tried candy, he tried gum. he threw his ashtrays away, he threw his cigarettes away. the last thing he did before going to bed was smoke. in fact, there were times when he could not go through the whole night without getting up in the middle of the night and smoking. that is addiction. he smoked immediately before going and leaving church. he would go -- leave movies. they would go to smoking -- they would smoke in restaurants, where they allowed him. when they did not, he would leave. he went to a smoking-cessation seminar. i mean, this is a man who, if he was not addicted, why did he need all that help? why did he go to -- why did he go to a smoking-cessation seminar if he was not addicted? why did it take him decades -- why did he try decades and decades and decades to try to quit if he was not addicted? if it is so easy to quit, why did not it happen? use your common sense. look how much time he spent smoking, okay? if he smokes two packs a day -- there is 20 cigarettes in a pack. we know how much time it takes to smoke a cigarette. it is 400 minutes. four hundred minutes, over an hour -- 6.6 hours a day, okay? that is 4,000 -- i mean, 2,409 hours a year. that is 120,000 -- over 120,000 hours in a lifetime. that is 5,118 days of smoking, okay? that equates to 13.75 years that he smoked. and if it is two-and-a-half packs, it is slightly over 20 years that he spent smoking. but think of this: six-and-a-half -- six -- a little over six-and-a-half hours of his day is spent smoking. that is not addiction? dr. drobes, very well-respected scientist, over 60 peer-reviewed articles on nicotine addiction, written seven chapters in books on the effects of smoking, he is lectured all over the country. the man knows -- he is a scientist. he knows this area of medicine. and when he went through the dsm -- by the way, he found that he probably met all of them, okay? but i'll tell you what. let us just go with the ones that he was sure about. nine out of 11, okay? nine out of 11. nine out of 11 is highly, highly addicted. severe addiction. severe. this guy's not mildly addicted; this guy is severely addicted. but think about it. he smoked for over 40 years, two- to two-and-a-half packs a day. who does that unless they are addicted? but here's the testimony of ms. pollari: was paul addicted to smoking? yes. any doubt in your mind? do you have any doubt about that? oh, no doubt at all. no doubt. their daughter-in-law, cindy: when you were dating richard, was paul trying to quit smoking? yes. and was that just during that time period when you guys were dating, or did that continue through the next 15 years? continued through the next 15 years. did you talk to him about that? did you have a conversation with paul about his quitting? yes. when he was trying to quit, did his character, his personality, change in any way? yes. how? agitated, irritable, annoyed in general, very difficult. was that normal for him? was that his normal character? no. very mild-mannered man. what is that telling you? that when you are trying to quit, you are in withdrawal, your personality changes. those are the things that dr. drobes explained. that is the science. that is the medicine behind addiction. you take away the -- the drug, and it changes you because you are craving for it, you want it. you know, the defense has no burden of proof. remember i told you that? we went over it. i want to make sure you guys know. the defense has no burden of proof. we have the burden of proof. we have met our burden of proof. we have been here for three weeks. we have pounded that there. we know -- we overwhelmingly met our burden of proof, but they have no burden of proof. but they did not -- there is no doctor that came in to contradict who? dr. drobes. there was -- he was the only addiction expert that testified in this case. no one refuted him. dr. abel. let us talk about dr. abel. because you know what? he was the only oncologist -- this is a cancer case. this is a lung cancer case. he is the only oncologist that testified in this case. harvard medical school, 44 years of practice in the specialty of oncology. he is an oncologist for thousands of patients. the only oncologist that testified. the only treating doctor to testify, involved in the care and treatment of paul pollari. the only doctor that testified that he even ever met paul. the only doctor to testify that diagnosed paul with any medical condition. the only doctor to testify that ever examined or provided treatment to him. the only doctor to testify that was involved in trying to save paul's life. the only doctor to testify that had access to all of paul's medical records. the only doctor to testify that he had access to all the medical records of medical professionals involved in paul's care and treatment from august 1993 to january '94. the only doctor to testify that saw paul during the hospitalization in december 1993; and saw him daily, for those 13 days, at least one time a day. at least one time a day. the only doctor to testify that was charged with the responsibility of determining paul's cause of death in 1994. he was -- the buck stopped there. the buck stopped there. the only doctor to testify about what -- about the cause of death, and that had the benefit of four months of treatment with him, medical records, access to the family, and other medical personnel. the only doctor to testify that he actually made a medical conclusion as to paul's cause of death in 1994. who was in a better position in this case to say why this man died? the man who treated him for 14 -- four months, and saw him 13 of his last 15 days alive, every day, at least once. is there anybody in the world that knew more about what paul was going through than this man right here? and what did he say? my opinion is that paul pollari died with a lung cancer, metastatic in his brain, and this was caused by cigarette smoking. and are those opinions held to a reasonable degree of medical probability? they certainly are. notice "reasonable degree of medical probability," because he is the only doctor that came in here and said, to a reasonable degree of medical probability, i know why this man died. he is the only one. with regard to your opinion about the cause of mr. pollari's death, is that something that you arrived at recently, or is that something you have held for almost a couple decades now? it is more than a couple of decades. i signed the death certificate on january 11th, 1994, and indicated on the death certificate that paul pollari's death was due to -- i wrote "bronchiogenic tumor," which is a technical term for lung cancer, metastatic to the central nervous system, and the brain is a component of the central nervous system, so my opinion was established more than 20 years ago. okay? he signed that death certificate before there was even a lawsuit. okay. and how do you know that -- that he had lung cancer as opposed to a cancer in the stomach, cancer in the colon? i mean, how do you know that? i was there. i'm confident that, in my evaluation of mr. pollari, a physical examination was accomplished, a history, complete history, physical examination, relevant laboratory data, and the studies that would be required to properly stage the tumor. i'm confident that those studies were done, because that would be my routine practice and the practice of any capable oncologist who would be encountering a patient with a malignancy. how else would he have known that he had lung cancer? how else would he have known that it had metastasized to the brain, unless he did all those tests and scans? where did he get that if he did not do it? why would he write it on the death certificate? what do you think he was doing for four months? what do you think he was doing for the last 13 days of his life? when you certified the death certificate, the cause of death, did you have the benefit of all the records, his care and treatment that you had been providing him for over four months before his death? all the records related to his care, since august 1993, up to january 1994, were in my possession and available to me when i certified that the cause of death was lung cancer which had spread to his brain. i mean, we can go on. i mean, he -- he -- let us talk about the gastric bleed. and do you know, more likely than not, what caused the acute gastric ulcer with recent hemorrhage? i believe i do. and -- and why do not you tell the members of the jury. mr. pollari was taking corticosteroid hormones to control the swelling around the tumor of the brain, and these medications have a propensity to cause peptic ulceration and gastrointestinal bleeding. and was that -- this acute gastric ulcer bleed a complication of the medications he was -- you were giving him to treat the metastatic cancer to the brain? yes. i believe the ulcer was a complication of the treatment given to treat the tumor in the brain, yes. and is that -- and is that to a reasonable degree of medical probability? yes. this is a man who never once had a peptic ulcer, never once had an upset stomach, never once was taking any medication for this until he started getting treated for the lung cancer. and this is about -- this testimony about how sure are you that you evaluated all these other possibilities, look what he says: an important component of the evaluation is a ct scan that is taken of the chest and carried down over the upper abdomen, so that the scan will visualize the chest, the liver, the pancreas, the adrenal glands -- adrenal glands; and if there were tumors manifested in the upper abdomen, the scan would have showed that. as far as the other sites of possible tumor development, you are asking the patient about his symptoms and you are examining him, so you are able -- so you are being as complete as is practical. so what did he write on the death certificate? bronchiogenic tumor, small cell, metastatic to the central nervous system. okay? if he did not do all those tests, all those scans, why would he have put that there? okay. and look when he does it. look when he does it. this man dies at 1:15 a.m. on the 10th, and the very next day he certifies -- he certifies the death certificate. the very next day. no delay, no confusion. he knew what this man died of. and so the defense in this case -- and i'm not criticizing the defense. let me tell you right now, i am not critical of the defense. they have the right to defend the case, so do not take anything that i say that i am critical of the defense or the lawyers. they are very good lawyers, okay? i have a lot of respect and, you know, they are very, very professional. so whatever i'm going to tell you, do not take it as i am attacking them. i am not. i am simply pointing out the inconsistencies in the defense with the facts of this case. are we clear? okay. but i've got to -- but i've got to point them out, okay? this is their expert, okay? this is their gastro expert, dr. haines. based on the information you reviewed, do you have an opinion -- this word again -- within a reasonable degree of medical certainty or probability as to what caused mr. pollari's death? based on the data, i cannot be absolutely certain the cause of death. okay. now -- now, you talked about the cause of gastric ulcers in general. do you have an opinion as to the possible cause of mr. pollari's gastric ulcer? no. i would have to speculate based on the odds. well, we are not here to speculate based on the odds, okay? we have to prove our case by the greater weight of the evidence, the more convincing weight in the case. we brought the guy in here who treated him and signed the death certificate, and they brought in a guy who is guessing and speculating. okay. you used the term like "if," "speculate," "possible" and "risk." do you -- you do not have an opinion within a reasonable degree of probability -- of medical probability as to what mr. pollari died from, correct? we do not know what -- i do not know what mr. pollari died of. you said -- i'll get back to that. now, you can only speculate as to what happened to mr. pollari in the last days of his life, correct? you can only speculate? that is correct. okay. you are talking about what could have occurred; but in terms of what did happen, you -- you know that you would only be speculating as to whether or not he had a heart attack -- it applied -- -- that in any way was related to his cause of death? yes, as it applies to his cause of death, i have no data. so all these things, all these possibilities that he was throwing around, has no data. he is speculating. he cannot testify to a reasonable degree of medical certainty. we are in a court of law and we have to prove things to the greater weight of the evidence. we have. and this is -- this is a man who died, and you are not supposed to be speculating why he died, or guessing. my question to you, you would be speculating as to whether or not an infection, gastric bleed or heart attack, contributed to his -- to his cause of death, correct? that is correct. everything short of what you know in these lab records to you is speculation? that is correct. you can only testify to what the possible causes of death are, correct? correct. it is not your opinion that he was dying of an infection when he was discharged on january 8, correct? it would be speculation. i cannot say. so even the -- even the possibilities, they are speculating. you could not fill out a death certificate and certify what he died from, based on the information you have? that is correct. i mean, it goes on. i mean, this witness, over and over and over again, said he had -- he was speculating, he did not know. all right. and so when dr. abel came to the medical conclusion, he had much more information than you have sitting here today, correct? i would hope so, yes. you would have expected that, right? i would. and you would have expected him to have done everything -- everything necessary and reasonable in order to come to the medical judgment, correct? correct, i would expect that. right. and you would have no evidence to suggest that he did not do everything necessary in order to make a medical conclusion as to the cause of death, correct? he says: i have no data, yes, sir. now, you can only speculate as to what happened to mr. pollari in the last days of his life, correct? you can only speculate? that is correct. that is what they brought you, speculation. pure speculation. this is a court of law. you need more than that. i could not bring in -- an expert in here and say he is speculating and prove my case. i would not have met my burden of proof. dr. peterson. this is the medical examiner. he is not an oncologist, either, okay? let me ask you, do you think it is plausible, doctor, that if a patient like mr. pollari, who is given chemotherapy, radiation treatment, is not worked up to find out where the cancer originated, do you think that is a reasonable hypothesis? and listen what this doctor says: i do. he thinks that dr. -- he says, i think it is possible that dr. abel, a harvard-trained, very experienced doctor, who is very specific -- he is a guy who is detail oriented, that when you say one word that is incorrect in a question, he calls you out on it, okay? that is the guy you want treating people for cancer, right, a guy who is not going to make a mistake, who is paying attention to detail. and this man says: i think it is reasonable that he did not work him up. where is he getting that from? nowhere. use your common sense. you saw the man testify. do you really think that is a possibility in this case? in fact, is there any evidence of that? none. you cannot say where the cancer started? correct. and you have no opinion as to what caused the cancer? that is correct. but one of the reasonable hypotheses in this case is that it could have been lung cancer, right? it could have been, yes. do you think that, more likely than not -- more likely than not, if he had lung cancer, it was caused by smoking? i think if he had a primary lung cancer, that is the only risk factor -- the only risk that i can identify that would most likely be the relation. so he even admits that, hey, by the way, if this is a primary lung cancer, it was probably caused by smoking. he finally had to give that up. he finally had to give that up. would you agree that smoking can cause bronchiogenic carcinoma, non-oat cell? well, listen, he -- i got him to agree on a lot of things, but for the sake of time, let me get through this. so when you gave -- so when you gave the opinion -- this is the corticosteroids. this is a man who says corticosteroids do not cause, okay, do not cause an ulcer -- a gastric ulcer bleed. that is what -- that is what he says. but look at this: so when you gave the opinion, did you ever review the literature of these -- of these drugs to see if that was correct? i have not reviewed the literature on corticosteroids, no. so when you gave this opinion earlier today that corticosteroids does not cause ulcers and bleeds, you know, you had not reviewed the literature on this; right? i have not reviewed the literature recently, that is correct. and have you reviewed any product labels, you know, for corticosteroids like decadron to see if maybe this drug this man was getting caused ulcers or bleeds? i have not reviewed the package insert for decadron, no. by the way, have you reviewed the package insert for any corticosteroids, to see what the concomitant use of nsaids and corticosteroids would be? no. i think i said i have not reviewed the package inserts, no. he is given an opinion, he has not even reviewed the medication to see what the complications of the medication were. i'm not asking -- i'm not sure what you are asking me. are you asking me what in -- what informed his death certificate? yeah, i'm asking you, would you expect that he had more information than those two sets of things when he certified the death certificate? what he may have had in front of him or not, i do not know. i mean, he -- he would not admit that a doctor who certified a death certificate with a specific cause of death would have the benefit of the medical -- of this man's medical records for his care and treatment. so, was paul pollari addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine and, if so, was such addiction a legal cause of his death by primary lung cancer? yes. and then we move on to the second question. okay. the second question is: please state as to each defendant whether smoking cigarettes manufactured by the defendant was a legal cause of paul pollari's death. and there is a line for reynolds and philip morris, and you say "yes" or "no" to each. so let me tell you what this is. what this is -- if you answered -- we are going to take a break. judge, is that okay to take a break? [#deleted recess#] mr. alvarez: thank you, your honor. where i left off was explaining question 2 and what the significance of question 2 is. and, basically, what it means is, what we want to know is which cigarettes that paul smoked caused his death, okay? which -- you know, which brand of cigarettes by which manufacturer -- not brand, but which manufacturer. so that is what this question is. if you answered "yes" to number 1, at least one of these has to be "yes," okay? at least one of these have to be "yes." and we suggest to you that they are both -- they are both "yes." they are both "yes." and what is the testimony about that? the testimony about that -- and i asked the doctor, the oncologist, specifically that question. i said: i want you to assume, doctor, that mr. pollari smoked approximately two packs per day of philip morris brand cigarettes from 1971 until his death -- until his death in january 1994. was that brand -- did that brand of cigarettes contribute substantially to producing -- you see how i used those words? because that is the legal cause instruction, right? it has to contribute substantially to producing his lung cancer and death. and look what the answer was: yes, i do. i want you to also assume, doctor, that mr. pollari smoked approximately two packs of r.j. reynolds or its related company brands of cigarettes from 1954 until 1971. would that brand of cigarettes -- smoke that brand of cigarettes contribute substantially to producing his lung cancer and death? and he answered: yes, it would. so both of them, you know, both of them. and in combination with both of them, caused his lung cancer, okay? and let me -- the legal cause instruction, there is two parts to it. the first part of it talks about how it contributes substantially to producing such disease or medical condition; and then the second part of it says, even though it operates in combination with some other cause. right? so it can be two. it could be two. you know, you could dovetail rjr's brand with philip morris' brand, and they both -- if they are both in combination, over a 50-year period, over a 40-year-period, caused his death; okay? but the testimony is that, independently of each one of those, they both caused it, okay? they both contributed substantially to producing it, and that is all the legal requirement we have to prove. we do not have to prove it was the sole cause; all we have to prove is it is a -- a legal cause. a contributing factor, not the contributing factor. big difference between something -- "a contributing factor" and "the contributing factor." you see the difference? okay. so this question, we suggest that you say "yes" to both, okay? question number 3 -- now, question number 3 is about apportioning responsibility among the parties. and you will have a line for reynolds, philip morris, and paul pollari. and they all have to total to -- to 100. but let me tell you, if you say "no" to example -- in question number 2, to philip morris or r.j. reynolds, whichever one, then you put zero for whatever one you said "no" to in this one, okay? because if they did not cause his death by smoking their product, then you cannot apportion fault to them on this question, okay? in all fairness to them, i'm kind of explaining that to you because you will -- you will also see it on the instructions. it is a little bit confusing, but i want you to understand, okay? so what is the evidence in this case? how should you apportion responsibility amongst these three parties? you have two cigarette manufacturers and you have paul pollari, okay? well, i suggest that it should not be, you know, paul gets fifty percent and the tobacco companies share some fifty percent because, you know, this is not, you know, everybody came in this knowing the same thing, right? if both people come in to -- to an agreement and both people know the same thing, then maybe you could say, well, it is 50-50; but that is not what happened here. that is not what happened here, because you know that they concealed information and did not tell the truth. and when someone does not know the truth about things -- ms. henninger: objection, your honor. the court: what is the objection, counsel? ms. henninger: the allocation of fault, your court's instructions as to what it applies to. should we come up to sidebar? the court: sure. (the following discussion was held at sidebar:) the court: sorry, i'm not understanding. ms. henninger: i cannot do it without a speaking objection. the court: sure, no problem. ms. henninger: mr. alvarez is saying that the comparison of fault, you look at the fact that they withheld information in the concealment and conspiracy claim. well, the -- your court -- the court already instructed the jury that the comparative fault applies only to strict liability and negligence. that is the comparative fault. so you have to be looking at the fault with regard to those two claims and those two claims only. you cannot take the fault from an intentional tort and mix it into -- mr. alvarez: i'm sorry, i did not mean to interrupt you. ms. henninger: i did not want to say that in front of the jury. mr. alvarez: i appreciate that. judge, i'm only pointing out that a reasonable and prudent corporation would have done -- a reasonable and prudent corporation does not lie, does not conceal things. i can do that, too. you know, it is -- the court: so do it that way. sustained. mr. alvarez: okay. (the sidebar discussion was concluded and the following was held in open court:) mr. alvarez: may i proceed? the court: please. thank you, sir. mr. alvarez: you are welcome. a reasonable and prudent corporation will not withhold information from its customers, okay? they will not do that. so what is the evidence in this case? because this man started smoking when he was young, when he was 12 years old. that is when they got him. that is when they got him, right? it was a different time, it was a different place, it was a different world, all right? and they knew -- they knew that their market was young people, that you had to capture them before their -- ms. henninger: same objection, your honor. the court: overruled. mr. alvarez: they have to capture them when they are young, okay? so what is the evidence in this case? eighty-five to ninety percent of all smokers start as teens, okay? that is the evidence. eighty-five to ninety percent of them start as teens. that is the market. they have got to get these young people. they have got to get these -- they have got to get these smokers as they are kids, so they can be customers for the rest of -- decades going forward. and they knew that. and these are the internal documents. the importance of younger adult smokers: young adult smokers have been the critical factor in the growth and decline of every major brand and company over the last 50 years. they will continue to be just as important to brands/companies in the future for two simple reasons. mr. reilly: i object, your honor. may we approach? the court: yes. [#deleted sidebar#] the court: thank you. ladies and gentlemen, there was an objection, i sustained the objection. disregard the last comment of counsel. proceed. mr. alvarez: so -- i'll tell you when to put it up. give me a second. one of the things you are going to have to evaluate in this case is whether punitive damages are warranted in this case. and we are going to talk a lot about that a little bit more in detail in a few minutes; but what is important to know is, when punitive damages are warranted, there is certain evidence that comes in, and that evidence is youth marketing, and it goes to show how reprehensible their conduct was. so let me go and show you how reprehensible their conduct was, okay? the renewal of the market stems almost entirely from 18-year-old smokers. no more than five percent of the smokers start after age 24. the total brand -- the total brand -- the total -- excuse me. the brand loyalty of 18-year-old smokers far outweighs any tendency to switch with age. thus, the annual influx of 18-year-old smokers provides an effortless momentum to success [sic] "first brands." marlboro grows at about a .8 share points per year due to the 18-year-old smokers alone. young -- younger adult smokers are the only source of replacement smokers. that is what they call them, replacement smokers. the replacement smokers are the people who are coming in to replace the people who died, or quit. less than a third of the smokers start after the age of 18. only five percent of the smokers start after the age of 24. if young adults turn away from smoking, the industry must decline, just as a population which does not give birth will eventually dwindle. and that is the percentage there, if you look at the -- it is 68.7 percent by 18. and the median age is almost 17 years old. this is an r.j. reynolds document. it says: it is suggested to develop a new rjr youth-appeal brand based on the concept of going back to -- at least halfway to the technology design of the winston and other filter cigarettes of the 1950s. it is apparently established beyond a doubt that philip morris' marlboro cigarette has a much stronger hold on the up and coming new generation of smokers than winston or our other brands. it seems to me that a "me too" brand stands very little chance of changing this situation. what is needed is a new concept. so they recognize that if there is a concept that works with young people, like marlboro, reynolds is going -- we got to -- we got to do something like marlboro does, because marlboro is very successful in getting these young people. we have got to do the same thing. that is their mentality. that is their mentality. that is what this document shows you. this is their state of mind. their state of mind is, these guys are doing it better than us. we got to do it, too. we got to go after these kids. many manufacturers have studied the 14-to-20-years market in hopes of uncovering the secret of the instant popularity of some brands enjoyed by -- almost completely to the exclusion of others, as shown above. creating a fad in this market can be a great bonanza. the progression of marlboro preference shares from fifty percent at 14 to 15, to 21 percent at 21 to 24, while an indication of the brand's great popularity among young people, is also a clear signal of the "in" status the brand enjoys among them. this has been confirmed in the recent series of group sessions we conducted. however, it does not -- it does also appear that maturity and broadened experience have a definite effect on the reduction, over time, of marlboro's astounding popularity among the 14 and 15 age group. i mean, they are studying it. i mean, they want to know what these kids are doing. they want to know why these kids are smoking. why do you think they are doing that? why do you think they want to know what 14- and 15-year-olds are doing, why they chose their cigarettes? why? 1975 memorandum: from time to time when describing market categories and target audiences, we use references such as "young smokers," "youth market," "young market," "youth market," et cetera. the terms do not accurately describe what we are talking about. in the future, when describing the low-age end of the cigarette business, please use the term "young adult smoker" or "young adult smoking market." please advise all members of your department that these terms should be used in all written materials in the future. why are they doing that? because they want to make sure that they -- that these -- they do not get caught using these terms. the federal trade commission, 1981: although many experts now classify cigarettes as an addictive substance, many teenagers believe smoking is okay if they quit before it becomes a habit, and approximately fifty percent of all those polled did not know that smoking is addictive for many people. because when you are a kid, you know, when you are 15, you do not think the same way as your -- as when you are 20. and when you are 20, you do not think the same way as when you are 30. and when you are 30, you do not think the same way as when you are 40, and 50, and 60. you change, okay? you change. this is who they are targeting: young people with diminished judgment. knowledge of more information about the health effects -- hazards of smoking is relevant to consumers' awareness of whether the health risks associated with smoking -- smoking have any personal application to themselves or whether they are among those people who are particularly vulnerable to these health effects. for example, some consumers incorrectly believe that while smoking may be hazardous to others, it is not hazardous to themselves because of the particular type of cigarette they smoke or the smoke -- or the amount they smoke. of particular concerns in this group are teenagers who are unable -- unaware of the potential addictive nature of cigarette smoking and who, therefore, may be tempted to experiment with smoking. let me just go through these real quick. okay. so let me talk to you about why there should be percentages of fault. and when we get to this question, which is question 3, you can only assess percentage of fault for paul pollari and those defendants that you have found in question 2, right? you got that? it is important, okay? they knew what they were doing. they knew what they were doing. they purpose -- they did not act like a reasonable, prudent corporation should act. they acted recklessly, they acted intentionally, they knew what they were doing. these were smart people. this whole thing was engineered by executives and lawyers who worked at the company, to do one thing and one thing only: it is to keep people smoking. so when you apportion fault, what i -- this is what i -- and, by the way, you can put whatever numbers you want there. it is up to you. you know, you guys are the jury. you guys decide this, okay? this is what i would suggest: i would suggest 47.5 percent for reynolds, 47.5 percent for philip morris, and five percent for paul pollari, okay? because he did not know what they knew. when he was 12 years old, he did not know what they knew, okay? and they continued in a campaign of doubt and confusion so that they could keep these addicted smokers smoking. because think about this: if you are addicted, if you are truly addicted and you get two competing messages, one from healthcare personnel saying, hey, look, you should stop smoking, it is bad for you, okay, and then you get messages from the tobacco industry, saying, do not worry, it has not been proven, but if there is anything bad in there, smoke a filtered cigarette, it will filter out all the bad stuff, less tar, less nicotine, it is safer for you, and then from there, you go, oh, do a light cigarette, it has even less tar and nicotine. if the person's truly addicted, which message are they going to receive, which ones are they going to accept? common sense. okay. so, after question 3, question 4 is a damage question which i want to talk -- we are going to put that all the way at the end. we are going to talk about it at the end. the next question, question 5, i call it the path to punitive damages, okay? this is the path to punitive damages, okay? this case warrants punitive damages. but you have to answer "yes" to these questions in order for us to get to punitive damages. so the next -- the next questions, the next five questions, you have to answer "yes" to or we do not get to punitive damages, okay? so what is the question? did paul pollari reasonably rely to his detriment on r.j. reynolds and/or philip morris' concealment or omission of material information not otherwise known or available concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes; and, if so, was such reliance a legal cause of paul pollari's death? and it will be "yes" or "no" to -- for each of the defendants here. and, again, on this question, if you answered "no" to one of the defendants in question 2, you cannot answer this question to that particular defendant, okay? all right. so what is the evidence in this case? what did they conceal? because this is about them concealing, okay? this is about them not telling the truth, concealing the information they knew about the health effects and addictive nature of cigarettes and not telling people. that is what this is. them not coming forward with the truth when they knew it. if you are a corporation and you know your product's addictive, you know that it causes diseases, many diseases, and you tell people it has not been proven, you know, smoke a filter, smoke lights, there is no doubt, if you pay scientists to say those things, if you -- if you conduct a conspiracy to do that, if you continue to lie to the american public for decades, okay, and not tell the people what you know, that is wrong, okay? and if people rely on that information, like paul pollari did, then they are responsible. and what is the evidence of that? what did they do? okay. this is what they concealed. they concealed from the public that they were conspiring to conceal the health effects and addictive nature of smoking. they did not tell people, hey, we met at the plaza hotel, we all got together, we are going to do this, you know, we are going to form the tirc, we are going to form the tobacco institute, we are going to do all these things, we are going to manipulate the science, we are going to tell doctors -- we are going to pay off the ama, we are going to pay off scientists, we are going to spread our money around and do what it takes to get -- keep people smoking and cast doubt in their minds about the health effects. that is wrong, okay? mislead -- and they mislead real scientists about the health effects of smoking. they misled the surgeon general and other public health authorities, okay? they knew that smoking was killing over 450,000 americans a year, and they did not say that they knew that it even killed one person. they knew that fifty percent of all smokers -- fifty percent of all regular smokers -- think about that. half of the people who smoke regularly will die of a smoking-related disease. that is a significant, significant percentage. and they knew that. you are making a product that you know that half the people that are going to use it are going to die and you do not tell them? they concealed that they had studied nicotine and knew that it was a highly addictive drug, yet they go in front of congress and they lie. they manipulate the levels of nicotine. they can take nicotine out altogether. and if people want to smoke for their enjoyment, because they want to go out for a social drink and they want to smoke, they can do that without nicotine. but that is not what they want. they want people smoking their cigarettes 20, 30, 40, 50 times a day, because that is how they make money. so that is why they do not take the nicotine out. they manipulate the levels to keep it up there just so it is enough to keep people addicted. they do not tell people there is arsenic, cyanide, radioactive polonium-210 in cigarettes. they do not tell people, hey, there is 70 carcinogens in every puff of smoke you are going to take. they do not tell people that filters are no safer than unfilters. well, what is the word "filter" mean? it means it is filtering something out. that is the whole purpose of the scam, okay? they do not tell them -- the whole purpose of putting a filter on the cigarette is to get people to think that it is doing something, when they know it is not. they mislead the public about the effects of lights. they know that "lights" means nothing. you end up smoking more and getting more carcinogens in your lung. they know that. they do not tell people that. but they are supposed to tell them all those things. and that is what this case is about: their failure to tell people they concealed this information from the public. and they did it for decades and they did it to a guy with a ninth-grade education. they knew it. from 1961: carcinogens are found in practically every class of compound in smoke. present technology -- this is 1961: present technology does not permit selective filtration of particulate smoke. they knew it back then. they knew they could not filter it out, okay? this is 1961. dr. wakeham writes this, right? this is 1963, the same dr. wakeham from philip morris who is responding for the whole tobacco industry, to the surgeon general. look what he says: none of the chemical substances listed therein, to our knowledge, have been found by scientific research to be harmful to the health of smokers in amounts reported in smoke. that is a lie. they were not telling the truth. it is possible, of course, to modify the chemical composition of smoke by the use of filtration. two years later, present technology does not permit selective filtration of particulate smoke. they lied. 1958: when they come over from britain, and they go to most of these tobacco companies and the tirc, what do they say? that everybody except one guy in the united states is now -- believe that smoking causes lung cancer if by "causation" we mean any chain of events which leads finally to lung cancer and which involves smoking as an indispensable link. okay. doubt and confusion. these are the documents. obviously, the word is "confusion," and anything we can do to confirm such a situation could work to our advantage. doubt is our product. they are selling doubt. doubt is our product since it is the best means of competing with the body of fact that exists in the mind of the general public. the other thing is polls. they know what people are thinking. it is also the means of establishing a controversy. this was a well-executed, well-planned, well-funded scheme on the american public for one purpose and one purpose only: to make money. and it worked. and it worked. look what their own dr. farone, who worked for philip morris, said. (excerpt of the videotaped deposition of william a. farone, ph.d., was played to the jury as follows:) q. can enough nicotine be removed to make the cigarette not addictive? a. yes. q. have nitrosamines been known by the industry for a long time? a. yes. q. about how long? a. 1961, 1962. that range of time. q. and did they express to you that they knew that smoking was, in fact, addictive? a. yes. q. and did they think that -- that these compounds, ammonia, urea, and so forth, enhanced the addictive nature of cigarettes? a. yes. q. was it thought at philip morris that addiction was the reason people smoked? a. yes. q. is what philip morris was selling, nicotine? a. philip morris was selling nicotine in the form of smoke, delivered by smoke, cigarette smoke. q. and is the same true of the other cigarette companies? a. yes. q. philip morris -- did philip morris want smokers to smoke as many of their cigarettes as they wanted to? a. sure, yeah. q. did they place any limits on how many cigarettes you should smoke? a. no. q. was philip morris aware that, the more you smoke, the more chance you have of getting cancer or emphysema? a. yes. q. or some other disease? a. yes. (video clip concluded.) mr. alvarez: that is the guy who worked for philip morris, okay? they knew it back in the '70s and the '80s, like he said. why did not they come forward? that is concealing, omitting material information. this is the former president of american tobacco company's deposition in 1986. he admits that he wanted people to rely on what they were saying. (excerpt of the videotaped deposition of robert k. heimann was played to the jury as follows:) q. does advertising play a role in a person's selection of a cigarette? a. we hope so when we advertise. it is difficult to confirm this, but we do make the effort, and i think it is fair to assume that the -- the expenditure of large funds for advertising does give status to a brand and, therefore, influences some people to select that brand. q. okay. is one of the objectives of advertising for cigarettes simply to put your advertising best foot forward and hope it will serve all purposes, it will -- a. yes. q. -- it will attract new smokers and keep your loyal ones? a. exactly. (video clip concluded.) mr. alvarez: you know, they -- they got exactly what they wanted, okay? they got people smoking. they got people doubting, when they knew it was -- what they were saying was not true. and when people did that, and smoked and got ill, they should have known. they should have known. this is the testimony of rose pollari: did you believe that there was a controversy about smoking and health? yes. by the way, did paul read the newspapers and publications? yes. did he watch tv and news and stay current on events? yes. and was paul aware of the controversy about smoking and health? yes. okay. by the -- by the way, were you and paul receiving conflicting information about smoking and health? yes. okay. some reports -- did some reports say it is hazardous and other reports say that it had not been proven? yes. okay. and, so, just so it is clear, did paul hear both sides? yes. and -- okay. and did paul believe that there actually was a controversy about smoking and health? yes. okay. in the '70s -- in the '60s, did he believe that there was a controversy about smoking and health? yes. and in the '70s, did he believe that there was a controversy about smoking and health? yes. and in the '80s, did he believe that there was a controversy about smoking and health? yes. and up to the time that he died, did he believe that there was a controversy about smoking and health? yes. they got what they wanted. he believed the controversy. that is why they spent all those tens of millions and hundreds of millions of dollars. what do you think they were doing? why do you think they set up these front organizations like the tirc, the ti? these are smart people. you think they are spending millions of dollars for nothing? so, did paul pollari reasonably rely to his detriment -- you know, you have the evidence -- on philip morris and r.j. reynolds -- i'm sorry, r.j. reynolds and/or philip morris' concealment or omissions of material information not otherwise known or available concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes; and, if so, was such a -- was such reliance a legal cause of paul pollari's death? and the answer to that is "yes" and "yes." okay. question 6. this says: did any of the concealment or omissions of material information that r.j. reynolds and/or philip morris on which you found paul pollari reasonably relied to his detriment occur after may 5th, 1982? and it is r.j. reynolds and philip morris, okay? now, here's the important part of this: may 5th, 1982, has no factual significance in this case. there is nothing about may 5th that is anything particular to paul. it has legal significance, okay? we have to prove that he -- that after may 1982, okay, after may 5th, 1982, he continued to rely on stuff that was concealed from him. ms. henninger: objection. misstates the law. the court: sustained. mr. alvarez: did he -- we have to prove that -- did any of the concealed or omitted material information by r.j. reynolds or philip morris on which you found in the previous question -- you found in the previous question -- if you say "yes" to that, you answer this one, okay? if you say "yes" to 5, you answer this one, okay? and, here, what we want to know is, after 1982, did he continue, okay? did he continue to believe, okay? ms. henninger: same objection, your honor. the court: sustained. ms. henninger: move to strike. the court: the jury is to disregard the last comment. mr. alvarez: so what is the evidence? okay. they have known for a very long time that filters provided just as much or more nicotine and carcinogens to people. they have known this for a very, very long time, okay? they knew that filters were -- this whole thing about filters was a scam to keep people smoking and keep in their minds some doubt that the filter was doing something, okay? here's a 1966 document that says: the illusion of filtration is as important as the fact of filtration. okay? 1976: the new filter brands vying for a piece of the growing filter market made extraordinary claims. in most cases, however, the smoker of a filtered cigarette was getting as much or more nicotine and tar as he would have gotten from a regular cigarette. he had abandoned the regular cigarette, however, on the grounds of reduced risk to health. this is what they knew. this is what they knew. they knew people were smoking filters because they thought it was safer. and they knew -- they knew that it did not reduce the risk and they were getting more nicotine. 1975: the smoker profile data reported earlier indicated that marlboro light cigarettes were not smoked like regular marlboros. there were differences in the size and frequency of puffs, the large -- larger volumes taken on marlboro lights by both regular marlboros and marlboro light smokers. so they knew that people were smoking more with these lights. they knew it. 1975, this is more on marlboro lights: the smoker data collected in this study are in agreement with the results found in other project studies. the panelists smoked the cigarettes according to the physical properties; i.e., the dilution, and the low rtd of marlboro lights caused the smoker to take larger puffs on the cigarette than on marlboro's 85s. the larger puffs, in turn, increased the delivery of marlboro -- marlboro lights proportionally. in effect, the marlboro 85 smokers in this study did not achieve any reduction in smoke intake by smoking a cigarette, parentheses, marlboro lights, normally considered lower in delivery. i mean, that is them. i mean, that is philip morris' own -- they know that "lights" means nothing, but they continue to do that. they continue to market it as a safer cigarette, when they know it is not true. in fact, people were smoking more. and that is not right. and it was not until 2001 when it first came out. public health authorities dramatically underestimated the ability of cigarette manufacturers to engineer cigarettes that would yield very low tar and nicotine values when machine smoked, but yielded much higher levels of tar and nicotine when smoked by smokers. the switch to low machine-measured-yield cigarettes with the illusion of risk reduction was, therefore, substituted for a real risk reduction that would have occurred had the smoker quit smoking altogether. let me go to this conclusion: advertisement of filtered and low-tar cigarettes were intended to reassure smokers who were worried about their health risks of smoking and were meant to prevent smokers from quitting based on those same concerns. advertising and promotional efforts were unsuccessful [sic] in getting smokers to use filtered and low-yield cigarette brands. internal document -- internal tobacco company documents demonstrate that the cigarette manufacturers recognized the inherent deception of advertising -- advertising that offered cigarettes as lights or ultra lights or having the lowest tar and nicotine yields. they concealed that. they concealed that. that was not known until 2001, way after mr. pollari died. they concealed that from him. and what did she say? okay. what cigarettes did he switch to? marlboro reds. a filtered cigarette. okay. and how -- and how were filters being advertised back then? as safe. and was -- and what was paul's understanding about the filtered cigarettes? that it was safe to smoke. did paul ever switch to another cigarette after marlboro reds? yes. and what was -- and -- and what cigarettes were that? marlboro lights. and do you remember when that was? early '80s, i think. is it the marlboro lights or marlboros? marlboro lights. and what was your understanding of why your husband was smoking marlboro lights? they were safer. direct evidence, after may 1982, that he believed that smoking marlboro lights were safer. and you were asked some questions about why your husband switched to lights. do you remember those questions? yes. and you were married to him for 40-plus years? yes. did you know your husband? yes. did anybody in the world know your husband better than you? no. okay. and do you know why your husband switched to light cigarettes? you can answer. because he thought it was safer. and did your husband ever tell you that he thought cigarettes were completely safe? no. right. that is the reason he smoked the lights. that is the concealment. that is what kept people smoking. that is what kept these addicted smokers smoking. smoke the filters, smoke the lights, these are safer, do not worry about it, you are safe. the daughter-in-law, cindy: and at some point did he switch brands? yes, he did. and what brands did he switch to? marlboro lights. and do you know when that happened? about the time we were married in '86, mid-'80s. do you -- did you ever have any conversations with paul why he switched from marlboro to marlboro lights? yes. my question was: did you have a conversation with paul about why he switched from marlboros to marlboro lights? yes. and what did he say? he felt they were safer. and did he actually say that to you? yes, he did. did you have a conversation with paul in which he told you how he got the impression they were safe -- yes. -- safer? yes. so that question, is there any -- did any of the concealed or omitted infor -- material information by r.j. reynolds and/or philip morris on which you found paul pollari reasonably relied to his detriment occur after may 5th, 1982? "yes" for both. now, the next questions, 7 and 8, are very close to the same questions as 5 and 6, okay, with a little bit of difference. this is our -- this is our claim that they concealed -- that they agreed with other tobacco companies. did paul pollari reasonably rely to his detriment on any act or omission taken by reynolds and/or philip morris in furtherance of an agreement with other tobacco companies or organizations to conceal or omit material information not otherwise known or available concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes; and, if so, was such reliance a legal cause of paul pollari's death? and then the same question, the post-1982 question, okay? so what is the evidence there? okay. they were -- they formed this whole conspiracy. they all got together, they threw money at it. this is what they were telling the american public. (the video clip was played and taken down to the best of the reporter's ability as follows:) voice: well, obviously, a filter takes out certain tar and nicotine. i do not think the industry admits there are any bad elements. if there are bad elements, through our laboratories, through the surgeon generals, through the ama, through acts of god and luck, we hope we may find them. and if they are found, they will be removed. but, at this point, we do not know. (video clip concluded.) (the video clip was played and taken down to the best of the reporter's ability as follows:) voice: we do not believe cigarettes are hazardous. we do not accept that, because when, as and if any ingredient in cigarette smoke is identified as being injurious to human health, we are confident that we can eliminate that ingredient. voice: do you believe that cigarettes are safe? have they been proved to be safe, mr. cullman? voice: i believe they have not been proved to be unsafe. voice: do cigarettes cause cancer? voice: i do not know if they do or not. voice: i'm not in a position to give you a "does" or "does not" answer. voice: what will it take for this institute or for the various tobacco companies to be convinced? voice: well, that is a good question, and one that i think has been confounding a lot of scientists for decades. voice: to this question, it must be answered, insofar as the correlation between lung cancer and cigarette smoking are concerned, no one knows. it may, it may not. voice: the case is still open. the jury has not come in. voice: it may not be harmful? you are not convinced? voice: it may be or it may not be. we do not know. voice: and as far as i'm concerned, the bottom line is that we simply do not know scientifically what makes a normal, healthy cell suddenly go malignant. whether it is cigarette smoking or diet or genetics or occupational exposures or physical or mental stress, we simply have not the vaguest notion. voice: cigarette smoking does not cause cancer, "yes" or "no"? voice: it is not known whether cigarettes cause cancer. voice: all right, sir. voice: it has not been causally established. voice: cigarette smoking -- no causal relationship between cigarette smoking and emphysema? voice: despite all of the research to date, there has been no causal link established. voice: no causal relationship between cigarette smoking and heart disease? voice: no. as a matter of fact, there are studies that while we are accused of being associated with heart disease, there have been studies conducted over ten years that would say, again, that science is still puzzled over these forces. (video clip concluded.) mr. alvarez: and the last gentleman you saw was president of reynolds. that was in 1984, okay? 1984, after the -- may 5th, 1982. now, this is the testimony of the ceo from 1993: does cigarette smoking cause cancer? not to my knowledge. it is not been proven that cigarette smoking causes cancer. this is ceo campbell, 1993. all right. is cigarette smoking -- is tobacco addictive? no, i do not believe that tobacco smoking is addictive. i mean, they were all doing it, they were lockstep with each other. "yes," "yes," "yes," and "yes." question 9. okay. question 9 is -- this is the final step in this phase for punitive damages. if you do not answer "yes" to this, at least for one of the defendants, we do not get to punitive damages. and this is a case for punitive damages. let me show you evidence of that, okay? and if we have a punitive damage phase, it is a very short phase, a day, day and a half. it is not -- we are not going to be here for three weeks again. you know, we told you we would finish by march 26th, and we will; okay? so what is the evidence there? let us listen to some of their own people. you know, let us -- let us listen to figlar, dr. james figlar, a representative from r.j. reynolds tobacco company. (excerpts of the videotaped deposition of james n. figlar, ph.d., was played to the jury as follows:) q. sir, sir, no, no, no, i -- i understand those are your beliefs. i want to know, do you believe that they were being honest with the american public when they were making those statements? a. if i may answer the question now. q. you may answer my question, and you can expand on it as much as you want, like you have been doing. so do you believe they were being honest? a. at the time, they were, because that is what they believed at that time. (video clip concluded.) mr. alvarez: okay. that is not a truthful statement. ms. henninger: objection to the comment on the witness' testimony. we need to make a motion. the court: sure. come sidebar. (the following discussion was held at sidebar:) the court: yes, ma'am? ms. henninger: mr. alvarez just looked the jury in the eye, told them that dr. figlar, a representative of r.j. reynolds tobacco company, lied to them. mr. alvarez: right. ms. henninger: i move for a mistrial. mr. alvarez: and he is -- the court: excuse me. one at a time. ms. henninger: he cannot come in here and say my corporate representative lied under oath. that is not proper closing argument. the court: thank you. anything else? ms. henninger: no. the court: mr. reilly? mr. reilly: no argument. the court: yes, sir? mr. alvarez: i can. that is exactly what the supreme court says. if somebody -- if a witness comes in and says something, gives an untruthful statement, i -- i can call them out on it. and i did, okay? the court: anything else? mr. alvarez: no. the court: objection's overruled. there is no manifest necessity for a mistrial. i'm overruling the objection. (the sidebar discussion was concluded and the following was held in open court:) mr. alvarez: he said that they believed it, and that is not true. and they knew it. they even formed a corporation in germany to do secret studies that they did not want to do here, so it would not be discovered. and look at these documents. ship all documents to cologne. on the phone and telex, these will be destroyed. if possible -- if important letters have to be sent, please send to my home. i will act on them and destroy. that is how they wanted to keep -- that is the -- the extent and the level of the secrecy of the concealment which merits punitive damages. if, however, the results with nicotine are similar to those gotten with morphine and caffeine, we want -- we will want to bury it. accordingly, there are only two copies of this memo, the one attached and the original which i have. dr. wakeham rose to the head of research for philip morris. listen to what he says. (the video clip was played and taken down to the best of the reporter's ability as follows:) voice: none of the things which have been found in tobacco smoke are at concentrations which can be considered harmful. voice: but the components, themselves, can be considered harmful, can they not? voice: anything can be considered harmful. applesauce is harmful if you get too much of it. voice: i do not think many people are dying from applesauce. voice: they are not eating that much. voice: people are smoking a lot of cigarettes. voice: well, let me say it this way: the people who eat applesauce die, the people who eat sugar die, the people who smoke cigarettes die. does the fact that the people who smoke cigarettes die demonstrate that smoking is the cause? (video clip concluded.) mr. alvarez: i mean, this company went to every extent to conceal the truth from consumers, to conceal the truth from people like paul pollari, okay? and they knew -- and they knew that they were doing it, okay? and they did not care, and they were bold about it, okay? they were bold about it. they did not care. anne browder, 1983. (the video clip was played and taken down to the best of the reporter's ability as follows:) voice: well, how can you stay in business if you cannot hook the kids? voice: we have been in business very well, thank you, for some time now. (video clip concluded.) mr. alvarez: okay. they know -- they know they had to get the kids. they knew it. they knew it. without the chemical compound, the cigarette market would collapse, philip morris would collapse, and we would all lose our jobs and our consulting fees. that is all they cared about. however, we cannot ever be comfortable selling a product which most of our customers would stop using if they could. that is to say, if the exit gates from the -- our market should suddenly open, we could be out of business almost overnight. i mean, where do you see in here, we should tell the customers, we should tell -- we should tell these smokers, these addicted people, that they should find help, that they should not smoke our products, that we know that it is causing cancer, we know all these things? not one document in the millions of documents have they ever said that -- not one time -- because that is not what they cared about. we do not foresee any difficulty to remove certain reports from research files. once such -- when -- once such action is necessary for the successful defense of our present and future suits, we will promptly remove all such reports. as an alternative to invalidation, we can have the authors rewrite those sections of the report which appear objectionable. they stopped at nothing: destroy, rewrite, manipulate. that is why punitive damages are appropriate in this case. since we have a major program at inbifo, and since this is a locale where we might do some of the things that -- which we are reluctant to do in this country. we have done -- we have gone to great pains to eliminate any written contact with inbifo, and i would like to maintain this structure. if this procedure is unacceptable to you, perhaps we should consider a dummy mailing address in koln for the receipt of samples. i mean, that is what they -- i mean, these guys are pretty sharp guys. these guys are doing everything they can so this stuff -- let us throw all this research out because i do not want it coming back to us and hurting us. meanwhile -- meanwhile, every year, 450,000 americans were dying, every year, of a smoking-related disease. every year. this is another example of a ceo making statements in 1986. (excerpts of the videotaped deposition of robert k. heimann was played to the jury as follows:) q. i want to show you what is marked as plaintiff's exhibit 17, which is simply a package of pall mall cigarettes that is currently being sold. can you verify that as a package of pall mall? a. yes, sir. q. and would you read the warning that is placed on that for us, please? a. surgeon general's warning: quitting smoking now greatly reduces serious risks to your health. q. that is not a warning that is voluntarily placed there by american tobacco, is it? a. no, it is not. q. would you put that warning there if congress did not require it? a. no. q. and the reason is, simply, american disagrees with the warning, does not it? a. we certainly do. q. you do not think they harm smokers, so there is no reason to put any warning on them, do you? a. we believe our product is not injurious to health. q. as far as you concern -- as far as you are concerned, is the surgeon general simply wrong in concluding that cigarette smoking causes lung cancer? a. i would use the term "misguided." q. okay. if he is misguided, then i take it that your opinion is he is wrong? a. i was simply trying to be polite about it. q. okay. but not being polite about it, in your opinion, he is wrong, right? a. dead wrong. q. congress is wrong in requiring these warnings, correct? a. we do not think they are justified. q. so they are wrong? a. they are wrong. (video clip concluded.) mr. alvarez: all right. back then -- it was not until 2000 that they first admitted that smoking was harmful to health and that it was addictive, okay? six years after this man died. too late for him. the court: five minutes, counsel. mr. mcpharlin: i have 13 minutes. mr. alvarez: we have 13 minutes. the court: proceed, counsel. if you want to come sidebar -- mr. mcpharlin: no. mr. alvarez: yes, if we can. the court: yes. mr. alvarez: i do not think i can do this in five minutes. give me a second. (the following discussion was held at sidebar:) the court: i do not know where you are coming from with -- mr. alvarez: because every time we go to a sidebar, we stop the clock. we have a clock. and they agreed to that, just -- i mean -- mr. mcpharlin: i stopped it on the breaks. the court: i stopped it on the break, too, but not when we come sidebar. mr. mcpharlin: i stopped it on the sidebars. mr. alvarez: i think we all want that, right? ms. henninger: i mean, it would stop gamesmanship about people trying to ask for sidebars just to waste time. mr. alvarez: i will not do that. i'm -- ms. henninger: i'm not doing that. mr. alvarez: i do not think it is appropriate that a sidebar counts against me. i did not ask for a sidebar. the court: counsel, two hours is more than enough. we have a running clock on this thing. we are not going to -- you know, it is not a gamesmanship issue. mr. alvarez: i did not know that is how we were doing it. i did not know that. i thought we were stopping the clock. the court: okay. thank you. (the sidebar discussion was concluded and the following was held in open court:) mr. alvarez: may i proceed, your honor? the court: thank you. please. mr. alvarez: okay. so this is another thing that they were doing to try to conceal from the -- from the american public back in the '60s, '70s, '80s, and '90s. this is what they were doing, okay? criteria for selection: first, the reports should be a new research -- mr. reilly: objection, your honor. can we approach? [#delete sidebar#] the court: i apologize. go ahead, sir. mr. alvarez: thanks. the next question: so, under the circumstances of this case, state whether you find by clear and convincing evidence that punitive damages are warranted against r.j. reynolds tobacco company and philip morris usa inc. the answer to both is "yes." and that is the path to punitive damages. okay. so i want to now change subjects and talk about question number 4, okay? and question number 4 is: please state the total amount of damages sustained by rose pollari for the loss of her husband's companionship and protection and for her mental pain and suffering as a result of paul pollari's lung cancer and death. you know, this is where you decide how much money to award in this case. and there is no standard, there is no book, there is no -- you know, it is whatever you believe is fair and reasonable in light of the evidence. you guys decide that, okay? and, you know, i'm going to make a suggestion, and it could be -- you could agree with it, you could say it is too little, it is too much, or it is just right. it is up to you. it is within your purview to do whatever you think is right in light of the evidence, okay? but there is certain things you need to consider. you know, she was 58 years old when she lost her husband. she was a young woman. paul was only 62 when he passed away. you know, the nature -- if you look at the nature of their relationship, they were married for 40 years. they had a loving family. for paul and for rose, the most important thing in their life was their family. they cherished the fact that they had grandchildren. she cherished the fact that -- and hoped that they were going to live a long and prosperous life just being surrounded by their families, making pasta for sunday dinners, and watching their grandkids grow. and she will never see any more the love that you see in a grandfather's eyes when a grandchild comes running and just jumps on top of them and gives them this big hug of pure, unfiltered love. and she is not going to have that. she is not going to have the husband that she would hoped she would have for the rest of her life, that they could take walks after dinner, just hang out, just have a companion. that is something she is going to -- she is lost. and when you look at, you know, paul and rose, you know, they -- they lived a simple life. they lived a humble life, you know? you know, she is the butcher's wife. but even the butcher's wife deserves to be happy. and they took him from her purposely, intentionally. they knew what they were doing, and they did not care. you know, paul loved his grandkids and he saw -- he got to meet one just right before he died. in fact, this is the last picture we have of paul alive, holding his granddaughter who is only a week old, okay? that is the last picture we have of him. and the last picture we have of him is holding one of the things he cherishes most in life, which is a member of his family. because, to them, it was not about wealth, material things. to them, the most important part of who they were, at their core, was family. and when you have a family that is so close and you have -- it is like taking a rock and throwing it in a small pond. it has a ripple effect. and that ripple effect affects, closely, rose, and it will affect her for the rest of her life. she was 58 years old when she lost her husband. so, i mean, you know, like i said, i have a suggestion. it sounds like it is going to be -- when you see it, it is a lot of money, you know? it is. but the loss is enormous, what she suffered since 1958 -- excuse me, since 1994, when she was 58 years old, until now. she has not remarried. so we would suggest $11 million. and it is a suggestion. it could be more, it could be less. it is whatever you find is reasonable in light of the evidence and what the evidence supports. it is completely within your purview. and with that, i'm going to leave you. and thanks, judge, for giving me some extra time. and on behalf of ms. pollari, we want to thank you for your consideration. and when they are finished, we will have a few moments to address you, and mr. mcpharlin will address you one last time. thank you. mr. mcpharlin: thank you, judge. all right. afternoon. you heard a lot so far, right? i only have a half an hour so i'm going to talk fast. sorry. she is used to it though. i'll start with some of the most recent things that you just saw. you just saw a timeline from each of them, right, remember the timeline that each of them just showed you. well, what was missing from that timeline? well, we could have put a line in for 1920, right? when the evidence that showed that they were corralling people to go get high schoolers, remember that 1920, high schools, big business for tobacco. right? so they want to talk about, well, youth marketing, youth marketing is a distraction, that is what they want you to think. it is not a distraction. it was a shameful part of their business. it is the shameful base of their business. it is what they built their business on. so it is not a distraction. to call it a distraction shows that they are company -- ms. henninger: objection, your honor. the court: sustained. mr. mcpharlin: all right. 1940s. they are following the science. they could have put that in their timeline, right, when they are advertising "more doctors smoke camels" using nurses, medical personnel, dentists to advertise their products. they could have put that in their timeline. when they are talking about no cough, "our product does not produce a single cough." mr. reilly talked about how rose's brother was told not to smoke because it made him cough. but what did the tobacco industry do when doctors were saying that? when they were thinking, well, it might irritate you, maybe it will make you cough. well they produced advertising, they put doctors, or fake doctors on tv that said more doctors smoke our product. you saw the lucky strike ad, 21,000 doctors surveyed smoke lucky strikes. more doctors than any other doctor in the world smoke camels. "no cough in a car load." inhale. "do you inhale?" every time medical -- the public health community said something, tried to make -- tried to put a message out to the public, tried to get some information out to the public that smoking could be harmful to your health, they reacted like no business ever did. you heard that they were the most prolific advertisers in the history of this country; 250 billion dollars over 60 years. sixty years. 250 billion dollars just on advertising alone. that does not include the hundreds of millions of dollars they spent on the fake scientific organization, on the tobacco institute. they could have put in when they put in filters. remember the timeline? they produced filters 1950s. before 1950 it was .6 percent of the market were smoking filters. after some information started coming out by 1975 76 percent of the market were smoking filters. why were they smoking filters? well, you do not have to listen to me, you can look at their own documents. you know, when they thought nobody was listening, when they thought nobody was hearing their words, you heard what they really truly believed. you saw from their own mouths what they thought. and what they knew was that their marketing campaign, and filters were a marketing campaign, they were not an actual health benefit they were a marketing campaign. they knew that their marketing campaign was working, that it was affecting people. do you remember the document from 1964, it was talking about the affects of the surgeon general's report and it was a philip morris document and they were talking about how it was not that bad of an impact. and you know what, 1965 is going to be a banner year just like 1963 was. we sold -- i cannot remember the exact number, it was like 500 billion cigarettes in 1963. so do not worry, we have a crop of replacement smokers coming in. these young folks who are not affected by -- or who are not persuaded by what just came out in 1964. so they knew exactly what they were doing. mr. reilly suggested that this case is about one smoker's decision, which is an attempt to just sweep under the rug decades of misconduct, lies, a conspiracy by an industry that was putting out a consumer product that they knew millions of people were using, teenagers were using. they did unthinkable things. so trying to just make this all about paul pollari, and it is about paul pollari, because it affected rose and paul in a horrific way. but to tell you this is just about his decision is -- that is the distraction. they talked about paul looking in a mirror. rose was with him for decades when he tried to quit. his family was with him for decades when he tried to quit. when he looked in the mirror he saw a man who wanted to quit. well, why did not mr. reilly ask you: i wonder what philip morris' executives saw when they looked in the mirror in 1953, or '64. or what did ed horrigan -- when ed horrigan woke up in 1984 and he got ready for his interview on ted koppel, right, put a suit on, when he looked in the mirror to get himself ready for that interview, what did he see in the mirror? why did not mr. reilly point that out to you? they showed you a board and said defendants cannot be held liable for merely selling cigarettes. well, that is not what we are asking you to do and that is not what this case is about. they did not just do that. they did far more than that, they did unthinkable things and you saw the evidence of that. this is not a claim about warnings. it is not a claim about the warning labels. fine. it is not. it is about intentionally selling a product that you know is addictive that you know kills and you lie about it and you do everything you can to confuse the public and confuse public health about it. that is what this case is about. they talk about a safer cigarette, how dr. proctor is so bold to suggest that they stop doing what they did to the product to make it so dangerous, right? they talk about tobacco being sold for hundreds of years. it is true, been used for hundreds of years except it did not produce lung cancer. their product produces lung cancer. their product produces emphysema, throat cancer, bladder cancer, stomach cancer, pancreatic cancer, not the tobacco that columbus smoked, not the tobacco that was around for hundreds of years, the product that they made that they told everybody was just fine. he talked about dr. proctor and all the things that he had to say, but you did not see one witness come in from rj reynolds or philip morris to refute a single thing he said. ms. henninger: objection, your honor. the court: sustained. ms. henninger: we need to make a motion. we can preserve. mr. mcpharlin: they said -- mr. reilly said this and i think ms. henninger said this too, nothing rj reynolds did or philip morris did influenced mr. pollari. that just defies common sense. they wallpapered this country with advertising with messages about what their product was, with statements and claims that it was not harmful, that it did not do anything wrong, that if you were concerned, smoke a filter. and then all of a sudden hundreds of thousands, millions of people are moving over to filters and then to lights. and they have the incredible audacity to tell you nothing they did influenced him. mr. reilly: objection, your honor. the court: what is the objection, counsel? mr. reilly: "audacity," we have -- i have the audacity, your honor? the court: thank you. objection sustained. jurors disregard. proceed. mr. mcpharlin: their defense is that nothing they did influenced paul pollari. the billions of dollars that they spent advertising and marketing their product. they say ph, well, the surgeon general said something about ph and unprotonated. well, you saw their own documents, remember when they thought nobody was listening or they thought they were not going to get caught, they talked about ph and how they were manipulating was causing their sales to skyrocket. right? that is what they said privately. mr. reilly said it is pleasurable, dangerous and addictive. well, two and three they denied for 50 years. he talked about the world book and reader's digest. why was not that impactful on philip morris and rj reynolds? if it was such an impactful publication, how come it did not convince philip morris, the people who actually manufactured the product, that there was something wrong that you should be warning people about? they criticize mr. pollari for telling his kids not to smoke. so that must mean -- mr. reilly: objection, your honor. ms. henninger: objection. the court: sustained. mr. mcpharlin: they bring up that he told his kids not to smoke. what does that mean? does that mean somehow that mr. pollari knows for certain that cigarette smoking is bad for you? he knows more than rj reynolds and philip morris in 1970 just because he did not want his kids to smoke? does that mean he knew that filters were a scam, that lights were a fraud? of course not. they talk about material facts. okay, material facts: it is addictive. it has 7,000 chemicals. they manipulate nicotine to make it more addictive. filters are a fraud. they do not give you less tar and nicotine. lights are a fraud. they do not give you less tar and nicotine. their own documents speak directly to that. fifty percent of the people who smoke will die. they will kill millions of people. those are all things that philip morris knew and rj reynolds knew that they intentionally withheld from consumers, that they intentionally withheld from paul pollari. they talk about awareness. the federal government, the ftc investigated awareness in the '60s and the '80s. and they concluded that what the cigarette companies were doing was extremely effective, was working, was undermining the public's understanding as to the true health effects of smoking. that is not coming from us, from the lawyers, that is the federal government investigating what the cigarette companies were doing and how effective their marketing was and their activities were. you have those reports, just read 'em. they talk about 1982. for legal reasons it has meaning in this case, but for practical reasons it does not mean anything, because what they did they never stopped doing until paul pollari died. his entire life, the entire time that he smoked they lied, they concealed and they conspired. they never stopped. they produced and manufactured and sold filtered cigarettes and convinced him that they were safer. he switched to lights in the mid 1980s thinking that they were safer and that is exactly what they wanted the public to think. that is exactly what their own documents say they thought. can you go to 1820, please. i'm sorry, not 1820. 2023. this is a brown and williamson document that you saw in the trial. and it talks about what they understood and knew about their reaction, their response to health issues, filters. "in most case, however, the smoker of a filter cigarette was getting" -- oh, no, that is not it. yeah, i'm sorry -- "was getting a filtered cigarette much or more nicotine and tar than he would have gotten from a regular cigarette. he had abandoned the regular cigarette, however, on the grounds it reduced health risk." and then over here, blow up that first point please. remember, when they thought -- when they did not think people were listening, when they thought they could talk privately, they said exactly what they thought, what they believed. nowhere in the instructions does it say the reliance had to be on something that happened for the first time after 1982. nowhere does it say that. they responded to the health controversy by producing more filter brands and brands with lower tar delivery. they knew exactly what they were doing. it was a deliberate attempt to mislead the public to keep people smoking and get more people to start smoking. go to 4818, please. so that was brown and williamson who reynolds is responsible for, right? nowhere in the instructions will it say that reliance on "lights" cigarettes as a fraud does not support reliance, nowhere in the instructions will it say that. so when they tell you there is no evidence of reliance, there is no evidence that we did anything wrong, he switched to light cigarettes believing that they were safer when philip morris and rj reynolds knew that was a scam. the verdict form will say relied to his detriment after 1982, not what mr. reilly told you, relied to his detriment after 1982. mr. reilly: objection, your honor. the court: ladies and gentlemen, you rely on the instructions that i gave you, all right? counsel, do not indicate what counsel did in his argument; you worry about your argument. mr. mcpharlin: okay. yes, sir. he told you there is no testimony about why he smoked a marlboro. remember that marlboro video that we showed you? according to -- that was made by philip morris. it was the most effective advertising plan of all time; the top selling product in the entire world. number one selling cigarette in the entire world. philip morris knew that that advertising was effective and they had wallpapered the landscape, wallpapered the country, making it the most popular cigarette in the country, in the world. and there is no -- there is nothing to suggest that they influenced paul pollari in any way. so the world was influenced, but paul pollari was not influenced. the world thought cigarettes were -- light cigarettes were safer, but not paul pollari. this is what philip morris said, "those who are currently smoking lights do so because they are better for you than full flavor cigarette. although some experience that they actually smoke more lights they perceive that they are cutting down and it is an alternative to quitting, which most cannot." so when nobody is listening they talk about how what we are doing is effective, what we are doing is working on people. the conspiracy, how about that as a material fact, all right. that was a secret that they denied and they kept the secret until this engle trial, right? until 1994 were they first called out again. and then in 2000 they do not admit what they did, not until 2000. they talk about choice, nowhere in the instructions, not in the verdict form, nowhere will you see the word "choice." it is not part of the definition of addiction. it belies, it defies their own documents in their own words what they knew why people were smoking. it is not in the dsm; it is not in any nida definition; the surgeon general; if you look in the heaviness of smoking, which we talked about with dr. drobes, none of the tests and measurements that you would look for in just assessing if somebody is addicted, which you do not have to use, you can just use your common sense, it is amazing, to suggest that he was not addicted to nicotine, not addicted to their cigarettes. he smoked two to two-and-a-half packs of cigarettes a day for over 40 years and they want you to think he was not addicted. that defies common sense. here's dr. koop from 1988. 4725a, please. (video clip was played and taken down to the best of the reporter's ability as follows:) voice: surgeon general c. everett koop has issued two major reports on smoking. one on the dangers of secondhand smoke, the other on nicotine addiction. the tobacco industry disputes both reports as more political than scientific. voice: we have been told so frequently by the cigarette industry that smoking is a matter of free choice, you start when you want and you quit when you want, but anybody who has ever smoked knows that is not true. voice: what does the record, the long-time record say is the most dangerous age to get hooked on tobacco? voice: the indications are very clear that the people who are most heavily addicted to nicotine and have the greatest trouble quitting are those who began smoking when they were 14 to 16. i think the studies in all over the world, in every country and every culture, the younger you start the greater the addiction and the more difficult it is to quit. voice: now you have said that you consider tobacco as addictive as cocaine or heroin; is not that an overstatement? voice: no. i think the evidence is very clear if you understand what we are talking about. addiction is a specific physiologic problem. and the manner in which you become addicted to nicotine is exactly the same manner in which you become addicted to cocaine or to heroin. and that even after you have quit and you think you are clean that there is a tremendous tendency to relapse. there is no such thing as a safe cigarette. there is no such thing as a quality death. (video clip concluded.) mr. mcpharlin: can you go to 2184, please. this is from 1980. again, from their archives, from their secret documents, from what they said to each other when nobody is listening. "the lawyers remind us, i'm told, that the entire matter of addiction is the most potent weapon a prosecuting attorney can have in a lung cancer/cigarette case. we cannot defend continued smoking as 'free choice' if the person was addicted." that is what they said. they know exactly what addiction does, they know exactly why people smoke and they know exactly what it means. it is the reason that people continue to smoke for decades and it is the reason that paul pollari continued to smoke for decades. i need to talk a little bit about the issues that were raised as it relates to paul's lung cancer. so for over 20 years, not until we got to this trial, was there any dispute about mr. pollari's death certificate or his cause of death. "bronchiogenic tumor, nonsmall cell, metastatic in the central nervous system." nobody disputed that. nobody called it into question. dr. abel's medical conclusions stood for over 20 years. here's what dr. abel said. "i was there. right. the material is obtained from the lung, and we have an individual who is a heavy smoker. now, when the patient is evaluated, and he is evaluated by his primary doctor, he is evaluated carefully by me, subsequent in his course he will be evaluated by other physician specialists as well. the initial evaluation encompasses a complete history. the patient is asked about his current symptoms, his past history, and a careful note is made in detail regarding any other symptoms he may have. the patient is then examined, a routine, customary but detailed physical examination. after that, laboratory data is obtained and imaging studies are obtained. at the conclusion of this process of the history, physical exam and laboratory data, and the laboratory data includes the cytologic examination of the needle biopsy, the determination was made that mr. pollari had a lung cancer." and what does dr. haines, their expert, say about dr. abel? "so when dr. abel came to the medical conclusion, he had much more information than you have sitting here today, correct? "i would hope so, yes. "you would have expected that, right? "i would. "and you would have expected him to have done everything, everything necessary and reasonable in order to have come to that medical judgment, correct? "correct. i would expect it. "right. and you have no evidence to suggest that he did not do everything necessary in order to make that medical conclusion as to his cause of death, correct? "i have no data, yes, sir. "now you can only speculate as to what happened to mr. pollari in the last days of his life, correct? you can only speculate. "that is correct." so the expert that they brought in not only testified that he believed that dr. abel did everything he needed to do in order to come to the conclusion that paul pollari had lung cancer and that his lung cancer is what his cause of death was. nobody disputed that. dr. haines does not even dispute that dr. abel did everything he was supposed to do to make that -- come to that conclusion. they brought you no experts to come in and refute -- ms. henninger: objection. the court: sustained. mr. mcpharlin: there was no evidence to refute -- ms. henninger: objection. the court: sustained. mr. mcpharlin: the only evidence you got about what caused his lung cancer was from dr. abel. actually, that is not true, you also got some from dr. peterson too. dr. peterson said if dr. abel is right, which dr. haines is clearly saying he did everything he needed to do to be right, dr. peterson said if it is a lung cancer, then it was caused by smoking, i'll agree with that. so there is no question here, there is no mystery. we do know, maybe philip morris does not know, maybe rj reynolds does not know, but we do know, dr. abel knew, the physicians who treated him knew, who took care of him, who was trying to save his life knew, the nurses, the lab techs, those people knew what was going on with him. the court: five minutes, counsel. mr. mcpharlin: yes, sir. rj reynolds and philip morris when they were conspiring to deceive tens of millions of people back in 1993 [sic], when we talk about entitlement to punitive damages, when we talk about if they should be punished when they were doing that, do you think they thought about their victims? do you think they thought about paul pollari and rose pollari and lorraine and claudia and richard? ms. henninger: objection. mr. reilly: objection, your honor. the court: sustained. ms. henninger: motion. mr. mcpharlin: when rj reynolds learns about this, when philip morris learns about this verdict -- mr. reilly: objection, your honor. the court: sustained. mr. mcpharlin: the evidence compels a verdict that says it is not okay to do what they did. it is not okay to lie. it is not okay to produce a product that kills millions of people and claim it does not when you know it does. it is not okay to make a product as addictive as you possibly can, to do everything that you can within your power, and these companies were they powerful they had lots of funds to do -- and resources to do whatever they wanted with these products. they could have made them safe. they could have made them nonaddictive. they could have done everything within their power to put the public's health as a priority, but what they did was they used all that technology, they used all that power, they used all that money to do exactly the opposite of that, to make it as addictive as possible, to sell as much cigarettes as they could because their priority was profits not human life. so if you want to talk about whether they should be punished, there is no question that these companies put human life way below profits. and that requires punishment. that is how it works, when you act like -- when a company behaves the way they have, you punish them. it has to work that way. they have to be told you cannot do it again, other companies cannot do it again. they have to be held out as an example to other companies -- mr. reilly: objection, your honor. the court: sustained. mr. mcpharlin: part of what punitive damages are for is to deter conduct. mr. reilly: objection, your honor, wrong case. mr. mcpharlin: it is in the -- it is in the instructions, judge. the court: excuse me, counsel, i'm not going to argue with you, move on. let us go. mr. mcpharlin: all right. just a couple more minutes. rose was asked in her testimony why they moved here, why they moved to florida. and her answer illustrates what rose and paul pollari's life meant to each other, family. they moved here to better their family and make a better life for lorraine. mr. reilly: objection, your honor. the court: overruled. mr. mcpharlin: they fell in love in two weeks. they spent 40 years together. it took four months to separate them forever. four months of watching her husband go from the man that you saw with his grandson to the man that you saw who did not even resemble that man with his granddaughter. rj reynolds and philip morris had an opportunity to change that history. those four months, they had an opportunity to change that. they chose -- their choice was not to do that. their choice was to conspire, was to get together, to lie, to deceive, to conceal, to do everything they could to keep people smoking when they knew they should not have been smoking. to do everything they could to make people think that it is okay when they knew it was not. rose lost her husband, she lost her partner, she lost the man that she had been with who helped her raise her kids, who helped her raise her daughter lorraine. she is lost that for the last 20 years and that will be gone forever for the rest of her life. that is what philip morris and rj reynolds took from her. and lastly, 1771, please. (video clip was played and taken down to the best of the reporter's ability as follows:) voice: i'd like you to rise and those who will be testifying as well with you to rise. if you would raise your right hand. do you swear that the testimony you are about to give is the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the truth? please consider yourself to be under oath. voice: let me begin my questioning in the matter of whether or not nicotine is addictive. let me ask you first, and i'd like to just go down the row, whether each of you believes that nicotine is not addictive. i heard virtually all of you touch on it. and just yes or no, do you believe nicotine is not addictive? voice: i believe nicotine is not addictive, yes. voice: mr. johnson. voice: congressman, cigarettes and nicotine clearly do not meet the classic definitions of addiction. there is no intoxication -- voice: we will take that as a no. and, again, time is short. if you can just -- i think each of you believe nicotine is not addictive, we just would like to have this for the record. voice: i do not believe that nicotine or our products are addictive. voice: i believe nicotine is not addictive. voice: i believe that nicotine is not addictive. voice: i believe that nicotine is not addictive. voice: and i too believe that nicotine is not addictive. (video clip concluded.) the court: wrap it up, counsel. mr. mcpharlin: thank you, ladies and gentlemen, for your time.