mr. paige: thank you, your honor. the court: thank you so much. mr. paige: thank you. may it please the court. the court: yes, thank you so much. thank you so much, mr. paige. mr. paige: ladies and gentlemen, good morning. so i'm going to be speaking for a while. and each side has about two hours to do their closing statement. so i appreciate your patience, and i know a lot of what i say you probably already know, but the first thing i want to say to each and every one of you on behalf of everybody here, even the defense and everybody on behalf of the plaintiff, is we all thank you for being here. and we know that to be here, you-all have your own jobs, your own families, and to be here, as judge sasser said yesterday, we try a lot of cases in front of a lot of juries, and it is important to the parties and the court that we have jurors who listen, pay attention, and know what is going on. we appreciate that. that is all we could ask for; right? we know that we started two and a half weeks ago. we were on the 11th floor in that big room, and there were over a hundred of you down there, and the parties were able to agree on the seven of you that we thought would be, you know, fair, impartial jurors who would listen to the evidence, listen to the law, understand the law, and that was a lot of law to listen to, and do what is right and do what is fair. and that is all we want, and that is all we could ask for, and we know that you will do that, and we appreciate that. so i just want to -- i'm going to go through a lot of the jury instructions that the -- the judge just went through with you, and i'll kind of walk you through them because it was a lot, and to -you know, it is a lot, it was, i think, 29 pages or 27 pages. so the first thing you could imagine, this is an important case to both parties. i think you-all know that. and, you know, as the defense has said from the beginning, he is told you that this case is about tom purdo. and, you know, that is partly correct, it is about tom purdo, you know, his life, what happened to him, but it is also about an industry. and i know you guys have learned, you know, when you came here, you guys may have had some preconceived notions about smokers, and that is natural, that is fair. you know, people come here thinking things. but you learned a lot. and i think now you know what a lot of people do not know. and now you know a lot of things that you could not have known coming in here. you know, all you knew was there was a class action. what does that mean? did it mean anything to you when you got here? probably not. so now that is why i think it was important that -- or we hope it was important that the evidence you heard, you saw means something to you, and it is important. so it is important that -- this is an important case. it is important that -- you know, cigarettes are a legal product. nobody is going to jail here. but this is a civil case. you are a civil jury. right? and in a civil society, you get to decide if what they did is right and what they did is acceptable. right? because you heard all of what they did, all their little secrets, their internal memos, all the things that nobody was going to know about for 50 years while a lot of people got hurt, a lot of people. and so 50 years, that is what -- this case is not only about tom purdo, but it is about 50 years of lies, 50 years of concealment. robert. and it is about a -- and it is about a -- and i'm going to talk about nicotine, we will talk a lot about nicotine. but it is an industry that their business model, you think about it, a big business, big industry, it is okay to make profits. we talked about that in jury selection, remember, corporations want to make profits, but you have to do it in the right way. you cannot lie. you cannot lie and hurt people. you cannot cheat. you cannot steal. everybody goes to work here. everybody goes to work in our society, and we all do it in a right way and a proper way. you know, there is a book, "everything i need to know, i learned in kindergarten." do not hurt people. do not lie. be nice. they did not do that. and along the way, 20 million americans, 20 million people, just like her husband, died. 8.5 million americans are living with smoking-related illnesses right now. and so you have to think to yourself, are profits that important, are profits really more important than human lives. because a hundred years ago, there was only 140 deaths in the whole world. so how do we get to this place that we are at now? how did it happen? because now we know. you know, we thought we knew, but now we know, now you know the smoking rates are going down, and it is a good thing because nicotine is a drug. i mean, make no mistakes about it. that is the truth. they sell a highly-addictive drug, and they know it. people do not know. people think, hey, smoking is a choice, people choose to smoke, people like smoking. smokers think that. smokers will think that. but they know it is not that easy, and what happens, the problem with it is -- and this is from their own -- this is on the -- i'm pointing here, but i mean there, but the -- the -- the document on the -- on your right, "heavy cigarette smokers thus appear to be true addicts," that is a paper they funded in 1963 that dr. proctor told you was leakage, that they did not mean to find [sic]. so think about it. 1963, the ctr, which the judge just read to you, you know, we had a whole dispute -- debate with dr. proctor about all the good research that the ctr did. the judge just read to you, the ctr are co-conspirators. there is no mistake about it, that is a fact, and that cannot be disputed. so the ctr issues a paper in 1963, and they find -- it is funded by the industry, and the industry denies it for 40 more years, lies about it to congress under oath, to everybody, to their customers, to people they were selling, and -the next one, robert. and the thing is, their business model, when you think about their business model, how did they become so successful? how -- how did they become such a powerful industry? because people did not always smoke. and so they know the only way they can do it is that nine -- 80 to ninety percent start before the age of 18. that is not fair. when you are selling a highly addictive, deadly product, do not sell it to kids. that is your product. you are responsible for that. do not target them. do not study them. find ways to avoid them. back from 1927, "school days are here. line up the most popular students." 1960, "these 14- to 24-year-olds are going to be our business for the next 25 years." that is their business model. that is how they are making money. these are grown men studying high school students, little johnny with little girls. and so these are grown men who are making these decisions that are affecting families. they are affecting real lives, real people. you met one victim. you got to meet one victim, one engle plaintiff, one class member. this happens every day, every day, thousands, 440,000 real people, americans, every year. that is over 1500 every day die. and they did it by lying, by targeting teenagers, by manipulating nicotine, and they put profits over human lives. and that is not right, and that is not fair. and that is why this case is important. it is important to both parties. so the first question that you are going to be asked on the verdict form -- and the judge went over it with you -- is, was tom purdo a class member? okay? and so that is a pretty simple question; right? you look at it, was he addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine? and if so, was his addiction a legal cause of his primary lung cancer and death? so it is a short statement, but there is a lot of things in there; right? was he addicted? was he addicted, the legal cause? was it primary lung cancer? we have had a lot of debates here, you know, and i'll talk about all of them. and, you know, you guys probably had -- you know, and when you get back in the jury room, this is one thing i'll say. look, you are a jury comprised of a lot of different people from a lot of different parts of life. everybody has different life experiences. and one thing i can guarantee you when you go back there, not everybody hears the evidence the same way. not everybody -- everybody from their own life experience are going to go back into that jury room when you start talking, and you will probably be thinking different things from -- at the beginning. and all i would ask every one of you, each and every one of you is to just listen to one another and have an open mind, because, you know, this is a case that obviously we all want to -- we want a fair verdict. and the only way that is done is if people from the community get together, listen to each other, keep an open mind, and evaluate what everybody else has heard and what everybody else believes when they go back in the jury room. two things i was told when i get up here, said, do not lose your glasses, and do not drink so much water. but it is not easy to talk so long. shit -- shoot. mr. furr: do not spill it. mr. paige: do not spill the water. when i got up here i thought to myself, i wonder if anybody has ever tripped and fallen in front of the jury and so much as spilled water. so -juror adkins: that is what you did to yourself. mr. paige: pardon me? juror adkins: you brought it on yourself. the court: harold to the rescue. the deputy: now, you do know i told my jurors if they spill, they have to clean the whole room. juror adkins: that is true. please put on your glasses. mr. paige: apologize about that. so this class membership, so the first thing i want to talk to about is with the question of class membership is to keep your eye on the ball. because if you look at that question, and that is -when you go back in the jury room -mr. furr: objection. please take that down. we need to approach, your honor. the court: sure. [#deleted sidebar#] the court: okay. all right. we are ready. thank you guys for your patience. all right. let us continue. mr. paige: so i apologize, but we just -- i just showed you -- the judge read to you the question for class membership. so it is was the addiction -- i figured i would put -- was the addiction the legal cause of him getting lung cancer. and then the judge also read to you the instruction what legal cause is. in our view, the evidence and the law in this case is very clear. you know, if he was not addicted, obviously, he is not a class member; right? if he was not addicted to nicotine, he cannot be a class member. but even from their own documents, from their own -- from the law that you will read and the evidence in the case, you will see that ability to quit, that is not what class membership is about. mr. furr: objection. misstatement of the law. the court: overruled. "in our view." continue. mr. paige: in our view, every addict can quit. okay? whether you are a alcoholic, a cocaine addict, or a nicotine addict, you have learned 60 million americans have quit. tom purdo quit. okay? just because somebody can quit does not exclude them from being in the class. mr. furr: objection. that is an improper statement about excluding from the class. the court: okay. no speaking objections. and we are simply going to rely on the evidence and testimony in conjunction with the jury instructions. let us continue. mr. furr: may i approach on this issue? this is -the court: of course, mr. furr. (the following proceedings were had before the court at the bench and out of the hearing of the jury.) mr. furr: this is improper, first of all. there is no such concept to say excluding someone from the class. the court: okay. mr. furr: someone is not in the class until they have met their burden of proof to prove they are in the class. the court: okay. mr. furr: it is not a matter of excluding someone from the class. mr. leppert: and the point is that there is plenty of case law when prosecutors misstate the burden of proof and lower it to something else. right now he is flipped it on us to exclude him. the court: okay. that is -mr. alex alvarez: that is not true. that is not true. because we could argue that he cannot be excluded from the class if he was able to quit. we could argue that. we could argue that. that is not an improper argument. we can say he -the court: but it is inclusion, not exclusion, is not it? mr. alex alvarez: yes, it is. but -the court: okay. mr. alex alvarez: -- that does not matter. the court: and it is your burden, not theirs; right? mr. alex alvarez: we have never said that. the court: okay. okay. mr. alex alvarez: we say the fact that he could quit does not exclude him from being a class member. that is an appropriate argument. the court: okay. as long as you still maintain that it is your burden on class membership, that is fine. as long as you say that, then that is fine. mr. leppert: excluding. he used the word "excluding." that means he is already presumed to be in it. the court: i do not think so. no, i do not think so. i do not think so. i think i'm going to overrule the objection. now re-clarify what the situation is. okay? (the following proceedings were had in open court before the court and the jury.) the court: you may continue, mr. paige. mr. paige: all right. thank you. i apologize. and listen, in the trial you guys have seen a lot of -- a lot of objections both sides; right? and there is nothing wrong with that. all -- you know, mr. furr has a client to defend and he is doing his job and i do not hold any ill will against anybody who objects, but i want to make sure that i'm at least being able to get my message out. so one of the -- there is a lot of important issues in the case. and the first issue is class membership. okay? and class membership, if you read it, it is simple. and quite frankly, when we go through the evidence, it is simple. okay? it is whether or not tom purdo was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine, and if so, was that a legal cause of his primary lung cancer and death? so the issue is legal cause; right? because we know if he is addicted, whether he is addicted or not, could be a class member, whether or not he has primary lung cancer, so what is the legal cause of that. and i'm going to show you the instruction of legal cause. go to the next one. but what the evidence and the law we submit to you will be the class membership are not about these things, choice -mr. furr: objection. the law, your honor. the court: wait. overruled. continue, mr. paige. mr. paige: thank you, your honor. choice, ability to quit, knowledge of dangers, brand usage, there are other parts of the jury -of the verdict form where you will answer those questions. for example, there is a question on what is called comparative negligence, and that is where you will apportion the fault between the parties, right, what tom knew, what -- what they knew, what they did and what he did. and you will be able to do that. knowledge, what he knew and what was concealed, go towards an issue of concealment and conspiracy. those are different issues. brand usage, there is another question on that. so class membership does not hinge on those. there is a part of these cases do deal with those issues, but there are different things in the verdict form where they apply. next, please. and so this is what the jury instruction is, and this is what the law is. so you do not have to take my word for it. if you read it, it is plain language, english language. and it says that, "addiction was a legal cause of primary lung cancer and death," so now they are defining for you what legal cause means, "if it directly and in natural and continuous sequence produced or contributed substantially to producing such primary lung cancer and death so that it can reasonably be said, but for the addiction to the cigarettes, the primary lung cancer and death would not have occurred." that is the law. that is what it says. and that is why i say keep your eye on the ball, because that is what the law in the case is. and all that means, if you ask yourself what does that mean, but for the addiction, would the primary lung cancer and death have occurred, did the addiction play an appropriate role? but for the addiction, if he was not addicted to nicotine, would he have smoked a pack and a half to three packs a day for 23 years and developed lung cancer and died? that is the simple question for class membership. it is no more. we do not have anything more to prove or anything less. it is our burden of proof and i submit to you we have proved it, but that is what we have to prove to be a class member. then there are other issues. and the other thing is that addiction, to be a legal cause, it does not have to be the only cause. so you may hear -- have heard evidence that, oh, he liked smoking or he did not try hard enough to quit or he -- there might be something else, but it does not have to be the only cause. that is the law. addiction to cigarettes may be a legal cause even if it acts in combination with such other cause if the addiction contributes substantially to producing the lung cancer and death. that is the law. that is for class membership. and so nicotine is important; right? because you have to know how important is nicotine. if addiction is going to be the legal cause, but for the nicotine, would he have smoked cigarettes. without nicotine -- quite frankly, without nicotine, who is smoking cigarettes? if it was really about choice and nicotine was not that important, do not you think they would remove the nicotine? why do their documents say how low can we go? why do they say that? they know it is about nicotine. they know it is about addiction. and you know what, if they remove the nicotine and those were the cigarettes they sold and people could freely choose to smoke or not to smoke, probably a lot of lives would be saved, and we would not even be here. but that is not the choice they made. and so in their internal documents, even from far back as 1963, "we are in the business of selling nicotine, an addictive drug, effective in the release of stress mechanism. "for the typical smoker, nicotine satisfaction is the dominant desire. therefore, in designing any product, the dominant specification should be nicotine delivery." so when you are thinking about is nicotine addiction the legal cause, but for the nicotine, would he have smoked 23 years, every day, from the minute he woke up to when he went to bed, all you have to do is look at their documents. and you know that nobody does that, nobody does that. and if they did do that, they would just sell cigarettes without nicotine. they would just do that, but they do not want to. and they could. you know, back in 1940 -- i mean 1900 when there was 140 deaths in the whole world, the cigarette was different. they were not inhalable; right? so you had cigarettes that were not inhalable. people were not getting addicted. so either -- if you want to sell them and you do not want to hurt so many people, first of all, do not market them to teenagers. secondly, do not lie about them. thirdly, do not manipulate the nicotine. but you -- they have a choice. they do not have to be inhalable. they do not have to have nicotine, and they do not have to keep the nicotine level to keep people addicted. "tobacco products contain and deliver nicotine, a potent drug. our industry is based upon nicotine." and they talk about comparing smokers to rats in a cage. so what is the definition of addiction? because this is why the case -- it is easy. that is why i say, with class membership, keep your eye on the ball, because it is not that complicated. it should not be that hard. it should not be that difficult to decide that, look, there is a class of people from 1940s, 1950s, like tom purdo, who were born in a different world than we live in today. you know, it is easy to sit here today and say what we know now, but to judge people who were the grandfathers, grandmothers of our generation who lived in a different world, a different time where people did not know what we know and say, oh, we have to -- it is not that difficult. this is a class where these people who were basically taken advantage of, that is what the class action is for. mr. tepikian: objection, your honor. the court: sustained. mr. paige: and so here, their own corporate rep tells you what addiction is. that is the r.j. reynolds corporate representative. it is doing something for an extended period of time that you have difficulty quitting. it is not that complicated. it is not that big of a deal to -- to have to argue why -- look, we have the burden of proof. they have a right to defend their client. any defendant is entitled to a defense. i get that, but it is not that complicated as to whether or not tom purdo was addicted. and, then, that is what dr. henningfield said. play that. (excerpt from videotaped deposition of dr. borgerding played as follows:) q. dr. borgerding, on behalf of r.j. reynolds, if you could give me a layperson definition of addiction, what would you say? a. in terms of a layperson definition of addiction? i believe that a reasonable definition would be something that someone does for an extended period of time and they have difficulty quitting. (excerpt from videotaped deposition concluded.) mr. philipson: go to the next one. (excerpt from videotaped deposition of jack e. henningfield, phd, played as follows:) a. as i mentioned, you can boil it down, but it is sometimes called the heaviness of smoking index, which is two items from how much you smoke and when you smoke. in my opinion -- well, it is really two items, it is number of cigarettes. so if somebody is smoking more than a pack of cigarettes per day, virtually every day, that is a sign that they are very likely heavily dependent. and the waking-up cigarette. people that smoke more quickly when they get out of bed regularly are more likely to have higher cotinine levels, higher nicotine levels in their blood, stronger withdrawal, greater difficulty in quitting and so forth. (excerpt from videotaped deposition concluded.) mr. paige: and then the next document. so when you look at tom purdo, the evidence in this case, he started smoking at age 13, he smoked for approximately 23 years every day. he increased up to a pack and a half to up to three packs a day at the end. he was getting a lot of nicotine. every cigarette, you have ten doses of nicotine, you are smoking, if you think about the time, if you multiply, it takes ten minutes to smoke a cigarette. he is administering, if you divide -- you take that out, there is 60 cigarettes in -- in three packs, right, 20, 40, 60, 600 minutes, i mean, that is like ten hours a day, i mean, he is administering nicotine to his brain over and over and over again. you do not do that for the taste. if he ran out of cigarettes, he would get them out of a dirty ashtray. he would not go to a friend's house that did not allow smoking. first thing in the morning as soon as he woke up. and the reason for that, as you guys know, that with the -- what you have learned is the half-life of nicotine is two hours, so after eight hours the nicotine is out of your body. when you wake up in the morning and you are not feeling right, somebody who is addicted to nicotine, that is the first thing they will reach for within five minutes of waking. that is what he did. he would have withdrawal. you know what? and here is the thing, and i am going to talk to you about this when we get to comparative fault because you may ask, and you should ask, and it is a fair question, why did not he quit sooner; right? that is a fair question. and he tried to quit. and he tried -- you know, every addict, somebody who is trying to quit, they try as hard as they could, you know, obviously he wanted to quit. he tried to quit. was he successful the first time? no. does that mean he was a failure? does that mean he did not care? no. he tried again. and does that mean he was a failure that he did not care? he tried again. and it does takes persistence. and with anybody who knows with beating addiction, the more you try, the more you learn. and sometimes it is not easy to go back and try again, because it is not easy to fail. and so when you quit and you fail and you try again and maybe you say hey, last time this did not work, and somebody who quits at age 35 is not somebody who did not care. you know, some people, a lot of people do not quit until their 50s or 60s or 70s, and they try hard and everybody is different. and so a fair question is why did not he quit sooner, why did not he try harder. and that is why, in our very first pleading, very first pleading, we admitted partial responsibility for his acts of omissions in combination with what they did. and i think for any smoker, for any smoker, if you try ten times, you can try 11. if you try five, you can try six, and that is just the way of the world, and that is the truth. and for me to tell you otherwise, for me to come here and say he does not bear any responsibility, i could not do it with a straight face and i know that. so -- but he tried as hard as he knew how and you know what, when people finally succeed, it takes a lot, it takes a lot of failures sometimes. some people quit on the first time. some people do not. some people takes ten times. some people have the benefit of gum, chantix, zyban, patches. he did not have any of that. so he tried, and ultimately with anybody who is going to quit an addiction, things have to happen. now, they can call it motivation and, you know, you have to think to yourself, what motivated them to do the things that they did. we know he was motivated to try to quit and at the end, after failing many times, three things happened to him that were powerful to him. you know what? his wife was pregnant, something happened with a friend's daughter, he was a born-again christian, he had failed many times, and that does not mean that he did not try harder before, and thank god he did quit. you know, that is what he wanted to do. he wanted to do that for years. he switched to -- and the reason that -- you know, they could criticize him for not quitting sooner, but it is a lot easier to fail when you think what you are doing is not so bad. so when he is smoking low tar and filters, and they are telling him, telling him and lying to him, saying that they are not that bad for you, that is not right. and they do not -- they should not do that. and they knew in their own internal documents that people were going to rely upon them, and they know that people relying upon them are people who started as teenagers and they know that the people relying upon them are going to die, at least half of them. they know that. so why would you do that? multiple quit attempts. and he tried over and over again. and so i submit to you the evidence is pretty clear he was addicted to nicotine. and our burden of proof is what is more likely than not, the greater weight of the evidence, what do you really think, that is it. so now we have to decide was the addiction a legal cause of his lung cancer. and so we know that somebody who was smoking that much, smoking that much is being exposed to all these carcinogens. you know, a lot of people do not know that. people think it is not going to happen to me. i'll quit when i want. and before they know it, they are doing it for many, many years and they are getting all these carcinogens into the body. you know, you guys have learned a lot in this trial, which is good information, it is useful information, and hopefully, you know, you know, you will share that when the trial is over. but a lot of smokers do not know this. they do not know that they are putting arsenic in their body, polonium-210, cyanide. that is what they are getting, every puff of every cigarette, they are getting ten inhalations of that into their lungs 200, 300 times a day. and then when you ask, how does addiction cause a disease, it is pretty clear. so we know with somebody like tom purdo who is smoking that much, he is getting, over the course of his life, millions, millions. and that is what dr. villa talked to you about. it is not -- it is the pack-years that are important. you know, somebody can smoke for 20 years and smoke two cigarettes a day or three cigarettes a day, but somebody could smoke for ten years and smoke three packs a day. this man -- and, you know, we talk about tom purdo, and i want to just make this one thing clear. a lot of times we judge him or you are going to be asked to judge him, and i will talk about that. and, you know, we have said repeatedly not to judge him on how we are today, but he was not always 35 years old. you know, a lot of his conduct occurred when he was 15 years old, 20 years old, 25 years old, when he was a young boy, a young teen, a young man. and all during this time he was getting exposed to millions and millions of carcinogens to his body. and you know that that is not good for somebody. and so this is what we know, that fifty percent of all long-term smokers will die of a smoking-related disease. 440,000 americans every year. and, you know, it is a number that, you know, it is like if you say it enough, it does not mean anything. but if you would turn on the news and you would see a hundred people die in an accident, that would be big news. if you saw a thousand people, that would be big news. this is 1500 americans every day. mr. tepikian: objection, your honor. the court: overruled. mr. paige: every day, and we know 80 to ninety percent of them started as teenagers. and that is a tragedy. so when you get to the medicine, because this is really what the defense was in the case, was that it was not a primary lung cancer. that mr. tom purdo died of either colon or prostate cancer. and so the greater weight of the evidence, because you have to decide, again, when you go back there, we offered the evidence, and you will look at the records again, hopefully more, you know, closely and you will evaluate them, but it means what is the more persuasive and convincing force and effect of the entire evidence in the case. so if we tipped the scales and you believe he died of lung cancer, then he died of lung cancer. and that is our burden of proof. we do not have to prove it beyond a -- we do not have to prove it, you know, beyond any doubt. you know, dr. peterson comes in here and talks about an autopsy. well, most people do not have an autopsy. he told you his office does 9,000 death certificates a year and only a thousand of them do autopsies. you only do an autopsy when there is a dispute. and so i cannot -- can i look you in the eyes and tell you that i know one hundred percent without an autopsy -mr. furr: objection as to what is in his face. the court: sustained. mr. paige: okay. the court: the evidence. mr. paige: the evidence in the case is we do not have to prove one hundred percent, because if that was my burden, it would be impossible and i admit that. so you have to use -- look, you have to use your common sense, your knowledge, your experience, and everybody's experience and what you have heard in the evidence in this case. the other thing i want to say is -- if you could go to the next and the medical record. and look, this was -- this is something that happened, it is unfortunate, and again, this is a question that is fair for you to ask, what happened to that -- to the ct scans; right? because you met linda. you met linda. and do you think that she did that on purpose? it was a mistake. if it was something intentional, she probably would have just said i do not know, i never had them or they lost them 20 years ago or whatever. but she did not -- for whatever reason, you know, not everybody is a lawyer, not everybody understands how important things are, and she did not know. and so that is the truth, that the films unfortunately, they were thrown away when she was doing something in her house. she did not understand how important it was. mr. furr: objection, there is no evidence that she did not understand the importance. the court: sustained. mr. paige: well, if you think that she did it on purpose, if you met linda and if you think that she did that on purpose, then you let us know that by your verdict, but you met linda and she is -- and you -- you judge her on her credibility and the fact that she told everybody, even in her deposition, exactly what happened. and i'll tell you why it does not matter anyway, but the instruction is you have to decide whether those ct scans or the x-rays would have been material in deciding the disputed issues, you are not required to, but you can consider it. and so i would submit to you if we had to -think about dr. peterson. dr. peterson said without tissue, you cannot make a diagnosis. do you remember he said that? he needs a tissue to make a diagnosis. so do you really think if dr. peterson looked at those films, that his -- and those films showed exactly what all the medical records said that they showed, cleveland clinic, do you think dr. peterson would have said anything different? mr. furr: objection, that is improper argument. mr. paige: do you think he would have came in here and said anything different? the court: sustained. mr. paige: okay, so dr. -mr. furr: move to strike, your honor. the court: sustained. mr. paige: so here is what we have for the ct scan. and, you know, we could have gotten experts and our expert and their expert and you-all know what would have probably been said. but these were the -mr. tepikian: objection, your honor. mr. furr: objection. the court: sustained. mr. furr: ask the jury be instructed to disregard that. the court: disregard the last statement. mr. paige: these are the truly independent medical records from a second read of the records, this is not even dr. armas, this is at sloan-kettering from one of the renowned -- top medical cancer institutions in the world. and they are reading these films and saying that "ct confirmed a 3 centimeter mass in the right apex in the right upper lobe, with no hilar lymphadenopathy." that is a reading of the ct scans, so if linda, you know, god forbid did not do that, do you think we would be in a different position? that is why i say to you it is not material, it does not matter. we have all the records and we have people who looked at these films who were independent, who were not hired by either party, they did not care about this case. and so we know from the records that -- and again, dr. peterson talks about how he presented right before he died. and we know that with cancer, that is not the way it works. you know that from what you learned in this case and probably what you knew before you got here, that it does not happen like that. it has to be a spread. it is a -- it occurs over time. so when he first presented to the doctors, he had the single mass in the adrenal glands, which you know just right from there, that 45 percent of the cancers that go to the adrenal glands are lung primary, and it went to the bone. and the doctors -- and they knew it was an adenocarcinoma and they were able to rule out anything else because nothing else would even fit that picture. and so -- and we know that initially, when they diagnosed him, that he responded to the chemo for the primary lung cancer, because the tumor shrunk. and dr. villa explained to you, and that is why the doctors gave him this chemotherapy, because they thought it was a primary lung cancer. and all the medical records from every single doctor who saw him at three different hospitals, 20 years before a lawsuit was filed, the doctors who had the films, the doctor who had the tissue, the doctors who did not care about the tobacco companies or linda or her children, every one of them found that this man had lung cancer. it was not even a question, it was not even a question in anybody's mind until several months ago when dr. peterson gave a deposition, then it became an issue. and, you know, peter -go back. and peterson says -mr. furr: i object to that, your honor. that was always an issue in their burden of proof. the court: side bar. (the following proceedings were had before the court at the bench and out of the hearing of the jury.) the court: what is the objection, mr. furr? i'm not sure i understand. mr. furr: whether he had a smoking-related disease or not did not become an issue because of dr. peterson's deposition. that was their burden at the time they filed this lawsuit. they had the burden to prove that he had a smoking-related disease. the court: okay. mr. furr: if it is cancer, that would include whether it was primary to the lung. so that is a misstatement that this issue just percolated up because of dr. peterson. they always had that burden. the court: okay. mr. paige: that is not what i said. the court: yeah, he -- he did not -- yeah, he said medical issue. he did not say -- he did not say burden, so i'm going to -mr. tepikian: the medical issue is always an issue. it was always in play. the court: but he did not -- but mr. paige did not indicate that -- he is not shying away from his burden on that saying the medical issue. so i do not think he is crossed the line yet, so let us continue. (the following proceedings were had in open court before the court and jury.) mr. paige: and so dr. peterson, he says when we deposed him, we asked him, well, why do you think the doctors all wrote lung cancer? and he -and why do you think that it is not lung cancer? and he did not say anything about the metastasis. what his answer was -mr. furr: objection as to the content of the deposition. the court: okay, sustained. mr. paige: when we talked to him here, what he said is the reason that he thought all these doctors were writing lung cancer was because it takes too long, it takes too long to write metastatic unknown primary and that it was just more convenient for them. and you think to yourself does that really make sense? do you really, really truly believe that all these doctors, who went to who knows how many years of medical school, internships, fellowships, sloan-kettering, cleveland clinic, it is as -- you know, we are suing for conspiracy, right? we are suing them because they had an agreement to lie. and if you listen to dr. peterson, for some reason, all these doctors at three different hospitals in different states -mr. furr: objection, improper argument. the court: overruled. mr. paige: at three different hospitals in two different states somehow have an agreement that they are going to write "lung cancer" because they are too lazy to write "unknown primary." that makes no sense. and i submit to you that dr. peterson, you know, you could -- one of the instructions the judge gave you was you could reject a expert's testimony in total if you think he was not being believable, if you do not think he was being credible and forthright. and i submit to you when dr. peterson says, that these doctors who tried to save his life at two different hospitals were doing it because they were lazy, i submit to you that he does not have any credibility at all. and then dr. peterson, we know all the doctors say lung cancer. and then we know there is a biopsy that says it is compatible with the lung origin. and dr. peterson said in another case, where we did not have this evidence, in another case, i do not know if you remember this, but there is another case where he said well, if all the doctors say lung primary and the pathology is consistent with lung primary, then, of course, i would say lung primary, because in that case they did not have that evidence. so now when we have the evidence in this case, he says no. so he changes his opinion depending on what the case is, but one thing that he says, that he cannot deny, is the only three possibilities, the only three medical possibilities in the world that we know of, because it is an adenocarcinoma, the most common type of lung cancer caused by smoking is adenocarcinoma, is that it is either lung, colon, or prostate. it cannot -mr. furr: objection, misstates his testimony, your honor. the court: sustained. mr. furr: move to strike. the court: sustained. mr. paige: well, he said it could be stomach or pancreas, but he thought those were highly, highly unlikely, and the ones that he thought it was if it was not lung, it was prostate or colon, which he said he did not think were likely either. so at the end -if we can go to the death certificate. the death certificate shows that there is a small bowel obstruction caused by metastatic non-small cell lung cancer, even dr. peterson finally admitted on cross-examination that the most common cause for bowel obstruction in a cancer patient is impaction from medications. he admitted that, he knows that. that is a fact. mr. furr: objection, misstates the evidence. mr. tepikian: objection. the court: counsel, sidebar. (the following proceedings were had before the court at the bench and out of the hearing of the jury.) the court: if it is an objection, come sidebar, please. mr. paige: he said that in opening and i -mr. furr: it is my objection, here. mr. paige: -- and he was not right when he said that. the court: both sides. no speaking objections. all right, state your objection, mr. furr. mr. furr: dr. peterson never said that the most common cause of small bowel obstruction was attributed to medication. he said there could be impactions that could cause small bowel obstruction, but he never attributed it to medication. the court: as the sole cause, that is the objection. so i agree. okay, sustained. (the following proceedings were had in open court before the court and jury.) mr. paige: and so dr. pete- -mr. furr: i also move to strike, your honor. the court: sustained. mr. paige: i'll rephrase it. the court: that is fine. mr. paige: he even said, what he said was, with cancer patients, the most common is bowel obstructions, fecal impactions, fecal impaction. but then we talked about the death certificate. we look on the death certificate, it talks about the -- enter the underlying cause or disease or injury that initiated the events. he had the bowel obstruction for one week that was caused by the non-small lung cancer that he had for 14 months. and so for one week, i submit to you that is consistent with what dr. peterson said and dr. villa said, that the small bowel obstruction would be, most likely with a cancer patient, from fecal obstruction. and so with the death certificate, we know and dr. peterson knows, that when you are looking retrospectively, if we are all looking retrospectively at the death certificate that is filled out by a treating oncologist who followed this patient for 14 months, who had access to all the stuff that dr. peterson did not have, we know that my burden of proof is more likely than not, we know that there is a 96 percent accuracy rate in these death certificates. mr. furr: objection. that misstates -mr. alex alvarez: i'll play -mr. paige: i'll play it. the court: overruled. play the video. mr. paige: okay. (video clip from courtroom view network of testimony of brian peterson, m.d., played as follows:) q. -- sign your name to a report, when you signed that report in federal court -(video clip from courtroom view network stopped and the following is in open court.) mr. paige: i'm going to -- so this was when dr. peterson had testified in another case in federal court where he had to file a written report, and he had to attach to those written reports literature that he found authoritative, reliable, and trustworthy that benefitted him in that case. and in that case, the articles that he relied upon, that he said were trustworthy, indicated when a treating cancer doctor signs a death certificate for lung cancer, because there is different statistics depending on who is signing what and what the disease is. but when the treating oncologist signs an affidavit, i mean a death certificate for lung cancer -mr. furr: objection. not substantive evidence, your honor, used for impeachment only. the court: okay. no speaking objections. overruled. continue. mr. paige: okay. play that, please. (video clip from courtroom view network of testimony of brian peterson, m.d., resumed as follows:) q. -- your name to a report, when you signed that report in federal court, it was acc- -- you considered it to be accurate and truthful, did you not? a. yeah, to the best of my ability. q. okay. and one of the things that you told the court that you were relying upon was a peer-reviewed study from 2012 called, "variability in cancer death certificate accuracy by characteristic of death certificates." correct? a. okay. q. and, doctor, do you agree that the accuracy rate for death certificates when being certified for a cancer-related specialist is over 95 percent accurate; right? a. gosh darn it, that is right. (video clip from courtroom view network stopped and the following is in open court.) mr. paige: okay. and so that is dr. peterson, their own expert. so, you know, we have all these -- you know, and again, it is our burden of proof, i'm not complaining. we have all these medical records. we have good doctors who cared for him, good hospitals, and we are here, and we are re-proving what her husband died from 20 years ago. so we now know that dr. peterson is looking at colon cancer or prostate cancer; right? and so colon cancer, what we know with colon cancer, even with dr. peterson, and when you start flipping the numbers around, what dr. peterson said he knows is with colon cancer -- and again, that is why the metastatic pattern at the beginning is important because they know that certain cancers they go certain way at the beginning and at the end different things happen when it is all over the body. but with colon cancer, he knows that 70 to ninety percent of the time, colon cancer will go to the liver first. remember he said that? and then he also said that it will go from the mesenteric lymph nodes first. because he talked about how it goes through the lymphatic system and it goes through the mesenteric and the liver first if you have colon cancer. and so we know that there were three ct scans that were done all along the way. and none of the ct scans indicated any -- there was one in august '96, i mean, we do not have the scans, we do not have the reports, but we have references to them. we know there was a scan done august '96, march '97, june '97 of the abdomen, and that those scans, none of them indicated anything in the liver, nothing in the mesenteric or peritoneal areas, nothing at all. and no doctor at sloan-kettering, and if any doctors would know if it was important, it would be a doctor at sloan-kettering, and none of them indicated anything of the -- of that. so here's a guy who has a single solid mass in his lung in the adrenal glands. he is got metastasis to the bone. he is got nothing in his liver and nothing in the mesenteric areas. and then a week -- and then they also, in addition to that, they did a sigmoidoscopy a year earlier, which only goes to sixty percent of the colon, but there is no polyps, he is got no history of familial polyposis, which is the only genetic risk factor, predisposition to colon cancer. he does not have any of that. and he also had no -- stage iv in august '96, he had -- so they want -- what their case is, is that in august of '96, he had stage iv colon cancer with no blood in the stool, no liver metastasis, no mesenteric metastasis, nothing to indicate that he had colon cancer. and then a week before he dies, they do another ct scan, and for the first time, it shows that it is now in the liver and new mesenteric masses, for the first time. and so now this doctor wants to tell you that because it is in the mesenteric last, which is not consistent with what he said, that that would be colon cancer. and think about that. if that were true, why would every doctor, there is five, six doctors who all said otherwise, what would motivate them for doing that? they had nothing to do with what we are doing here. so go to the next one. so this is the spread. he starts like -- he starts here. and at the end, as dr. villa explained to you, went through the bones at the end, and coming here, and now he is got all these multiple -- if you look at it, he talked to you about multiple lesions, and that is how it is described at the end, that he is got multiple masses in the mesenteric area. and finally, we know more likely than not that you can exclude colon cancer, single solid mass in the lung, went to the adrenal glands and the bone, no blood in the stool. look, you are not going to have blood in the stool for stage i or stage ii colon cancer necessarily, but they are saying august '96, because we know it is got to be stage iv because it spread to the bone; right? so we know it is outside the colon. for it to be colon cancer, it is got to be stage iv. how could you have stage iv colon cancer without any of these symptoms? there is not one doctor in the world that even thought that it was possible. if they taught it was possible, they would have looked for it, but they did not even -it was not even -- it was not on their radar screen because it did not make sense and it does not make sense. and then he said prostate cancer. and again, remember he said both of these were just as equally as likely. and he is a doctor who now said yesterday do not get a psa. well, we know that psas -- the two ways that you screen for prostate cancer are rectal exams and psas; right? and so if somebody does not want -- you do not want to get screened for prostate cancer when it is stage iv. and this guy, they want you to believe that he had stage iv prostate cancer that had grown -- not a little tumor, but had grown to a stage iv mass in his prostate, which had a normal rectal exam and a psa negative. they told you psa is 95 percent accurate. okay? so you have to think that he falls within that 5 percent and, for some reason, he has a normal rectal exam with stage iv. it does not make sense. it is not even plausible. they do the psas for a reason, they do these tests for a reason. and so not one doctor until dr. peterson testified said that it was prostate. and dr. peterson said he does not know if it is prostate, he does not know if it is colon, could be lung cancer. but we have all these doctors, all of them, who they had no doubt, no doubt, dr. armas, dr. meiri, you will see their names in the records, dr. weick from cleveland clinic, dr. britto, who is a pathologist, who said consistent with lung primary, dr. pfister at sloan-kettering, dr. villa said it is a hundred percent certain. and so i submit to you hopefully it is clear that he did have primary lung cancer from smoking. and so this is, if he is addicted and if you believe he was addicted and you believe he has primary lung cancer from smoking, this is all -this is the addiction causation issue. (excerpt from videotaped deposition of peter lipowicz, phd, played as follows:) q. and so do you on behalf of philip morris see any relationship between nicotine addiction and disease? a. so the relationship is that if a smoker is smoking more cigarettes because he or she is addicted, then that can lead to a greater risk of cancer. (excerpt from videotaped deposition stopped.) mr. paige: and this is surgeon general koop. (video clip played as follows:) dr. koop: we should also give priority to the one addiction, tobacco addiction, that is killing more than 300,000 americans each year. (video clip stopped.) mr. paige: and so when we asked him if the legal cause question, but for the addiction, was the addiction a substantial contributing cause, not the only cause, but a substantial contributing cause of his lung cancer and death, again, i submit to you that if you look at the records, they know how important the nicotine addiction is. they say in their own records, without nicotine, we would all lose our jobs. and look in their documents and you see where they talk about losing their jobs, about money, about not getting money, and look for how many times they have talked about being concerned with any of their customers' health. you will not find it. you will not find any reference anywhere where -- all they talk about is money, losing our jobs, we could being out of business overnight. the profits over human lives is the thing that motivated them and drove them, and human lives, even though they promised in the frank statement that the customer's health would be paramount, which it should be, right, if you are selling a product like that, why would not it be, the public health would be paramount. when you look in their documents, you will see no consideration, zero, for the health of anybody, no consideration for anybody, for the welfare of anybody, but their own profits. and you will see documents like that over and over again. and so was addiction the legal cause, but for the addiction, would he have smoked a pack and a half to three packs for 23 years and developed lung cancer and died. and i submit to you that he -that he is a class member. and then once he is a class member, and this is why it is so important, because once he is a class member, these findings apply and they cannot be denied and they have to be embraced by you as if you found them yourself. these are findings that were in another trial, in another courthouse, a big case that went to the florida supreme court and they have been approved as binding upon you as long as he is a class member. and these are serious things because smoking -- the trial was in the '90s, '97, i believe, but it says smoking causes cancer and lung cancer. they did not admit that into until 2000. that was a finding in the engle trial. nicotine is addictive. they did not admit that in the trial. that was a finding. they did not admit that until 2000. their products are defective and unreasonably dangerous, they were negligent, and they omitted material information that was important information, not otherwise known or available, knowing it was false. that is a fact. and failed to disclose a material fact concerning what they knew about the health effects and addictive nature of their product. and that each defendant, and this is where they conspired, they had an agreement with each other, philip morris and r.j. reynolds, and when i say philip -- r.j. reynolds, i mean american tobacco, brown & williamson, lorillard, they are all part of reynolds now, agreed with each other to conceal and omit information regarding the health effects of their product or the addictive nature with the intention, so they knew, that smokers and the public would rely upon the information to their detriment. meaning they knew that people would rely upon what they were saying and get hurt. that is what it means to rely upon it to your detriment. and the companies that were involved were all the companies that you have heard about, plus, and that is what dr. proctor was telling you, that this whole thing about the ctr and their research and all the good research was a front and a shield and they are co-conspirators along with the tobacco institute. and those are facts. so if mr. purdo is a class member, they can no longer say that they are not responsible for doing those things. and then so the next question will be about brand usage. and so one of the things that you have learned in this case was there were different brands that were smoked. he smoked tareyton for a long time, made by mr. furr's client. now, which was made by mr. furr's client. and then she smoked a brand merit for a couple of years that was made by mr. tepikian's client, philip morris. and so the brands that he smoked for mr. tepikian's client -- and i just want to say because you have to decide whether each of those was a legal cause, and it is the same thing, it does not have to be the only cause, they can act in combination. and remember, dr. villa said he got lung cancer because of his smoking history. he had 40 years, 40 whatever it was, 50 years of smoking pack-years and the dose response. and in those pack-year history was about -- i know dr. villa said you need about five years to cause lung cancer. well, he had at least five years of the merit, because he smoked merit for about two years, two to three packs a day. but even without, you cannot separate, you cannot just separate. so when i talk about comparative fault later, we know that merit was about ten percent of the smoking history. and so when you apportion fault, i would submit that would probably be something you would consider. but the cigarettes that he was smoking of merit, the filters of the merit, the low tar of the merit, the two packs a day for two years was part of the smoking history where he was getting all those carcinogens day in and day out. i submit to you that -- that philip morris cannot be excused. and both of them bear their own proportion of responsibility for their defective products. okay. mr. paige: your honor, can i approach for a second? the court: sure. (the following proceedings were had before the court at the bench and out of the hearing of the jury.) the court: do you need a break or anything? mr. paige: yeah. the court: yeah. i was going to you actually ask, it is probably a good time. five-minute break? mr. tepikian: yeah, good time. can we take a break? the court: yeah, that is fine. we can take a quick recess, quick stretch break. mr. furr: sure. (the following proceedings were had in open court before the court and jury.) the court: all right. let me give the ladies and gentlemen of the jury a five-minute stretch break, restroom break. we are going to continue. again, we are going to continue with mr. paige's opening when we come back, and then we will have our lunch. do not discuss the case during the quick stretch break, everyone. mr. alex alvarez: may i be -- oh. (the jury left the courtroom at 11:56 a.m.) the court: yes, restroom. (recess taken from 11:56 a.m. to 12:05 p.m.) the deputy: are you ready for the jurors? the court: we are ready. (off the record from 12:05 p.m. to 12:07 p.m.) the court: all right. ready? the deputy: jurors entering. (the jury entered the courtroom at 12:07 p.m.) the court: all right. welcome back, everyone. thank you so much. please take your seats. and, harold, i believe the delivery gentleman is outside as well. there was someone outside with food. okay. you may continue, mr. paige. mr. paige: and so now as you know, there are different questions on the verdict form. so one of them is for -- or two of them are for concealment and agreement to conceal, and then there is also an issue about comparative fault. so i'm going to talk to you kind of about both of them together. but the question on the verdict form about the concealment is, did he rely to his detriment on a statement of material fact by each defendant that concealed or omitted important material information not otherwise known or available to him concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking, and was it a reliance and a legal cause of his primary lung cancer. and the second thing talks about the same thing in furtherance of the agreement to conceal. so the one thing i'll say is that there are different parts of his life when information were -- we submit where it was concealed from him, and there are different parts that are important because he started smoking in 1958; right? so that would be an important time for him to know crucial information, that it was concealed, obviously. and along the way, different things were concealed about different things that were important as well. so it is not a one point in time. it is information concealed at different points in time that made a difference. but you have to go back to his life to understand what he did not know. and also, when you are going to judge him for his comparative fault, we would ask that you judge him at the relevant time that he lived in; right? so this is, as you know, back when he was living, in the '50s, it was sixty percent of doctors, by the 1970s, when he was still trying to quit, thirty percent of doctors were smoking, thirty percent. so that is a lot of doctors who were still smoking at that time. famous athletes, that is yogi berra, joe dimaggio and then that is his girlfriend who gave a deposition, and this is what she said about what was going on at the time. (excerpt from videotaped deposition of barbara nimesheim played as follows:) q. were you aware in the 1950s of the health effects of smoking? a. no. q. did you know that smoking could cause lung cancer back in the 1950s? a. no. q. was smoking normal in the late 1950s? a. very much so. back then, smoking was not an issue health-wise. everybody seemed to smoke. no one was educated like they are these days. i mean, it was just, you know, not much different than chewing gum back then. (excerpt from videotaped deposition concluded.) mr. paige: and so back then, it was not much different than chewing gum. doctors were smoking. teachers were smoking. athletes were smoking. you know, you would not see lebron james or dwayne wade smoking now, and if they did, you would not see them doing it publicly. you certainly would not see them on a tv advertisement for it, but back then, it was normal. and these were healthy people. you know, tom was an athlete. but look at these athletes. you know, you have hank aaron. he was the guy who actually originally -- you guys might be too young, but i know he is the one who broke babe ruth's home run record initially. vince lombardi was a famous coach. len dawson, that is one of the super bowl. there was a hockey player, a hall of famer. it was normal to smoke for athletes to smoke, and they looked up to athletes, and they lived in a world where it was -- there was nothing wrong with it. and they used -the cigarette companies used athletes to advertise because they knew that kids looked up to athletes. willie mays. you know, i remember willie mays. you all may not remember, but he was great. he was a guy, hit home runs, stole bases, an unbelievable fielder. here he is, all the kids looked up to him, he was the guy, he was the man, he was the guy who was -- they used for tareyton. there is his baseball card. this is what tom's boyhood friend said about this. (excerpt from videotaped deposition of michael stefani played as follows:) q. based on your knowledge and experiences with mr. purdo, you would -- is it fair that you would say he did not make any smoking decisions based upon those ads? a. absolutely not. it would not be fair to say that. absolutely not. q. do you mean -a. i think those ads influenced both mr. purdo and me to -- to smoke and to continue smoking. (excerpt from videotaped deposition concluded.) mr. paige: and so they -- you know, philip morris and r.j. reynolds, they advertised smoking at that time as something that was fun and cool and glamorous. and -- and that is the culture they wanted. that is the society. you know, they spent a lot of money. they spent $250 billion marketing their product, making this acceptable in our society, and it was for a long time. you do not see it now like you used to see it then. it is not as acceptable. back in the day, you -- jurors could smoke, judges could smoke right here in the courtroom while the trial was going on. that was the world they created, and it was not that much long -- you know, you could think back to something that happened 20 years ago, depending on your age, it does not seem like that long ago; right? if you are my age, it does not seem that long ago. 20 years ago, some people knew, 30 years ago. i remember, you know, things in the '70s. it does not seem so long ago. well, when he was a kid, if he looked back 50 years, there was like nobody even dying of lung cancer. so now he is living in this world that they have created. they have spent a lot of money for it. and, you know, they are spending more than $10 million a day. there is no way to avoid this advertising. and really, in the '50s, '60s, and '70s, i could argue that he did nothing wrong, because if you look at what negligence is, it is what a reasonable person would do under the circumstances. in the '50s and '60s and '70s when he was smoking -mr. furr: sorry. objection, your honor. there is no instruction about negligence. i move to strike and ask the jury to disregard. mr. alex alvarez: actually, there is. the court: not that -- not that one instruction, so -- which -- let me see, mr. alvarez. mr. paige: i can just move on. the court: he will withdraw it. mr. furr: i move to strike. the court: okay. sustained. mr. furr: and disregard. the court: sustained. mr. paige: so i could argue, if i -- if we wanted to, i think i could, to say in the '50s, '60s, and '70s, he bears no responsibility, but we are not going to do that. mr. furr: your honor, it is an improper argument, what he could do if he wanted to. the court: okay. sustained. that is fine. mr. paige: so here's how they made smoking appear during the '50s and '60s. (video clip played as follows:) speaker: what cigarette do you smoke? you will be interested to know how the doctors in america named most was camels. yes. according to this survey, more doctors smoke camels. speaker: do you inhale? then you are better off smoking philip morris. and here is how you can prove it. light up a philip morris. take a puff. get a good mouthful of smoke. speaker: do not miss the fun of smoking, do not miss the fun of smoking, mildness is a pleasure with pall mall. speaker: pick up a carton or two of filter-tipped tareyton. get a special one for pop's day on sunday. he will love them, and he will love you for it. granny: you always were a smart one. winston tastes good. ms. london: you get a lot to like with a marlboro. filter. chorus: filter. fred flintstone: okay. how's about taking a nap? barney rubble: i've got a better idea. let us take a winston break. fred flintstone: that is it. winston is the one filtered cigarette that delivers flavor 20 times a pack. winston's got that filter blend. barney rubble: yeah, fred. (video clip stopped.) mr. paige: and so they -- we know that in 1953, that is when it really started. that is when they had their meeting at the plaza hotel, that is when they knew the truth, and that is when they could have changed history, and that is when they could have done -- made a difference. you know, this was an opportunity. we talk about opportunities. this was big news that smoking caused lung cancer. it was big news that it was going to hurt people. it was not a secret to them. and they had people from their companies, all these executives, ceos, who were responsible for their products meeting in private at this hotel, deciding what they were going to do going forward. so they have choices; right? so think about it. these men who are ceos for this company -- these companies knowing -- and at that point, you know, it was not like it is today. so they are now knowing, for a fact, that knowing how they have been studying teenagers, knowing the problem that it is creating, knowing that fifty percent or sixty percent of doctors are smoking, and they are now meeting privately saying what are we going to do about it? the last thing you would think they would say is we are going to get together and enter into a conspiracy and lie about it and not tell everybody what we knew, and that is exactly what they did, and that is why we are here, and they hurt a lot of people. and so we know internally they are talking about -- again, when you look at whether or not they are talking about helping people, if they ever talked about helping people, doing something kind or nice or coming forward and making people -making sure people do not get hurt. they are talking about how great it is for them that people cannot break the habit. how wonderful it would be for them if they produced a cancer-free cigarette, while they are denying it causes cancer. and then they talk about "this is the way the world ends, not in a bang, but a whimper." it is something almost too terrible for most of the industry's men to realize even yet, though the very heads of the great corporations signalized the end of the old days when they linked arms and walked together, and that is when the conspiracy began, which was not uncovered until another 50 years later. and so after the conspiracy, they took out the frank statement. and again, this was an opportunity to really change the world, and they made promises. they told the public there is no proof that smoking is the cause of lung cancer. they accept, as they should, people's health as a basic responsibility, paramount to every other consideration, including profits, which they should. we believe the products they make are not injurious. that was a lie. we always will and always have cooperated with those closely whose task it is to safeguard the public health. that was a lie. and so we know -- and so around that time, even in the '50s, even the '70s, because you have to think, if you could put yourself back at that time and think about it, like, they are now finding this out about their product. they know it is a fact. they know it is a scientific proven fact that there -- that people are really going to get hurt, and they are telling the public, because now maybe the people think differently. but back then, they were saying, hey, if we believe it, we will go out of -- out of business. we will go out of business. we will not do this. we are not going to sell a highly-addictive drug that is killing people. we will not do it. "if our product is injurious, we will stop making it." now, that was 50 years ago, 60 years ago, they were making those statements. and here's what they were saying publicly -- they were saying in interviews. the first one will be bowling, the top guy speaking and then wakeham. (audio clip played as follows:) mr. bowling: i certainly would not be in the business if i thought cigarettes were harmful to people. i think it is important that there be a lot of us around who are trying to keep the research honest and open. i think the real dishonesty is telling people things that are not so. mr. taylor: if you were convinced that cigarettes were killing people, would you stop making cigarettes? mr. bowling: well, i have personally been on record on that for a long time. i am not in the business of killing people, obviously. i have said all along simply there are plenty of ways to make a living. i happen to believe in what i'm doing very strongly. dr. wakeham: anything can be considered harmful. applesauce is harmful if you get too much of it. mr. taylor: people are smoking a lot of cigarettes. dr. wakeham: well, let me say it this way. the people who eat applesauce die. the people who eat sugar die. the people who smoke cigarettes die. does the fact that the people who smoke cigarettes die demonstrate that smoking is the cause? i do not know what harms a cigarette smoker or what does not harm him. i really honestly do not know that. you are -- you must be trying to get me to admit that cigarette smoking is harmful. i think that if the company as a whole believed that cigarettes were really harmful, we would not be in the business. but we are a very moralistic company. (audio clip stopped.) mr. paige: and that is 1976. so think about it. that is at a time -- they are saying that they do not know; right? these are ceos, scientists, a vice president, scientists, the head scientists of a company in 1976 publicly stating that they do not know. they know if somebody is addicted. if somebody is addicted, all they need is some doubt, some confusion, you know, you fail in your quit attempts and you think to yourself, hey, you know, it is not going to happen, it is not proven, they are going to remove it if it is harmful, the filter will help me. that is all an addicted smoker needs, and they know that, and they take advantage of people. and those statements were callus, and they were -- they were uncaring, and they did it on purpose and those -- those men were just two of them. a lot of people. it was a -- you know, when you talk about a conspiracy, you know, philip morris may say, hey, they only smoked my product ten percent of the time, why am i getting dragged into this? it was r.j. reynolds that was ninety percent of the time. why are you bringing me into this? when you dirty your hands and go into a conspiracy, when you have all the information -- those guys were from philip morris, both of them. when you have information and you agree to lie about it, you know that people are going to hurt and you should be helping people, you know, they could -- hey, why us? why are we involved? because they should have stepped forward. they should have helped people. this conspiracy could have ended in 1976. imagine what would have happened, how history would have changed. you know, we know now there is less people smoking. imagine if they would have admitted it 25 years earlier, 50 years earlier. 20 million americans have died since 1964 -mr. tepikian: objection, your honor. the court: overruled. mr. paige: and they did not care. that is a lot of people. that is -- that is -- and they did not care, and tom purdo was one person, one person. and so, can we show that? and so these lines on the chart -- oh, i'm sorry. so all along they knew, there is no secret that they knew. you know, we know we cause cancer. carcinogens are found in every class of compounds. that is written by the guy who just said it is just like applesauce. he is saying it is like applesauce in '76. in '61 he says, you know, we know there is carcinogens and we know filters will not work. you know, so on and so forth. so it was not a secret to them. they knew what they were doing. and so all along, if you look at the time periods that are important, you know, here's 1953 when it started going down. you know, tom purdo has not even started yet, smoking. imagine the difference it would have been to tom if they would have just come forward with the truth and helped people and told the truth. in 1964, the same thing. they did whatever they could, even though tom, he quit right around here, when it started going down. so, you know, they had opportunities themselves, and, you know, you just have to grasp what they did. and, you know, you met a family here, you know, who was really hurt by what they did. and that is -- that happens every day, time and time again, and that is why you do not conspire like that. that is why you do not conceal. and that is why, if you do it, you have to be held accountable because part of the reason for punitive damages is to punish somebody for doing something like that so they know it is wrong and to deter others, because if you do not deter others, what are we saying? that it is okay, that you can do that to all these people? and that is why you saw the harm -- you saw how, you know, zack was nine years old when his father died. and so here, you know, they did it on purpose. doubt, confusion, deceit. these are all their internal documents. "key word is confusion." "we could deny the" -- "we have publicly and frequently denied what others find is the truth." "the most important story is cast doubt." you know, why would -- why would -- if somebody would say that these are a few wrongheaded statements, you would have to think to yourself why would anybody in their right mind do this to another human being? and they did it on purpose to many, many people. the next one. so here's a video, again, these are two gentlemen from philip morris. (video clip played as follows:) mr. howard cullman: i do not believe that most people who smoke get lung cancer. we are now in an era, as you know, of moderation. we have smoking habits, which incidentally are today changing the type of cigarettes from regular cigarettes to filters. i do not think the industry admits there are any bad elements. if there are bad elements, through our laboratories, through the surgeon generals, through the ama, through acts of god and luck, we hope we may find them. and if they are found, they will be removed. mr. joseph cullman: we do not believe that cigarettes are hazardous. we do not accept that. because when, as, and if any ingredient in cigarette smoke is identified as being injurious to human health, we are confident that we can eliminate that ingredient. (video clip stopped.) mr. paige: okay. so then i want to move on to filters. you know, internally, you know, they were discussing how -- what the public believed about filters. because they knew that if people were scared or people thought it might be unhealthy, they could -- if they could give them a filter, the word "filter" means it is filtering something out. and they knew that people were switching for health reason -- health factors showing up as a reason people were trying them, but they know it was an effective advertising gimmick. they knew this internally. this is what they were saying. and so this is how they would market the -go to the next one. this is how the filters were being -hold on. -- were being used. you know, they showed the filter. this is like a -- for better -- showing like a water filter and saying, hey, we are taking all the bad stuff out. just like the guy on tv said, do not worry about it, if we find any dangerous ingredients, we will remove them, but until then, just smoke a filter. and a lot of people did that. people switched to filters. so it is like you see nobody smoked filters, and then it is like 99 percent of the people are switching filters. and here is the tareyton commercial. (video clip played as follows:) speaker: white outer filter and an inner filter of activated charcoal, fine granules of activated charcoal and pure cellulose, and the charcoal filter works with the white filter to actually improve the flavor of tareyton's fine tobaccos. yes, there is a difference you can see in the filter. it makes a difference you can taste in the smoke. so get the charcoal filter with a taste worth fighting for. joint the unswitchables, smoke tareytons. (video clip stopped.) mr. paige: you know, it seems to make sense, right, that a filter would work. it seems to make sense, but they knew internally that even though they said it makes a difference, they know, they knew it was -- see, and we are seeing now -- these documents that you are seeing, nobody saw them until -- until -mr. furr: objection. mr. paige: -- the late '90s or 2000s. mr. furr: outside the record. the court: sustained. mr. paige: well, they were not -the court: just say they were -- just change how you say it. mr. paige: well, you heard from dr. proctor when they -- how they came about, some people would sneak them out, and ultimately in about 2000, more documents came out. these are confidential documents. they were secret. they did not want anybody to see them. and this is what they said confidentially about filters where they knew, they knew -- when you talk about information that is concealed that should be revealed when 440,000 americans are dying every year, do not you think they have a right to know this? do not they have a right to have this revealed, or you think it is fair to conceal this from them? because they knew it was purely a merchandising and sales proposition. a filter smoker winds up smoking more to provide him with the same delivery he had before. we say here is our quadruple filter removing whatever constituents of smoke, and then we give you a nice jolt of nicotine. it is the illusion of filtration. the smoker of a filter cigarette was getting as much or more nicotine and tar than he would have gotten from a regular cigarette. do not you think tom purdo would have -- is entitled to know that? why -- what would give them the right to conceal that from people, to advertise one thing and conceal that? under what scenario would that be okay to do that? and then all their lying, they knew internally, this is an internal document from 1972, and they are looking back 20 years to the frank statement when they started lying, and they said, they are talking about why they are doing it. okay? this is -- you are looking at what they are talking about privately about how they know. it is not a mistake, they are doing it on purpose, and they are doing it because they want to have a single strategy to defend themselves in litigation, politics, and public opinion. because if they can do that, they can sell more cigarettes. and they talk about how this strategy was brilliantly conceived, brilliantly executed. who would think it was brilliantly executed? over the years they won important battles, and it is only a holding strategy because it only held us off for so long because now we know. you know, that is why i said, you thought you knew, but now you know, and now you know we know we all know that what they were doing was creating a doubt, the doubt so people would smoke and they could deny things on purpose. and then more documents where they talk about the holding strategy. "an admission by the industry that excessive smoking is bad for you is tantamount to an admission of guilt with regard to the lung cancer problem. it could open the door to legal suits and the industry would have no defense." this was back in 1978. "i stated that one of the elements of our legal defense was that there was no dose-response relationship. our medical scientists would say what we wanted." "we would like to know what the ctr staff makes of the developments, lest some lawyer be looking over our shoulder. i do not concede even one person died of a chronic disease that it is caused." and that is part of their holding strategy. that is what they did, and they did it on purpose. and i submit to you that it is just not right, and that is why we are all here. and then the ctr. i'm sorry. okay. and then here it talks about where they use their power, where they were infiltrating the ama, where they got involved with congressmen, that they would have perceived -- that, you know, that there may not be a causal factor. so they were doing it everywhere. they were doing it in public opinions which we have seen, they were doing it in litigation, now they are doing it in legislation trying to get friendly congressmen. you think to yourself, what chance did tom purdo have? when did he have a chance? when he was 15? when he was 20 when they were telling the filters and lights were safer? when did he -- when would he -- when were they going to be fair with him. next, please. and then the ctr, you know, there is no doubt what the ctr was. they spent millions, hundreds of millions of dollars funding phony research. and again, those were good institutions, but they did not know. you know, people like harvard and stanford, they do not take their money anymore. but back then they were getting their money so they could say, look, we are funding this research, but the research had nothing to do with smoking and health except for about the 24 articles that leaked. but internally, they were saying, "the joint industry-funded smoking and health research programs have not been selected against specific scientific goals, but rather for various purposes, such as public relations, political relations. in general, these programs have provided a buffer to the public and political attacks on the industry." it was a shield and a front. and tobacco money ain't so dirty anymore. so they knew people needed their funding. they knew there were scientists who needed their funding, and they were using that as part of their fraud. and that is why the ctr has been found, and the judge will instruct you, as a matter of law, in the engle findings they were co-conspirators, the ctr and the ti. and finally, when we talk about destroying documents or losing documents, we know that part of their plan was to do it on purpose. we do not have -- we do not have all the records. they -- purposely, they would destroy documents, they would bury documents, they would avoid certain research projects. so the fact, when you look at their concealment, what were they concealing? why would they be destroying documents if they wanted everybody to know the truth? and so -- the next one. and so i submit to you that, you know, when you think about what this case is about, and, you know, one of the things, there is going to be an instruction about reprehensibility because you may think like, hey, he talks a lot about teen smoking, he talks a lot about nicotine manipulation. one of the things you can consider is, when you are considering the punitive damages, you consider the reprehensibility of the their behavior and you consider harm -- you have to only -- for punitive damages, you can only punish for the harm done to tom purdo. but when you are considering reprehensibility, you are allowed to consider similar behavior that affected others. so that is why when you look at what they were studying in the '50s and you look at what they did in the '60s, the '70s, the '80s with teenagers and the nicotine manipulation they did all along the way, that is why it is very important. and so the evidence is clearly the case that they never cared, you know, they never cared. and after i speak, mr. furr, mr. tepikian will speak, and in -- but i -- and they will tell you their defense. but i submit to you the evidence in this case and all the evidence is they never cared about nicotine addiction, teen smoking, how many people were dying, and the harm they were doing. and here is more -- more denials. (video clip played as follows:) speaker: a california doctor said, "as a scientists, i find no persuasive evidence that cigarette smoking causes lung cancer." a new york doctor told congress, "to claim there is now sufficient scientific evidence to establish that cigarette smoking causes disease is, in my opinion, unjustified." mr. dwyer: turning a significant health question into a publicity stunt is an insult to serious science. dr. langston: i cannot point to anything that i would consider the cause of cancer of the lung, but the behavior of the disease does not support the idea of cigarettes being the causal agent. ms. browder: the case is still open. the jury has not come in. mr. stossel: it may not be harmful? you are not convinced? ms. browder: it may be, or it may not be. we do not know. mr. dwyer: so insofar as the correlation between lung cancer and cigarette smoking are concerned, no one knows. it may, it may not. mr. koppel: cigarette smoking does not cause cancer, yes or no? mr. horrigan: it is not known whether cigarettes cause cancer. mr. koppel: all right, sir. mr. horrigan: it has not been causally established. mr. dwyer: there is not unanimity of opinion in the community of science on these issues. some are convinced in one direction, others take an opposing view, and still others say that we have no business prejudging the scientific controversy. we need more information. speaker: our tobacco industry continues to earmark millions of dollars annually on an ongoing basis in unrestricted, arm's length research to answer the very questions raised in the surgeon general's report. speaker: do cigarettes cause cancer? mr. merryman: i do not know if they do or not. ms. banks: i am not in a position to give you a does or does not answer. mr. tisch: the data that we have been able to see has all been statistical data that has not convinced me that smoking causes death. mr. campbell: we do not know what causes cancer in general right now, so i think that we may find out what causes cancer and we may find out some relationship, but -- which has yet to be proven. (video clip stopped.) mr. paige: and so it is clear that they wanted this doubt, they wanted this confusion, more so for political, public opinion, and litigation purposes, but they also wanted it for smokers, where they wanted a smoker to be able to believe there was some doubt, some confusion, some crutches, and they knew that people were relying upon them. and this is the corporate representative, dr. figlar, who talks about that, and then linda will tell you what they believed. (excerpt from videotaped deposition of james figlar, phd played as follows:) q. and then they also wanted to reassure the public that there was no proof of the claims which linked smoking and lung cancer; correct? a. they -- they -- they did want that message to get out, yes, that is correct. q. and they wanted people to be able to believe them and rely upon them, did they not? a. i believe in general, yes. (excerpt from videotaped deposition concluded.) (video clip from courtroom view network of testimony of linda purdo enochs played as follows:) a. he believed that if he smoked first a filtered cigarette and then a filtered low-tar cigarette that he was smoking a safe cigarette. q. and how were filters being advertised during the marriage? a. that they were safe. q. and how were low-tar cigarettes being advertised during the marriage? a. they were safe. (video clip from courtroom view network stopped and the following is in open court.) mr. paige: and so as more and more information was coming out, there was a switch from -- to low-tars, that people started smoking more low-tars because they were being told that they were safer. and they were talking internally about -think about it, where now we have -- you know, they came here and they told us about zonnic. i do not know if you remember that. but mr. furr cross-examined dr. proctor and said, look, we are making zonnic now, we are selling people zonnic now, it can help them quit. well, that is a good thing, if they are really doing that. but back in 1978, they were doing the opposite. what can we do to intercept people who are trying to stop? this was at a time when tom purdo was trying to stop. we can intercept people. we can give them low-tar cigarettes. we can lie to them. we can tell them that they are safer. "those who are currently smoking lights do so because they are better for you. they perceive that they are cutting down and it is an alternative to quitting, which most cannot accomplish." this is what they are concealing and they are lying about. "most smokers can be considered nicotine seekers." and they talk about, they cannot sell a product that does not have nicotine or people will quit. so they do not want people to quit. they want to intercept them from doing that. and these were the advertisements that they used that they would tell people about science works, the lowest in tar. and go to the next one, please. and then internally, they are talking about -think about it. he is smoking merit. this is a philip morris brand. and again, he only smoked it about ten percent of his career -- of his smoking career, history, but merit internally, when here's a guy who is trying to quit between 1977 and 1970 -1981, we know he is trying to quit until he finally succeeds, and he fails every time he is smoking merit, and he does not know that merit has 77 percent more free nicotine, more of that free nicotine. and so how fair is it now to come in here and say, well, he should have tried harder, he was not motivated enough when they are manipulating his nicotine -mr. furr: objection. this is attacking defense. objection. the court: overruled. mr. paige: and again, nothing i'm saying is that -- mr. furr and mr. tepikian are fine lawyers. i think you know i respect them immensely, and i'm not saying anything. i'm talking about back in 1977 to visualize what mr. -- what tom purdo was going through and what he did not know, what we all know now. and then they talk about how people were going -- they are switching to these brands and if they could reassure them that they are doing the right thing for health reasons. and a merit smoker is a health-conscious smoker who is looking to cut down who does not smoke for flavor, his desire is to quit. and they say, oh, well, he was educated, he was educated. you know, there are people who are educated who quit. there are people educated who do not quit. there are people who are not educated who quit. there are people not educated who do not. that does not mean anything. that does not mean anything. you know, you could be the smartest person in the world and have a problem quitting. but all along, think about it where they are talking about how the merit smoker is trying to do the right thing. he is health conscious, and he does not -- so they know that here's somebody who wants to quit and who is health conscious, but they are messing with his nicotine. and also what they did not reveal, and it is even worse, is that when you are smoking these low-tar cigarettes, you compensate. low tar, low nicotine, you have to get a nicotine level. people smoke these doses of nicotine. so -- and that is what dr. proctor was explaining. they manipulate the ph levels to make sure, even if it looks low nicotine, you are going to get your nicotine. even if it looks low tar, you are going to compensate and get more tar. and so all their internal documents, they talk about let us discover ways to exploit the benefits of smoking to the advantage and profitability of our business. again, they are talking about exploiting people for their profits. switching to low-tar cigarettes is the option that is probably the most illusory because they will likely compensate. smokers are taking in more than the ftc rating. so when you talk about concealment not being revealed and you talk about comparative fault and you are going to compare what mr. tom purdo did to what philip morris did because philip morris was the merit cigarette who they were manipulating the free nicotine, i would ask you to consider this, respectfully. and again, they knew, these statements are in the '60s to the '80s, where they know -- i mean, these are people, again, who have nothing to do with this lawsuit, and this is what public -- what people were saying in the public about what they believed back then while they were being lied to. (video clip played as follows:) speaker: i've been reading a lot about it in the paper, but i do not know anyone actually who has gotten cancer because of the fact that he is a smoker. i mean, it has not been proven in black and white. construction worker: if they come out and really say, well, you are going to get it, i'll stop then. but when they just keep on saying some say you do, some you do not, i'll keep going on. speaker: you know they say it causes cancer and heart disease. do you believe that? mr. gaines: no, i do not. i -- not in my heart, i cannot believe it. i look back at it, peoples that make the cigarettes, and i feel like that the one that make the cigarette should know what they are doing. (video clip stopped.) mr. paige: and so, yeah, we are asking that you -- we are hope -- we believe that we have proven to you that mr. purdo is a member of the class of his generation of smokers who were lied to and who were addicted to nicotine. and they continued lying all the way till they were standing before congress under oath. now, this is after mr. purdo had quit, but again, i want you to consider this similar conduct for reprehensibility and if you could play this, please, robert. (video clip played as follows:) mr. wyden: let me begin my questioning on the matter of whether or not nicotine is addictive. let me ask you first, and i would like to just go down the row whether each of you believes that nicotine is not addictive. i heard virtually all of you touch on it. and just yes or no, do you believe nicotine is not addictive? mr. campbell: i believe nicotine is not addictive, yes. mr. wyden: mr. johnston? mr. james johnston: congressman, cigarettes and nicotine clearly do not meet the classic definitions of addiction. there is no intoxication. mr. wyden: all right, we will take that as a no. and, again, time is short, if you can just -i think each of you believe nicotine is not addictive. we just would like to have this for the record. mr. taddeo: i do not believe that nicotine or our products are addictive. mr. tisch: i believe nicotine is not addictive. mr. horrigan: i believe that nicotine is not addictive. mr. sandefur: i believe that nicotine is not addictive. mr. donald johnston: and i too believe that nicotine is not addictive. (video clip stopped.) mr. paige: and so this is the reliance instruction, it is a lot to read. and i'm not the best reader, so i know i'm going want to butcher it -- mess up some words here, but i'll try to go through and maybe paraphrase a little bit. but when you are looking for reliance, because that is one of the claims, is for the conspiracy and the concealment claims, and again, they are all important claims, and class membership is obviously important, and so is punitive damages, and these claims are important too. the issue is thomas purdo, did he reasonably rely to his detriment on any statement of material fact by each defendant that concealed or omitted material information, not otherwise known or available, concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking, and if so, whether such reliance was a legal cause of his lung cancer and death. reasonable reliance on a statement that is misleading because it conceals or omits a material fact is a legal cause if it directly and in natural sequence produces or contributes substantially to producing the lung cancer and death so that it can reasonably be said but for the reliance, the lung cancer and death would not have occurred. this means that the plaintiff must prove for each defendant, philip morris and reynolds, that tom purdo's reliance on a statement by that defendant concealing or omitting material information, and the material information we submit to you is the filters, the lights, the health effects, all of that, how addictive it was, the manipulating of the nicotine, the free nicotine, on a statement not otherwise known or available to him and he would have acted differently and avoided his alleged lung cancer and death. and go on, please. and then this is what is important. this is also important. it is not necessary that a direct statement be made to the representee, to tom purdo, it is not necessary a direct statement be made to him in order to give rise to a right to rely on a statement, for it is immaterial whether it passes through a direct and circuitous -mr. philipson: circuitous. mr. paige: -- circuitous channel. so it can come through another source. it does not have to come directly through philip morris. there was a lot of information out there, a lot of doubt, a lot of confusion. a lot of people thought filters were safe. a lot of people thought low-tar and lights were safer. and tom purdo cannot be found to have reasonably relied on a statement if he knew it was false or the falsity was obvious to him. right? so -- so -go to the next one. he was doing what everyone else was doing. this is the rise showing that everybody was switching to filters when he was. how would he have known that the filters were not working? and he switched to low-tars when everybody else was switching to low-tars thinking they were safer. how would he have known? and it was not only him. as you heard, the national cancer institute, american cancer society, the ftc, the surgeon general, all believed that filters and low-tars were safer. so obviously, if they were fooled, these are people a lot smarter than tom purdo about smoking issues, obviously they knew, and that is why it worked. that is why it worked for so long. the clerk: 30 minutes, counsel. mr. paige: i'm sorry? the clerk: 30 minutes remaining. the court: 30 minutes. mr. paige: oh, okay. thank you. and so again, here is the material information, the important information that we submit would have been useful for tom that he could have known this controversy was a lie, all these different carcinogens. this fifty percent of smokers are going to end up dying from these horrible diseases. they targeted and studied teenagers. the nicotine is being manipulated and the filters and the low-tars do not make smoking any safer whatsoever. and so i submit to you in terms of the concealment and the conspiracy to conceal that you find against both philip morris and r.j. reynolds. and so the next thing i want to talk about is apportionment of fault. and so in our first pleading, we admitted fault, as i told you. is the pleading next? and so this is -- the judge read this to you. we admit fault in combination with what they did for the duration and frequency of his quit attempts, we have discussed this, but i want to be clear what this means, because we admitted it, and so we do not, you know, think he did anything wrong from starting smoking at that time or starting when he was a teenager, because that was normal, and when he became addicted and he tried to quit in his 30s. but again, he bears some responsibility because everybody could try harder. and as smoking was increasing, really, he could not have done anything wrong when he started, and as smoking was increasing and he was trying and he was believing that filters were safer and believing the lights were safer and trying as hard as he can, you know, again, it is a fair question why did not he quit soon sooner, but a lot of people were fooled. again, thirty percent of doctors smoked, this is talking about 10 to 20 million americans at that time did not believe it. and we know that addiction -- addiction is a disease. you know, from their own documents they talk about it. it is not a free choice. you know, it is not a free choice. you can come in here believing that it is, but now knowing what their documents say about how they manipulate nicotine, how addictive nicotine is, with every inhalation within seven seconds you are getting a dose of nicotine to your brain and that the half-life is two hours. it is an addictive drug and if it was a choice, if it was a free choice, then just remove the nicotine and let everybody alone and let people smoke when they want to or not. and they know it is not about free choice. so we ask that you compare the actions, you know, coming -- you know, compare the actions of a young man who became an addict, he was lied to, he tried to quit. we never said he was perfect. he does not -- you know, we never said he is perfect. nobody is perfect. but he did not lie to anybody. he did not hurt anybody. he did not put profits over human lives. you know, he was a good dad. you have seen from -- i think you know him from what you have heard about him. you know, he was a very good father, a very good husband. you know, he had the two-hug rule, ate together with his family every night, his kids -- he took his daughter to swimming at 5:30 in the morning. a lot of dads do not do that. that he was a good man. he was not perfect. mr. furr: your honor, this is not relevant to apportionment of fault. the court: overruled. mr. paige: and so he could have tried harder. you know, there is no patches or gum. so i submit to you his failures were probably failure of his weakness. it was typical of the time, exactly what he did. he switched to filters when everybody did. he switched to lights when everybody did. he finally succeeded, and so we would ask you for philip morris to apportion they had ten percent of the smoking history, so for this claim, and again, the apportionment does not apply to the conspiracy because for the conspiracy, they are all in, but for the percentage for this, we would ask that philip morris -mr. furr: objection, that is a misstatement of the law, your honor, the apportionment. the court: counsel sidebar. mr. paige: okay. the court: are you okay? you want to clear it up? mr. paige: we are going to be asking -mr. furr: i just ask that that be stricken from the record. the court: okay. sustained. i'll sustain your objection. strike the comment. mr. paige: the law is if philip morris is ten percent, they are ten percent, and so then maybe actually they should be more because i was thinking just on the product usage, but you also have to consider the conspiracy, the concealment, their part in all that when you are apportioning fault for philip morris and the difference they could have made had they come forward early. so either of them could have come forward early and saved millions of lives. but i submit philip morris can be ten percent at fault and if philip morris is ten percent at fault, i respectfully submit to you tom purdo cannot be more at fault than philip morris. he did not hurt anybody on purpose. he did the best he could. he did not lie. he did not do anything wrong other than try, and he actually succeeded rather young in quitting, and i would submit that tom purdo would be 5 percent at fault and that r.j. reynolds bear the bulk of the responsibility. and again, these are suggestions, you could award, do different percentages. you have to award some percentage to tom purdo as a matter of law and however you feel fit. obviously we will respect it, and my client will appreciate whatever consideration you give on that. and so the next issue, i apologize, there is a lot of issues; right? there is a lot of different issues, and i have not even gotten up to -- this is for punitive damages. and so punitive damages, so now, this is the part that i talked about, because this is -- we have spoken a little bit about it, but punitive damages, it is not just, you know, when you were in jury selection, we asked you-all if the evidence supports it, you know, the money does not go to -- it does not go, it is not -- that is how the law is. it does not go to anybody but the family. that is where it goes. that is the law, and that is what happens. but there is a reason for punitive damages. and the reason for it is that they need to be -- if somebody does something really, really bad, they have -- the punishment has to fit their -- what they did. and there is nothing worse you can do to people than what they did. there is nothing worse you can do to tom purdo than what they did. and so punitive damages are warranted as punishment to both the defendants and as a deterrent to others so that other companies, other corporations who are thinking about putting profits over human lives or targeting teenagers or lying to the american public, they will be deterred because they will look back and say, look, the jury system is a great system, you are one jury for one family today. and there are juries all across the country, all across the state listening to cases, and corporations listen, they watch what you do. and that is why punitive damages are important to deter corporations and let them know. and all we ask, you know, the punitive damage phase, we talk about different phases in the trial, if you find that he is a class member and if you find that punitive damages are warranted, there will be another small part of the trial, and philip morris will call one witness, r.j. reynolds will call one witness, we will not call any, and it will go probably a day, a day and a half. and so at the end of your verdict when you say punitive damages are warranted, the judge will ask you to come back, we will put on about a day of evidence, opening statements are usually short, about half an hour, closings are much shorter than this, i promise you, and -- but it is important. so they are warranted if you find that they did something intentionally or by gross negligence. intentional misconduct means that they had actual knowledge of the wrongfulness of their conduct, and i submit to you the evidence is overwhelming. you know, we have to prove by clear and convincing evidence. there is no dispute, no doubt, no nothing, that they absolutely one hundred percent knew what they were doing was wrong and they knew there was a high probability of injuring tom purdo and despite the knowledge they intentionally pursued that course of conduct resulting in injury. if you find that, which i submit the evidence is overwhelming, punitive damages are warranted to punish them and deter others. and also you could find punitive damages by gross negligence if you find that they were reckless in what they did or wanting in the care, that it constituted a conscious disregard or indifference. and think to yourself, do you think that they were -- they were obviously indifferent to the life, health, safety, rights of persons exposed to their conduct. they did that. they were indifferent. they did not care. they only cared about their profits. they only cared about themselves. and now, 2016, we are in court, and we are asking that you as a jury hold them accountable for that. and so these are the people, some of the people involved. and this is just, you know, these are grown men, you know, grown men who made these decisions, made these choices, and you get to consider the reprehensibility, the harm suffered by other persons not party to this lawsuit in assessing reprehensibility as long as it is based on the same or similar conduct. and so i want to talk a little bit about youth smoking and a little bit about nicotine manipulation and then i'm going to sit down. i know everybody is probably hungry; right? a little bit? i'm sorry. it is a tough time to stand up at 11 o'clock right before lunch. but -- so it said -- this is from their own documents. so we talked about whether they had a reckless disregard or indifference to the rights of others. they have deliberately played down the role of nicotine, "hence the nonsmoker," they are talking about teenagers, "has no knowledge or little knowledge of what it may offer him. instead we must somehow convince him," so they are talking about intentionally convincing teenagers, "with irrational reasons that they should try smoking in the hope that he will for himself discover the real satisfactions, nicotine addiction." and so think about that when you think -- if you play that out in your mind and you think what these grown men are saying, scientists are saying, that we are going to have to find teenagers, offer him, trick him into trying smoking, and hopefully, he will become addicted, and if he becomes addicted to nicotine, we know statistically there is a 15 percent chance that he will have a horrible, painful death and he will leave behind his family. they knew that. that was not a secret to them. and so in the '50s, you know, that is when we know about the candy cigarettes, the cartoons, how they made smoking look appealing to kids. in the '60s, they were writing letters to school kids. you know, that went on until we had letters all the way through the '90s. think about it, in the 1990s they are writing letters in classrooms telling kids it is not been proven. you know. people with their right mind would not do that. here they are talking about 1964, '5, this surgeon general report comes out, now the dip is going back up again and they are talking about how great it is that these new teenagers are going to join the new prospects of new smokers. and then they are talking again about how they are going to recruit new youngsters to smoke. this is all in the '60s. that conduct, that is their -- that is what i say, that is their business model. they -you know, if you go to wharton business school and you say, hey, the professor says -- hey -- and linda's daughter went to penn, so what business school -- imagine somebody goes to a business school and they say, we want you to come up with a business model where you could make a lot of money, and somebody hands in a paper and says, okay, what we are going to do, we are going to sell an addictive drug, we are going to go after teenagers, we are going to make billions of dollars, half of them might die -- or half of them will die, but we are going to make a lot of money, and along the way we are going to lie to people and trick them, they would get an f, and they would probably kicked out of school. and that was their business model for 50 years, 50 years. in the '70s they continue to talk about it. now, this -- this -- this is a document 1973, "listed below are future problems that may arise in the tobacco industry. increased educational programs to prevent young, nonsmokers taking up the practice." how could that be a problem in anybody's world? how is it in any reality? who would even think that was a problem? they are -they are considering helping kids, teaching kids not to smoke in the '70s could be a problem. and then in the '80s it continues. they talk about replacement smokers. they talk about how for the past 50 years teenagers have been the base of their business, and they talk about 12-years-olds, 13-year-olds all the way up to 18-year-olds being replacement smokers. so they know all along their business model is somebody dies, somebody quits, we are going to replace them. adults are not going to do it. we are not going to convince an adult, you know, but we will go after the teenagers, and then hopefully they will get addicted and we will start all over again. and it is right in their documents, and that is a fact, and that is a one hundred percent fact. and then with the nicotine levels, this is another thing that they concealed that was wrong that they would manipulate the nicotine levels. we could fairly precisely regulate the amount of nicotine to any level management desires. how low can we go? we need to determine a minimal level that will keep people continued smoking. so as they are targeting teenagers, they are manipulating nicotine. as people are dying, they are manipulating nicotine. the ph, if we were talking about the ph and giving it an additional nicotine kick. the goal is to determine the minimal level of nicotine that will allow continued smoking. they talk about how ammonia will liberate and make free nicotine, increases the impact and potency of nicotine. that is not right, and that is not fair. they did it on purpose. and then when they found out that there were scientists who were coming out with medications, they opposed it. they did not want that. they tried to cut off their funding. anybody who would come up with something where they would help people, they are concerned that they would be digging their own grave. so that is -- that is -and this is an industry that wanted nothing -- that survived only on misfortune of other people and profiting greatly by it. and they did it for one purpose and one purpose only, and it is right in their documents. they knew they were lying, they knew they were lying for decades, and they did it for one purpose, for money. and you know, again, it is fine for a corporation to make money, but not at this -- not at this -- not to do this. not at this expense. and not to take these measures. and to have gotten away with it for so long, for so long, and thank god now we are getting away from it, but think about it. it is a hundred -- think about it. we -- a hundred years in history is a short period of time. you know, earth has been here for billions of years. man has been here for a long time. we are talking about a hundred-year period in history. a hundred years, 200 years from now, they may look back at this and say how did this happen, you had this hundred-year period where this industry made millions of dollars targeting teenagers and killing them and they all died? it is not right. so punitive damages are warranted. again, if you find they are warranted, to punish and deter, we would ask you respectfully that punitive damages has to be by clear and convincing evidence. i would submit to you the evidence is crystal clear on that. and we would ask you to award punitive damages against both, r.j. reynolds and philip morris, and they will bring in their experts or their corporate representatives tomorrow, and i would look forward to cross-examining them and talking to them about what they have been doing. so the last issue, the very last issue, is damages; right? because now we are at a point in the trial where we have to ask you for fair and reasonable compensation, what is fair compensation for what they did to this family. you know, he -- linda was married to him for 27 years. you know, they could say that she is been married three times. but you heard her. this was her high school -- not her high school. she met him when they were young. she loved him and adored him. you know what, she is remarried now. she is happy. thank god. tom would want her to be happy. but think about it. she is a single mother raising a 9-year-old boy and a 15-year-old girl alone when they should have their father. she went through hell and back. and she was a widow at a young age. and she loved him, and i think you know, i mean, those -- she -- she missed him. and for five years, she did not even date. and think about it. a little boy who is 9 years old, he does not have his father to help him with sports and talk to him about girls and help him learn how to tie a tie, you know, that is a big loss for the family. the little girl, 15 years old, probably she needs her dad the most. so i think you guys get a picture of what a good guy he was. and so the amount that i'm going to suggest to you -- you know, this is one family, and i'm going to suggest an amount. you can give more. you can give less. i wish that i could ask you for a hundred million dollars. mr. furr: objection, your honor. the court: sustained. mr. paige: i have to ask you for an amount that i believe is supported by the evidence in this case and the law. and certainly, we would not want you to give an amount -mr. furr: objection as to counsel's opinion, your honor. the court: sustained. mr. paige: your honor, could i approach? the court: sure. (the following proceedings were had before the court at the bench and out of the hearing of the jury.) the court: go ahead. mr. furr? mr. furr: my objection is counsel cannot state a personal opinion. he cannot argue to the jury that he is assessed the evidence and the law and in his estimation, this is the amount of money that the evidence warrants. that is completely improper. mr. tepikian: has to be based upon what the evidence -the court: okay. he can say, "based upon the evidence, i believe this is an amount." that is it. that is okay. yeah. okay. (the following proceedings were had in open court before the court and the jury.) mr. paige: so based upon the evidence that you have seen in this case and the law that you have been instructed, we would not want a verdict over that -- we would not want a verdict that could not -- that would not -- that would be over that amount is the point i'm trying to make. so the suggestion i'm going to make to you, you could award more or less, but i would suggest to you that not to award more than i ask for because the amount that i'm going to ask for we think is appropriate under the facts of this case. so for linda, for -- for losing her husband, who she loved, everything she went through, we would ask -- and everybody has three separate claims. you know, she has her claim. the kids have theirs, and they should not be penalized because they have separate losses. so for linda we would ask for $7 million for losing her husband, and for the kids who lost their dad at a young age, a very young age when they needed him the most, we would ask for 9 million per child. and, again -if you can go to the last photo, please. you know, they lost a lot. and when i sit down, i guess you are going to go for lunch. then mr. furr and mr. tepikian will speak, and then when they get done, we will have a short chance for rebuttal. i know these closing arguments are long. i appreciate your attention. i really do. i know you will give mr. furr and mr. tepikian the same attention, and we all appreciate it. when they get up and they start talking, i want you to listen to hear what they talk about and what they say about teen marketing, replacement smokers, the conspiracy for 50 years, all the people who died, the widows and children that they left. mr. furr: objection, your honor. i cannot dispute the finding. the court: sustained. mr. furr: i move to strike and ask the jury to disregard. the court: sustained. mr. paige: all right. that is all i have. thank you very much.