mr. webb: thank you, your honor. the court: yes, sir. mr. webb: good afternoon, folks. how are you? this is the last time i will have a chance to address you. i just get to speak once this afternoon. and mr. baumberger gets to proceed after me. so i'm going to talk to you for a while, not quite sure now long, maybe an hour, hour 15 minutes. i'm going to talk on behalf of all three of the tobacco company defendants on this issue of medical causation, so save you some time. you will not have to listen to three of us this afternoon, just one. so i assume that is good news. i'm going to talk -- by the way, let me at the outset make one observation, and i want to join my counsel for the plaintiff to thank you for your jury service. i spend my life doing this in the courtroom, and i've watched the six of you, and you have paid attention to the evidence, you have done what you said you would do, and nobody can ask or expect any more of that. that is all. you did it. what i'm trying to do now is my job. and you have heard quite a bit of evidence in this trial, and some of it has been inconsistent. some of it witnesses have not agreed with each other on certain issues. and so what i'm allowed to do now in this argument is the same thing mr. baumberger was allowed to do, which is to, i'm going to try to pull the evidence together for you what i hope is in some logical way. you can decide that after i'm done if i did it in the right way or if i did it in a logical way. now, counsel said that all the tobacco companies want to do is confuse and confound things. i'll let you judge that also at the end of my presentation. i hope i do not do that, because what i intend to do is to talk about the actual evidence that was presented to you, which by and large consists of this right here, these medical records. and counsel tried to act in his presentation, said it several times, that this is a case about these five hands-on treating eyewitnesses, these five treating eyewitness doctors versus what we say. and let me say two things about those treating physicians. first of all, they did their job. mrs. putney had a serious aggressive cancer, and they treated it. number two, once they got the pathology report on february 14th and tney knew it was small cell cancer, it did not matter to them whether it came from -- whether it started in the lung or started in the thyroid. the treatment is the same. and they did not go forward and do the medical test that you would need to do if you actually wanted to show where it started. and that is where i'm going to go through. number two, they were called -- but they did their job. they did what they were supposed to do and they treated her. number two, he called each one of them eyewitnesses. and i do want to comment about that, because each one of those treating physicians has one thing in common, i do not know whether there is any way to remember, there is one thing each of them said, and they were completely consistent on it, they did not remember mrs. putney. and they did not remember what treatment they gave her. all they have is the same thing you have. all they have are these medical records. because they do not -- if they are eyewitnesses, they will be the first time there is been an eyewitness in the courtroom that says, i do not remember being there and i do not remember seeing anything. because those five physicians do not remember mrs. putney at all. and every one of them when they testified, all they were testifying to is what is in these records right here, this pile right here. they do not remember at all. and so all of the doctors who testified during this trial had access to the same records, and you will too. and you will get to be the judge of what is in those records. and i'm going to walk through, and counsel said that i -- the tobacco companies are just picking on evidence that is missing. it is been destroyed. it is not here. i am going to talk about evidence that is not here because evidence that is not here cannot be used to sustain the plaintiffs' burden of proof. i talked about this in my opening statement. i told you, if there was ever a case where there s two sides to a story, it s here. and you all said that you would listen to both sides of the story, and i know you have done that. i'm going to take my time now to try to walk through, marshal the evidence, and, yes, my point throughout my presentation is that the plaintiff has not met their burden of proof. and i agree with counsel, we are the only nation that allows civil cases, these disputes, to be resolved by people like yourself that we select from the community and we bring them into a courtroom and they take an oath and they swear that they will only decide the case on the evidence. they will not decide the case just based on sympathy. counsel kept saying, well, maybe mrs. putney wants to get to phase ii. you get to decide if this is the end of the case because she has not proven with credible evidence that she is met the burden of proof, the burden of proof being that she had a cancer that started in her lung. now, i made the point in my opening and again today, as i said up here, the defendants do not have any burden of proof on the issue of whether -- of where mrs. putney's cancer started. we have no obligation to present any evidence whatsoever, and we have no burden of proof. we have the right, though, we do have the right to cross-examine witnesses, and we have the right to present witnesses if we want to show you evidence that we think affects the burden of proof. for example, the fact that she may more likely have thyroid cancer than it is that she has lung cancer is important evidence, because you have a right to consider that in determining whether she is met her burden of proof. what i put up on the screen now is in simple terms. this is what this case is about. this case is about the plaintiff, they have got to prove that they can prove that the cancer actually started in the bronchial tree of her lungs. that is what they -- and i'm going to -that is what their expert has said, it started in the bronchial tree of the lung, and they have got to prove that. on the other side we presented evidence that it is more likely that it started in the thyroid. we did not present that evidence because we are trying to prove that it started in the thyroid. in fact, dr. wartofsky admitted there is huge amounts of evidence he would like to have that is missing. but he told you it is his best, based on what he sees in these records now, that is where he believes it is most likely to start. and plaintiff is going to have to deal with that. if they are going to sustain their burden of proof, they are going to have to answer that question of whether or not they have ruled out or excluded thyroid gland, because if they have not, they cannot sustain their burden of proof. they cannot prove it started in the lung. i put -- i sometimes try to get down to things right off the bat. i put down here on one screen -- there is some critical medical test evidence that is missing in this case. and on the side of the lung, because they contend it is -- the cancer is in the bronchial tree. that is where they say it is. there is one test that every doctor in this case has agreed upon, we determined that one hundred percent of the time, and it is called a bronchoscopy or bronchoscope. always get in trouble with that word. i apologize. there was no bronchoscope test done in this case, ever done. on the thyroid side, everyone agreed if you want to know if there really was thyroid cancer, the thyroid scan test will give you the answer. so i want to walk through this missing evidence right off the bat because i hope that when you go back as jurors and deliberate that you will talk about what is it the plaintiff would had to have shown you to prove that she actually had cancer that started in the bronchial tree of the lung. this is their theory. this is what they told -- this is what dr. villa told us when he testified. he testified, "question: and where would the primary be?" you have learned that primary means, where did the cancer tumor start? so he says, the primary, where it started is somewhere -- he says somewhere in the bronchial tree. why do you think he was so vague about that? why did he say somewhere? it is because he actually does not have any evidence that it is actually in the bronchial tree. there is no evidence in this case that it is in the bronchial tree. and i'm going to walk through that with you right now. here's what dr. villa, this is their expert, the pathologist, this is not a treating doctor, he came in and looked at these same records right here that you are going to have and he said it is his opinion that it is right there in the bronchial tree. that is where he says it is. and then he goes on to say, and so it is going back, "would you show us the areas where the bronchogenic cancer on this drawing metastasized to?" now, let me slow down. what he is saying is that the cancer started here in this bronchial tree and then it metastasizes out somewhere. and here's what he said. he said, well, it extended, meaning metastasized, to the hilum, the mediastinum, and then the supraclavicular area, and then it went to the brain. so this is what he says happened. he says that there is a tumor in here somewhere in this bronchial tree. he does not tell us where, but it is in here somewhere. and then it actually extended out and metastasized out here into the lymph nodes of the hilum. the hilum is not where the cancer started. the hilum has nothing to do with this case. the case is about whether there is -- whether he is right, whether there is a tumor up in here in the bronchial tree that would metastasize out to the hilum. because he knows and every medical witness who testified in this case, dr. andrews told you this morning, you cannot have a cancer starting in the hilum. it will not start there. just lymph nodes are there. so his theory is that there is a tumor right here and it comes out and metastasizes to the hilum, goes up to the mediastinum, and then up here into the neck. now, it is fair to say you should be able to ask, what is the actual evidence that that tumor actually exists right there? does that tumor actually exist? what is the actual medical evidence that is in these documents right here? and by the way, the bronchus, you picked up from some of the -- i do not need to go into a lot of details, but those are basically air tubes that start at the base of the trachea and then they branch out into the lungs and then they become smaller. they become known as bronchi inside the lungs. it is very common for cancer to start inside the bronchial tree. so that is not surprising that that is where he says it started. the question is, how do we know there is actually evidence to show that it started there? and we know from the medical testimony there is two tests. there are two medical tests that can be done that would tell you as jurors whether or not there actually is a tumor right there. there is two tests. one is a ct scan. and you heard from all the -- i think all the medical witnesses agreed ct scans -- this was a ct scan of the chest done here, and it is a very -- ct scan is unlike an x-ray is very detailed just the way the technology works. and you have heard testimony today from others and from dr. andrews, if there is actually a tumor in the bronchus somewhere, that ct scan will show one as small as a bb, 4 millimeters, so that even a very small tumor actually anywhere in that bronchial tree should show up on a ct scan unless it is extremely small. however, if you could not see it, we know for certain that a bronchoscope will detect it one hundred percent of the time. so the question is, do either one of those exist in this case, a ct scan that shows that tumor or a bronchoscope? and the answer is no. i'm going to walk through this evidence a little more detailed in a moment, but at the outset there is no question she had a ct scan of the breast that was done. we do not have the film here. it is gone. it is destroyed because of the passage of time. and we do not have it. but we have the radiology report. and every doctor who is testified admitted that it does not show any mass in the bronchial tree. it does not show it. there is no mass that the ct scan detects in the bronchial tree anywhere. all that the ct scan shows is something in the hilum, but not in the bronchial tube, none. none. zero. there is no test that shows that because it was not there. and dr. villa has no evidence it is there because the ct scan does not show it and there never was a bronchoscope done. you heard detailed testimony from dr. andrews, a bronchoscope is actually a -it is a safe, painless procedure. takes about 15 minutes. he explained how you take the small camera, it goes into the bronchi, down into the bronchial tree where dr. villa says that there is a tumor in here somewhere and it would find it. if it is there, it would find it. and you do not have it. you do not have it because the treating doctors, whatever their reasons are, chose not to do it. and that was their prerogative. no one is criticizing them for that. but you are jurors now in a case, and we have got to resolve if there is any evidence that there is actually a tumor right in here somewhere, somewhere in this bronchial tree right here, that shows up on something. and right now we do not have it because the ct scan does not show it and the bronchoscope was never done. so on the side of the lung as far as whether there is evidence that you could rely upon in these medical records that shows that there is actually a tumor right in here somewhere in this bronchial tree, the ct scan does not show it and the bronchoscope was never done. and so i respectfully ask you to talk about it when you go back to the jury room because there is no evidence to support the plaintiffs' theory. and you need evidence to support a theory. you cannot come into a courtroom and have a theory. you need to actually have evidence. on the other side over here, we presented evidence from dr. wartofsky that it is more likely, based on what is in these records, it is more likely that it started in the thyroid. and what we found out is that the test that would have shown you the answer on whether it is in the thyroid so the plaintiff could rule it out and exclude it, that test was arranged for and we do not know what happened and you do not have the evidence. what happened is this. there was a ct scan of the neck that was done on february 2nd, 1994, the day after she went to dr. mitchell. and the ct scan of the neck showed that there is a mass contiguous, meaning touching or connected, with the thyroid gland. you have seen this before. and this x-ray technician, dr. pollock, said it cannot be ascertained that this arises from the thyroid or whether it represents... and he goes on to some other possibilities. and you heard witnesses, medical witnesses, testified what this is saying is that you see a mass that looks very suspicious like thyroid cancer. it is right next to the thyroid. it is right there. it s right next to the thyroid, connected and contiguous with it, and it cannot be ascertained. but clearly he is raising at least the suspicion or the possibility that there is thyroid cancer. now, counsel just said that we just made all this up because thyroid cancer is not caused by smoking. i did not make this up. i did not do the ct scan. it is the ct scan that raises the prospect that this may be not coming from the lung, but may be coming from the thyroid. and so what happened here is that this is their expert, dr. villa, he testified that the next possibility differentiation would be aggressive thyroid cancer and he agrees. he is got the same ct scan of the neck. he knows that is exactly true. he knows this is raising the possibility of thyroid cancer and he acknowledges that. and more importantly, dr. mitchell clearly -- on february 2nd -- february 3rd, on february 3rd, it is right here, february 3rd, dr. mitchell has just gotten the results of the three x-ray ct scans that were done the day before, on february 2nd. so he now -- he is in his office, he is got the results, and he decides because he sees the same thing that i just showed you right here, he is seen this right here, he knows this is raising at least a suspicion that it started in the thyroid, and so he, as it says there, also arranged a thyroid scan. so i did not come in here and make up that someone should have done a thyroid scan. that is dr. mitchell, the treating doctor in the case, recognized that this is something that would need to be evaluated before we would know where the tumor originated. and what we know from the evidence is that these medical records, they are all here, everyone has agreed, there is no thyroid scan in these records, none. there is none. and we do not know what happened. because dr. mitchell does not remember mrs. putney. he does not remember who she is or what his treatment was. he does not know what happened. he just does not know what happened. and he just does not know whether one was done. but you do not have it as jurors. and so that is pretty important because if -and also, by the way, we not only do not have a thyroid scan, but we do not have a thyroid biopsy, because after the thyroid scan the next step you were told would be to do a biopsy of the thyroid to find out if it is cancerous, but never happened, it was never done. the scan was never done and the thyroid was never done. it could very well be based on the evidence that once the pathology report on february 14th showed small cell cancer that the treating doctors did not find -- they wanted to treat her, which was the right thing to do, and it did not matter where the tumor originated, because the treatment is going to be the same. so i kind of tried to put on one slide here right at the beginning of my presentation to you my discussion of the evidence what i think is the problem with the plaintiffs' case in very simple terms. they have got the burden to prove the cancer started in the bronchial tree of the lung, down in here somewhere, and there is no ct finding of that whatsoever, there is no bronchoscope test done, and no lung biopsy. we have none of those, zero. i do not know what else -- i do not know what -- there is literally no medical test evidence in here, none. all we know from the treating physicians is that we know she smoked heavily for 40 years. that is conceded. and we know that small cell cancer is very common in the lung, but that is not medical evidence. you could have a belief or a theory, which is fine for a doctor to say, i'll bet it started in the lung, but then we have got to have the medical evidence. and it is not here. and it is not a criticism of the treating physicians, because they treated her for small cell cancer regardless of where it originated. but, whatever, tests were not done to actually determine where it started. the issue that you have been told by the court you have to decide. so on the other side, thyroid, as far as plaintiff being able to address this issue and show that, no, there is no likelihood it started there, let us show you it did not go there, it did not start there, they do not have it. they do not have the thyroid scan. what we have is a suspicion ct finding raising the possibility of thyroid cancer. we have no thyroid scan and no thyroid biopsy. and that is right there, i respectfully suggest, on one piece of paper is the weakness of why the plaintiff cannot sustain the proof, because it just is not here. now, one of the reasons you have heard from the evidence about why we do not have the evidence, some of the evidence was never done, but others were destroyed. and you heard counsel from opening statement on the big thing that we do not have are the radiology film and we don t have the pathology slides. and they were destroyed up here in 2005, right here, through the passage of time simply because of document retention policies of the hospitals. we know from the evidence that the plaintiffs first decided, among themselves, to file a lawsuit around here in '04, '05, and the lawsuit gets filed here in '07. the records were destroyed here in '05. and we do not have those records, we just do not have them. and counsel has acknowledged the passage of time, those records do not exist. so they are not here for you to consider as jurors in this case. and i put, based on all the witnesses who have testified, yes, i will talk about gaping holes in the medical evidence because they do have the burden of proof. and i'm not being unfair when i point out what does not exist in this case. the radiology does not exist. the films are gone. they are destroyed. no one can come in here and show them to you or put them up on the screen and talk about them. they are the best evidence, not the report. the films themselves. we do not have the pathology slides. dr. wartofsky told you if we actually had the slides, the tissue, we could do tests today, yesterday, the day before, and answer the question that cannot be answered now because they do not exist. we do not have a bronchoscope. it was never done. we do not have a lung biopsy. it was never done. we do not have a thyroid scan, never done, a thyroid biopsy. we do not have an mri or ultrasound, which dr. wartofsky explained would very well shed light on where this cancer started, we do not have them. as far as even the treating physicians who testified here admitted many of their records are gone because it is been so long. there is only sketchy -- this is not -- believe me, with all the treatment she received, this is a very small group of records that is left. because of the passage of time that is all that we have in this case. and we do not have -- you heard about the chemical stain test that could be done, the blood test, the autopsy. none of that evidence is here in the courtroom for the plaintiff to use to meet the burden of proof. what do we have? i went back and looked at all the evidence that had been presented to you. and you can decide this, you are the jurors, not me, but it looks to me like the plaintiff, and based on what i heard counsel say in his opening statement, there is actually -- there is certainly -- there is some key medical test evidence that they are relying on. there is a pathology report dated february 14th right here, and there are three radiology reports on february 2nd. it is actually four pieces of paper out of here, four pieces of paper that they seem to be saying they are basing their case on, actual medical evidence, not theories, not guesswork, from a doctor who does not remember treating ms. putney. i'm talking about actual hardcore medical evidence inside that group of documents. and so let us talk about them so we can see what is there. do these four pieces of paper give you any evidence that her cancer started in her lung? because that is the issue we are trying to resolve. here is the pathology report, one page dated february 14th, 1994. and dr. aronsohn, he testified under oath in this case, and this is what he testified to, under oath. and counsel chose not to talk about this during his opening statement. dr. aronsohn said right off the bat, there is nothing in the tissue sample that we took from her neck that told him where the cancer started. nothing. there is nothing that he learned from looking at that tissue that told him, where did the cancer start? it does not answer the question. he says the pathology report, this report here, he said the pathology report would not have looked any different if mrs. putney's cancer had started in the thyroid or the lung. just think about that for a moment. it does not matter where it started, the cell description will be the same, because what he is seeing on the microscope, he can describe the cells that he is seeing, but does not tell you where the cancer came from. and we do not have to -- i'm not guessing. this is what he testified to in trial. he concluded that the cancer cells on the pathology slide were small cell, but he did not determine the specific location where the cancer started because he did not have enough information to do so. and he acknowledged that he wrote on the pathology report, likely site the lung because she smoked, which is fine, but that is not medical evidence. he admits that he cannot tell from what he did where it started. so the pathology report does not answer at all the question that is being directed to you as jurors as to where did the cancer start. so also other medical witnesses during the trial admit what i just told you. they acknowledge -- dr. faig says, there is nothing in the pathology report that rules out thyroid cancer. that is a pretty strong admission. dr. villa, nothing in the pathology report shows where her cancer started. admitted that thyroid cancers can be mistaken for small cell lung cancers under a microscope. dr. monson, admitted that nothing in any of these reports he reviewed rules out thyroid cancer. so now that we are in a courtroom today deliberating about a case, their own witnesses have admitted under oath that what is in these medical records does not rule out thyroid cancer, and with that they cannot sustain their burden of proof. radiology, the other three pieces of paper, the other three pieces of paper are these radiology reports. and the fact is that none of those radiology reports show a mass in the bronchial tree or anywhere in the lung. and dr. andrews explained to you yesterday and today the radiology reports do not identify any cancer mass in her lung. dr. faig admitted the chest x-ray does not state that the cancer started in her lung. dr. villa admitted the ct scan did not identify any discrete mass in her lung tissue. dr. califano admitted that the ct scans and chest x-ray do not determine whether ms. putney's cancer started in the lung. now, dr. califano was their expert that they hired and brought to court as an expert. and he admitted to you as jurors as their expert that these three pieces of paper here, they do not determine whether she had cancer that started in her lung. and so the issue that you are told that you have to find, which is whether her cancer started in her lung, the four pieces of paper that plaintiff seems to be relying upon do not establish that. and so we have the four pieces of paper, and they are here, and they are in these records, but i just showed you the testimony from their own witnesses that acknowledge that those radiology reports do not tell us or answer the question that you have been asked to determine is, did her cancer start in her lung? there are three critical facts that are imbedded in the evidence that you have heard over the last several days that i respectfully suggest to you that show that the plaintiff simply cannot prove that the cancer started in her lung. let me start with the first that you have heard quite a bit about. i want to talk about the symptoms that ms. putney reported to her doctors and the children. and let us talk about what the symptoms are. because counsel tries to minimize these symptoms whereas there is no dispute between these medical doctors that what i have on the screen now, those are -- these are the common symptoms of aggressive thyroid cancer. there is five of them right here. i've listed every one of them, and i'm going to walk through the evidence with you. but there is no question the evidence proves that she had every one of these symptoms. and these are the symptoms. no one disputes that. and over here, these are the common lung cancer symptoms that people have talked about during the trial. and the evidence is that she did not have any of those symptoms. now, there is some overlap between whether she had a long history of shortness of breath or had rapid onset. so there is some overlapping problems. breathing is an overlap, i think, between the two common symptoms. but believe me, issues such as a growing -- a rapidly growing neck mass is not a symptom of lung cancer under any stretch of the imagination. so there is no question. let us just quickly walk through the evidence. we know from her first visit to dr. mitchell -- you have seen this document many times; i do not need to belabor it -- she told the doctor what her symptoms are, sensation of lump in throat on right side for about a month. now noticed a lump on the right side of the neck, some trouble breathing, speaking, two-packs-per-day smoker, two cases of beer per week, and no trouble swallowing unless try to swallow fast. let us start with counsel said, you should use your common sense. let us start with that. where are her symptoms? are they in near the thyroid in her neck, or are they in her lung? the symptoms that she is explaining to the doctor are clearly up here in her neck. they are not her lung symptoms. her children also testified to the same thing. they explained that she was having trouble breathing air in and out, had a sore throat, hard time swallowing, and this lump in the neck got as big as a ping-pong ball, it grew very, very rapidly. that is what her children testified to. and so, yes, i have shown you symptoms are not unimportant. symptoms are very important. and she had every single common aggressive thyroid cancer symptom. and the evidence is not in dispute on that. go to the other side. did she have any chest pain or productive cough with coughing up blood, long history of shortness of breath, weight loss? and the answer is there is nothing we have. her medical records, you have them here, you can look at them. there is no report -- there is no indication in any of her medical records that she had any of these symptoms, no chest pain, no productive cough, no coughing up blood, no long history of shortness of breath, no weight loss. none of them are there, none of them. now, we also have her children's testimony that their mother, sharon putney, her mother was not coughing up blood, did not have chest pain. her two sons, mother did not complain o shortness of breath or coughing up blood. mother did not complain of coughing up blood. we also have, though, testimony from the treating doctors in this case that testified to the following. dr. mitchell admitted that the symptoms i just showed you, he admits those symptoms were consistent with thyroid cancer. that is what he testified to. he admitted that she did not complain of any kind of coughing. dr. andrews, mrs. putney's symptoms do not show lung cancer because she had no chest pain, no cough, and no history of breathing problems. in fact, dr. andrews testified -- by the way, he is the only pulmonologist, he is the only lung expert who testified in our trial, and he testified he has never ever seen a case of lung cancer where the cancer traveled up into the neck and the neck muscles causing a large neck mass. he is never seen it ever, ever in treating thousands of lung cancer patients. he is a pulmonologist. so the symptoms that mrs. putney reported is clearly thyroid cancer symptoms and not lung cancer symptoms. dr. wartofsky said the same thing, she had all the signs and symptoms of aggressive thyroid cancer. dr. andrews, this is the testimony he actually gave, i think it was yesterday. "so how many patients in your practice, sir, come to you with cancer that started in the lung with none of these pulmonary symptoms that you just described?" his answer: "the patients that i see on a regular basis with lung cancer will always," will always "have at least one of those symptoms as they present to me." at least one. "question: so if mrs. putney presented to dr. mitchell and had a cancer in her lung, would she be the first patient that you have seen without -- that presents without any of the pulmonary symptoms?" his answer: "yes, she would be. advanced patients such as mrs. putney will always have pulmonary symptoms." so while counsel tries to downplay the lack of pulmonary symptoms, that is a major indication that there is something going on with mrs. putney that is not lung cancer. so that is the sum total of the symptoms evidence. every symptom of aggressive thyroid cancer, none of the common lung cancer symptoms. second issue, i talked about this a little bit ago, but i want to go into a little more detail. it is pretty fundamental, i think, if she had a cancer that started in her lung, there has to be a mass in her lung. so let us see and go through this. we know that the radiology reports do not show any mass in her bronchial tree, none whatsoever. this was dr. califano. this is their expert on this critical issue that the radiology reports show no mass in the lung. dr. califano. "question: as you read that over" -talking about -- he had the ct scan. "as you read that over, do you agree that based on that ct scan of the chest, the radiologist was not able to determine if she had a lung mass or a metastasis or spreading of cancer from some other primary source, which would be adenopathy," that is what he is saying, "is not that correct?" his answer: "based on that ct scan, yes." dr. califano told you the truth. that chest ct scan does not say anything. it does not tell us if she had any cancer in her lung, because it just -- it is just not there. what he is referring to, this is the actual ct scan that is in the records here, and it is very short, with what this ct scan shows, there is no mention of any tumor anywhere in the bronchial -- in the bronchial tubes, in the bronchial tree. and the witnesses have all admitted this. there is no reference anywhere in here that supports the plaintiffs' theory that there is actually a tumor in that bronchial tree. nothing. what there is is this, there is a huge mediastinal mass and/or adenopathy and a right hilar mass and/or adenopathy. and what dr. califano was explaining to you is that when it says mediastinal mass and/or adenopathy, what that means in our terms, layman's terms, is that you cannot tell from the ct scan whether that is actually a mass or whether that is simply swollen lymph nodes because there is been a metastasis from somewhere else. and so, therefore, the ct scan does not answer the question at all because there is no mass anywhere on here reported in the bronchial tubes, as plaintiffs' theory in this case. this theory here that it is right here or somewhere in the bronchial tree right in here somewhere, this document does not show that at all. in fact, dr. andrews testified as far as this theory here is concerned, this is what dr. andrews testified, it is physically impossible for mrs. putney to have had a mass in her bronchial tree because a mass in an airway will always cause symptoms like a productive cough, coughing up blood, and shortness of breath. mrs. putney had none of these symptoms. what he is saying is that if this theory were true and there actually is, as the plaintiff says, as dr. villa says, there is actually a tumor here somewhere in the bronchial tree, somewhere in the bronchial tree, it would cause these symptoms to take place always. and she had none of those symptoms whatsoever. and we also know, as i told you before, that the other test that would tell us is the bronchoscope, and we do not have it. so we have no cat scan, ct scan of the chest, and we have no bronchoscope. now, let me talk about the hilum for a moment. because i want to make sure there is no confusion. there is been a lot of testimony about whether, is the hilum part of the lung or it is not part of the lung? and you have had conflicting testimony on that. and what i want to suggest to you is that based on the plaintiffs' theory of the case it does not matter, because nobody in this case, no one, no expert is testifying or suggesting that the cancer started in tne hilum. and that is why -so it is not like you have three choices. well, maybe it was the thyroid. maybe it was the lung, or maybe it was the hilum. no one is saying that at all. no one is saying that the hilum is where the mass started. in fact, several experts, including the only pulmonologist, dr. andrews, explained it, you cannot have a hilum (sic) start in the lung. there is no lung tissue there. there is lymph nodes. so you cannot have a cancer that starts in the hilum. it is got to start somewhere else. and this theory -- so again, this is dr. villa, this is their expert who is telling you what his theory is. and, again, he is telling you that it starts in the bronchial tree, and then he says it metastasizes out into the hilum to the mediastinum and up into the neck area, the supraclavicular. so that is not my theory. that is their theory of the case that they have to prove to you. that is what they have to prove. that is what he testified to. this is a picture of what he is saying. he is saying that there is -- this tumor in the bronchial -- by the way, the reason he is saying that is that he knows that you cannot have a tumor starting in the hilum. he is a pathologist. he knows that if she is got lung cancer, it is in the bronchial tree somewhere, and that is what he testified. so he says it is here and then it metastasized and extended out and then went through lymph nodes up through the hilum, the mediastinum, and up into the neck area. that is his theory. the problem with this theory is that there is no cat scan or bronchoscope that shows it. there is none. zero. and as far as the hilum is concerned, whether it is part of the lung or not, the reason i say it is irrelevant, just the points that have been made that i do not think are in dispute, that is not their theory. their theory has nothing to do with it starting in the hilum. dr. villa does not suggest that it starts here and then somehow goes up. that is not his theory. his theory is it is starting here in the lung and then it metastasizes out, which is why there is no -- in fact, no one is suggesting that. the hilum and mediastinum, everyone has agreed they are areas of the chest cavity. they do not contain lung tissue and they are not organs. and that cancer normally originates in organs. and so you have got evidence. the plaintiff says the lung is an organ, and that is correct. and the thyroid is an organ. but the hilum is not an organ. and so there is no one in this case has suggested or is contending that it started in the hilum. and so no one at all is suggesting that the tumor started here. no one at all. and so dr. andrews, as you recall, said that it cannot start there. he is the only -- has to start in the bronchus. and dr. villa agrees with him. so it is got to start in the bronchus, and yet there is no evidence of a tumor in the bronchus. so let me go to the third issue, which is medical evidence shows that it is actually more likely just based on what we have here, because all we have are these records here, at least what is in here. dr. wartofsky at least told you his reasoning why he believes it is more likely to be in the thyroid, but he may not be right. you understand in this case you as jurors have every right to conclude that we just do not have enough evidence. one of you asked a question the other day, which is, if you do not know where it started, how do you know whether it went up or down? and there is no question that you are right about that. and dr. wartofsky told you that you are right about that. dr. wartofsky explained to you that if you do not know and cannot show because you do not have the evidence that it starts here or starts here, whether it goes up or down, no one knows. but that means the plaintiff has not proven their case, which is that it started here. and so the evidence about whether or not it is more likely that it started in the thyroid, if it is more likely that it started in the thyroid based on the evidence you have, then clearly plaintiff is not going to be able to sustain or meet her burden of proof. so let us talk about the evidence. and you can judge what the evidence is. we brought the doctor in. he clearly is one of the leading experts in the world on thyroid cancer. he s written a book devoted simply to thyroid cancer. that is all it is devoted to. this is the first time he is ever testified in a tobacco case. he told you that there is two other occasions when he was asked to look at medical records and he said, that is not thyroid cancer, and he would not if testify. and if counsel is suggesting that he came in here and testified because he got paid, i think he said $30,000 for his time, by the way, every -- these treating doctors also were being paid. do you remember that testimony -- they all were being paid for their time. there is nothing unusual about -- medical people that come into a courtroom, they are all being paid for their time. i'm not going to argue that someone lied because they were paid for their time. i do not believe that, and i'm not going to argue it and it is not true. he came in and he told you what he sees in these records. and he was the first one to tell you that there is a lot that is not here. and he was not trying to say, i know with absolute certainty. he does not know. he says it is missing, but this is what he thinks is likely. and he told you what it is based on. i'll walk through it for a few minutes. based on his experience, he thinks it started in the thyroid because of the appearance in her neck touching the thyroid is typical and common with many other aggressive thyroid cancers that he is seen over his 40 years. he is seen thousands -- i'm not sure any doctor could have treated more thyroid cancer patients than he did. here's what he told you. he said, when you see a neck tumor, cancer mass right in this area here, right connected or just right touching upon the thyroid, he said eighty percent of the time, eighty percent of the time, it is thyroid cancer. so as far as making -- just use your common sense. this is not down in her lung. this is up in her neck, right -- touching, right on the thyroid. and the doctor explained that when he sees that eighty percent of the time it is thyroid cancer and he explains that when this happens this cancer is so aggressive it bursts out of the, basically the container, the thyroid, and it goes out and gets entwined into the muscles out in here. and it does not do much to the thyroid because it bursts out of the thyroid and it starts growing in the muscle. and this is what -- he explained this to you when the pathology report, remember, shows, and no one disputes that this tumor is invading the muscles in the neck and it got intertwined with the muscles in the neck. and dr. mitchell, it was why he could not save mrs. putney, because he could not cut the tumor out and get what is called clean margins where they remove all the cancer and try to get clean -- he could not do it because it was so entwined into the muscles. and that is not in dispute in this case. and dr. wartofsky explained to you that aggressive thyroid cancer almost always does that. almost always that is what he sees, is once it breaks out of that capsule, if you will, out of the thyroid, it is an aggressive cancer and it gets intertwined with the muscles in the neck. and he says that is another reason why it looks to me like thyroid cancer. also dr. andrews testified just today that he has actually never seen a small cell cancer that invades the muscles of the neck like we have here so that he is never seen it. he is never seen lung cancer ever come out of the lung and come up to the neck and invade the muscles like that. does not it make common -- if this tumor is right here, the fact that it is so aggressive and gets right into the neck muscles, its right there. and dr. wartofsky explained to you that that is one of the reasons why between the location of it and the invasion of the neck muscle that that is why he at least believes based on what he sees that it is thyroid cancer. and he explained to you that this -- he believes based on what he sees in the records that you have got this cancer here and it spreads downward into the mediastinum area through the lymph nodes, he explained that to you in some detail, and it comes right down here into the hilum. it is right there. that is where the masses are. there is no mass in here. it is right there. that is where it is. and he explained to you that he sees that all the time. that is a very common presentation of the spread of thyroid cancer. and so he told you because of those reasons which he sees in the medical records, but he then told you, he is the one that pinpointed what he does not have and what you do not have as jurors. and the same tests that i went through, i'm not going to belabor them, but these are the records that he told you do not exist, and he told you every one of these. every one of these tests if they had been done would help answer the question that you have been asked to address, which is, did it start in the lung? and we do not have it. we do not have that evidence. there is also another important reason why it appears more likely that it started in the thyroid based on the evidence we have. and it is because of where the cancer was in mrs. putney's body at the time of diagnosis. dr. villa admitted that in almost all cases small cell lung cancer spreads to first of all multiple areas of the lung. what that means, they call that the lung metastasizes on itself. and you see all kinds of metastasis in the lung because it grows so rapidly. and yet we got the ct scan, there is nothing there. it is not there. and so there is no metastasis in the lung. and it goes usually various places, to the liver, the adrenal glands, bones, lymph nodes, in the intestines, and dr. villa said this is where you normally see it. but when she was diagnosed, it had not gone to any of those areas when she was diagnosed. and that is not what you see with small cell lung cancer. and so the fact that she did not have the metastasis, the only thing we know is that nine or ten months later in december it does metastasize to the brain, but we are talking about when she is diagnosed back in february these doctors would expect to see multiple areas of the lung with metastasis, liver, adrenal glands, bones, lymph nodes, and it is not there. dr. andrews yesterday and today explained that he said the same thing as dr. villa, they both agree on this, that when you have small cell lung cancer it spreads right away to the same places after it starts spreading. and he says almost all small cell lung cancer patients when they show up at the doctor's office they at least have one of these somewhere in their body. and when she was tested and she went to the doctor's in february and thereafter her cancer had not spread to any of those parts of the body, nowhere. in fact, her spread was completely inconsistent with small cell cancer because she never had cancer identified in any of those other areas of her body. in fact, what dr. andrews explained is she had no spread to the expected locations, then she had this mass in her neck which he is never seen or heard of as a symptom or manifestation of lung cancer. so the spread of the cancer that both the plaintiff and the defense agree upon does not make -- does not appear that it is consistent with small cell lung cancer. so those three fundamental facts i respectfully suggest to you show you that the plaintiff has not proven its case. it does not matter whether we -- we all have sympathy for mrs. putney, that is not an issue in the case, and for her family, but no one can change the records and the evidence in the case, and they are here. as far as her treating physicians, the five folks that testified, counsel this morning said dr. wartofsky attacked those treating doctors yesterday. that is not what he said. that is not what he said. in fact, what dr. wartofsky said, if you remember, he testified she had a very aggressive cancer that needed immediate, immediate care and that he testified he thought they did a good job. what happened, they got a pathology report back quickly and they knew exactly how to -- she had small cell cancer, and they knew that on february 14th. and they knew exactly what treatment to provide her. and he explained to you that they provided her with -- they tried to remove part of the tumor, they could only get so much of it out, that s an operation. they treated with chemo and with radiation. they did what they should do. all that dr. wartofsky pointed out to you is that it would not matter to them at that point whether or not it was from the lung or the thyroid and, therefore, they did not perform any medical tests after that. they just did not. no one is being critical of them. no one is suggesting that they did anything wrong. they treated her correctly. but we are in a courtroom now 12 years later with missing documents and records, with tests that were never done, and we have to analyze the evidence based on what we have before us. and those five treating doctors came in and they testified that they believe it started in her lung. they did. they testified to that. so the question you need to ask yourself as jurors, if there is no ct scan showing it is in the lung, there is no bronchoscope that shows it in the lung, there is a cat scan of the neck that tends to raise the question of thyroid cancer, what are they basing their testimony on? and they all admitted it, they are basing it on this. the clerk: you are at one hour, counsel. mr. webb: thank you very much. they are basing it on the fact of her smoking history, and they are basing it on statistics regarding small cell lung cancer being common in the lung. but none of tnem remember treating her at all. they do not remember her. and so, as i said, they know what is in these records, and that is all they know. and so they cannot make up a cat scan that does not exist. they cannot make up a bronchoscope that was never done. it is not there. and as far as this evidence, it is okay for them to have that theory. there is nothing wrong with that theory. she was a heavy smoker. and small cell cancer is common in the lung. so there is nothing wrong with them having that theory. then they got the pathology report and it showed small cell cancer. but as far as smoking history, we do know, and this is not in dispute, ninety percent of all lifetime smokers smoking two packs or more a day do not get lung cancer. so we cannot just conclude that because she is a smoker that it had to be in the lung. you need medical evidence to show that. you cannot just base it on a theory. you clearly need medical evidence to establish that. as far as statistics regarding small cell lung cancer being common, you have heard the testimony from dr. andrews and other doctors, you cannot diagnose -- you cannot make an actual diagnosis just based on statistics. statistics do not prove anything regarding a specific patient and what caused the specific disease in that patient. where her cancer started must be proven by medical evidence, not statistics. it is okay to have a theory or hypothesis, as doctors call it. there is nothing wrong with that. and they are good doctors. but they cannot change the evidence in this case that is been presented to you as jurors. and by the way, as far as statistics are concerned, counsel tries to make it appear as if the likelihood that it could be thyroid cancer is so rare, but this is what the actual testimony is. the testimony is that, dr. wartofsky analyzed the description of the cancer cells, and he testified that it is consistent with any one of the following four types of aggressive thyroid cancer. and he explained to you that it could be any one of them. and the reason he cannot tell you which one is because the pathology reports -- the pathology slides are gone. so he cannot tell you. all he can do is read over what the pathologist wrote on the report. i had him read it off to you yesterday, and he told you, it could be any one of these four aggressive type of thyroid cancers. and he identified each one what it is. and he walked through them and explained to you that those amount to about 10 to 12 percent of the thyroid cancers every year in america. so the idea that it is somehow completely unheard of, it is just not based on what the actual evidence is in the case. so i'll come back to where i started. probably, as all lawyers, i probably talk on too long, so i'm going to wind down. you have been very patient, and thank you for listening to me. the burden of proof is what i've been talking to you about. i respectfully suggest to you that based on the actual medical evidence that you have, all i can is ask that you go back as jurors, folks that we picked that took an oath, and you talk about it among yourselves and you get to make a decision. and all i can ask is that you do it based on the evidence you have before you, what you see in the medical records. talk about it with each other. and ask yourself, did she actually prove that her cancer started in her lung? and when you ask yourself that question, is there any medical test evidence that shows that that is in those medical records? these are the holes i've talked about. this is evidence that is not here. this clearly relates to a major failure of proof that we have in the case because of the passage of time and because certain tests were not done. and, yes, i will tell you or suggest to you that based on what i've just talked to you about for the last hour or so, if you look at the plaintiffs' five treating experts, five treating physicians who do not remember mrs. putney, they are basing this on smoking history and statistics. and we have over here she had all thyroid cancer symptoms, no lung cancer symptoms. and here, most important, no medical test evidence that it started in the bronchial tree of the lung, which is her theory of the case. there is evidence that it was likely started in the thyroid. we have key medical evidence destroyed, key tests not done. so you go ahead and evaluate it. yes, i respectfully suggest to you that when you deliberate and talk with each other, decide what your verdict should be, i respectfully suggest to you that mrs. putney's family have not established their burden of proof, and i would respectfully ask that you that you fill out the verdict form and check off "no." thank you very much for taking the time to listen to me.