mr. reid: thank you, your honor. may it please the court. afternoon. i want to tell you at the beginning that we honor and appreciate your service. you have the hardest job. when you go back, you will — that is when the really hard work, it may have been hard, as mr. sloman said, listening to these long depositions or seeing the lawyers do things, that'll -- that'll be easy, except when you go back there. and i appreciate your work and i know that you will do your duty in rendering a verdict in this case. now, i want to tell you a couple things that you might not have appreciated from listening to counsel this morning and really from the case. the first thing i would like to tell you is that this case is about mrs. reese. she is the most important person in this case. and the second most important word in this case is causation. causation. ms. reese and causation. and i'm going to talk about that today, because that underlies the entire question that you are going to be asked to decide in this case. at every turn, that is going to be the question, is there causation between what ms. reese, through her lawyers, claims and is there evidence to connect it to the claims that she is making in the case. now, the plaintiff has the burden. they have said that over and over. i'm not sure, however, when they say we should have brought a doctor in from colorado, we had the right to do this and we should have done that, well, as we have said all along, that is not our burden. i'm going to talk to you about what evidence we have put on because we have put on evidence sometimes to try to explain certain things or try to understand what actually happened factually, but it is the plaintiff's burden, and i have really narrowed it down to maybe two or three things or four things that the plaintiff has to prove. in the first of these, they have to prove that ms. -- that smoking was the cause of ms. reese's throat cancer. they have that burden. they have to prove that smoking was the cause of ms. reese's c.o.p.d. they have to prove that smoking caused ms. reese's illness -- i'm sorry, addiction caused mrs. reese's illness, and they have to prove that some concealment by my client, concealing something meaning she did not know it from any source at all, caused her to make the smoking decisions that she made. that is their burden. and i'm going to talk to you about the verdict form that you are going to be asked to fill out and we will talk about how you translate those answers into questions. the verdict form is going to say a question, then yes/no, another question, and yes/no, so forth. now, you have heard evidence in this case as to alternatives for these. first of all, you have heard that there is an alternative to either -- for the throat cancer, either h.p.v., or if you do not believe h.p.v., there is an alternative of alcohol, because dr. wingert said alcohol and smoking are coequal risk factors. you have heard testimony that one alterative to c.o.p.d. might be asthma. you have heard that an alternative to saying -- they say the only reason that ms. reese smoked was addiction, nicotine. well, you have now heard an alternative to that, which is choice, that she made a choice, being fully aware of the risks associated. and finally, you have heard an alternative to the concealment, and that is that she had actual knowledge, actual awareness of what they now claim she concealed -- we concealed. the concealment is essentially the risks, the health risks of smoking and the addictive quality of cigarettes. and you have heard an alternative to that. so that — that sort of frames the case. and that frames what i'm going to talk to you about in the time that i have this afternoon. now, i told you causation was important. and i was -- i drew something i would like to share with you. you know, to get from here over to miami beach, you have to go over a bridge. well, i have sort of thought about that as an image. and you may not be able see it from the podium there. i'll tell you what it says. if you imagine these are the two sides, this is the mainland and this is the bridge. can you see over -- i'm sorry. no, i cannot move the podium anywhere, but i'll tell you what it says, it is not complicated. you might think about this is ms. reese over here in miami and these are her claims. well, you need to connect them. and how do you connect things? you connect them with a bridge. and this bridge, i'll call it, is the bridge of causation. they have to get from here to there. and the way they do that is to show you evidence that there is a causal connection between ms. reese and the claims that she makes here and the recovery that they seek in this case. and that is why i say causation underpins everything in this case. now, the judge will tell you -- well, will tell you, you have already heard. that is changed. it used to be that the juries were instructed after the lawyers, and the supreme court in its wisdom said you need to do it before now. but they have told you -- they have told you what causation is. and they have given you a definition. and the two important parts, really, you have the whole instruction, but the two parts i would like to focus on, you have to show that it contributes substantially to producing the injury. so it cannot be a little bit. they have to show that it is a substantial contribution. and the second part is that the injury would not have occurred, that is known as the but-for test, and that means that without our action, without, for instance, concealment, she would have never smoked. now, if there is no concealment, obviously, that does not meet the test. so that is the legal -- that is the legal construct, you might say, that you have to deal with in this case, you have to decide but for, without the claims they make against my client, would the -- would the same thing have happened in this case, that is, would she have made the same smoking {sic}. now, i would suggest to you that if you think back through their evidence, their -- virtually all of their case is based on things that really have no connection, that do not cross the bridge for ms. reese. i'm going to give you three or four examples, and then we will go through and talk some more. you saw these findings today. and the judge instructed you about the findings, and he said to you that these findings do not establish that r.j. reynolds is liable to plaintiff, nor do they establish whether ms. reese was injured by r.j. reynolds tobacco company's conduct or the degree, if any, to which the conduct was the cause. the findings had nothing to do with ms. reese. that jury that made those findings did not know ms. reese, they did not know her case, they did not know any facts about her. they made the findings. and nobody is disputing the findings. nobody on our side got up and said, no, no, those findings are wrong. the findings mean what they say and that is all. and actually, if you think about it, one of the findings was smoking causes cancer. well, that is on our website, we agree with it. another one is it is addictive. we agree with it. and so forth and so on. you still — to get from the findings to recovery in this case, you have got to connect it with ms. reese. the second thing that you heard a lot about in this case was advertising. and remember dr. proctor, the first witness. and let me tell you this, i'm not going to talk about how much money people made. i'm surprised counsel brought it up as something important. dr. proctor was far and away the most expensive, richest expert, you have heard he is between 700 and a million dollars, $4,800 if he just shows up and goes home and does not do anything. you should not decide who to believe based on how much money they charge. likewise, i was a little surprised also to hear that it would have been better and you should not believe one of our witnesses because he looked at you when he talked to you. i usually tell witnesses the jury is the decisionmaker, it is polite to talk to the people that have to decide and have to evaluate, so i did not realize that it was considered -- somehow it makes the witness less credible because the witness looked at them. i think dr. pitchenik -- i think most of the witnesses looked at you. because where else would you look? you are right here and you are the decision makers. but dr. proctor spent a lot of time talking about advertising. and again, you have to connect it. and they tried to connect it through ms. reese, but they failed. and here's how they failed: with one exception, and i'll talk about it in a minute, they did not show you any evidence of a single brand decision, a decision to smoke a certain brand of cigarettes, not a single one had anything to do with advertisements. now, remember what the evidence was, she smoked camels because her friends or her parents smoked them. she smoked kools because they were soothing, smoothing, and mentholated. she smoked pall mall red because she got tired of menthol. she smoked pall mall gold because the doctor told her to stop and that is when she switched to a different brand. she went back with red because she did not get the same calming, relaxing effect with gold that she got. she went to camel signature because of cost. and she went to marlboro because of flavor. none of that has anything to do with ads. there was one possibility, and they did it again today, they showed you that kool ad, and the interesting thing about that is remember, that ad was for kools with filters. ms. reese never smoked kools. kools did not have filters in the '40s when she was smoking. so to say -- they could never say today, well, this ad affected her decisions. but they tried to say, well, this kind of ad. well, no, that kind of ad was not even out when she was making -- when she made her decision to smoke kool. and the tobacco that she -- the cigarettes that she smoked 37 years throughout her life was pall mall. and she told you under oath that the ad had nothing to do with her smoking pall malls. they tried to build a bridge by showing you that ads were the reasons that she smoked or made choices about smoking or not smoking. did not happen, and there is no evidence of that in this case. again, that is an example of their failing to connect their client to the evidence. which they have to do, they have to do it, because almost every instruction had something about cause in it. you have to show a causal relationship. compensatory damages, punitive, liability, all -- everything has a causal relationship, and they did not do it with ads. and beyond that, beyond that, she testified that ads had nothing to do with her decisions. and that is the only ad she talked about was the pall mall. and the kool ad she never said she saw. now, the third thing that they used that they were not able to connect to ms. reese were our documents. and they tried. they tried. they failed. now, first question, every document that you saw -- obviously, the medical records relate to her and that is a different thing. every company document that you saw, did they make any attempt to show that that document had anything to do with ms. reese? did she see the frank statement, for instance? the congressional report, did she see the -- did she ever read that? did she see the waxman hearings that you saw where everybody stood up and except for the r.j. reynolds, who tried to have a conversation, and the senator cut him off. did she know any of that? none of those documents relate to ms. -- to ms. reese's case, and that is the evidence. now, they showed you -- think about the documents. they showed you press releases, but they never showed you that those made it in the newspapers, just because somebody issues a press release. they showed you internal documents with no identification at all, documents that you do not have a clue who wrote it or what their job was or was it ever sent to anybody. they put a document up on the screen, they did not tell you who wrote it, they did not tell you who received it, they did not even tell you what company it related to, did it relate to a company whose cigarettes she was smoking. they picked a sentence or two out of documents without showing the second and third pages. and i'll show you some of those in a few minutes. they put in documents without any witness at all. nobody came into the witness stand and said, now, this is why this document is important, this is what this document means. they just cherry picked a group of documents and said look how bad these documents are, look how bad. and i'll talk about those documents in more detail later. so that is three. the fourth thing that they tried to do is basically what i'll call half truths. they brought dr. proctor in, for instance, and they talked about this thing called the c.t.r., the council for tobacco research. you did not hear that mentioned today, but dr. proctor told you that it was a front organization and that it did -- he called it distraction research, meaning nothing to do with smoking and health, all this other stuff. well, one of the great tools we have developed in this country is cross-examination, because then you get to ask the questions that they left out. and they only showed part of a document, you can ask about the rest. so when i asked dr. proctor, i said how many -- how many articles, how many studies did c.t.r. fund? 6,000. where were they published? in the leading journals in the country, scientific journals, the peer-reviewed journals. were they ever cited by the united states surgeon general? yes, they were cited numerous times in their reports about smoking and health. he comes in and says none of those studies had anything to do with smoking and health. well, why would the surgeon general then pick them out and put them in his report about smoking and health if they did not relate to smoking and health? he did not tell you that. he did not show you a single article and say, look at this, this is -- this article is distraction research, and here's why, and explain it to you. did not show you a single one. and his most kind of outrageous thing was, he said that this c.t.r. would take money away, would take grants away from people who wrote articles that they did not like. you remember him saying that? did he show you a single one? not a single one. and you know -- he has access to the 60 million pages of documents and he can search it, and you know that if there was a single example of that, he would have brought it in to show it to you. he did not. not a single example. and those four things kind of summarize in general the plaintiff's case against my client. now, i'm going to talk about the medical case separately, but on the claims against my client, that summarizes the case, things that have nothing to do with ms. reese. now, i want to talk -- let us talk through what you are going to have to actually decide, the questions you are going to have to answer. first of all, there are really, really three things, the class membership is the first thing that counsel talked to you about, and that is really three things, what caused her illness? was it an illness caused by smoking? did they prove that it was an illness caused by smoking? was ms. reese addicted, or, in other words, could she quit? and finally, did the addiction cause her to do anything or was it because of her choice? now, these are going to be the questions you are going to actually -- i'm sorry, right here. these are going to be the questions. was she addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine manufactured, that is a yes or no if you believe she was addicted, and we will talk about the definition. the second question is was the addiction a legal cause. so you have to decide if addiction is the cause, because if you believe it was something else, like choice, with full knowledge of the risks, then that would be no to that question. and the same with the -- they divided it into two, the throat cancer and the c.o.p.d. and no to those questions means that your verdict would be for reynolds in this case. and those are the first three questions that you will have to answer. now, i want to talk about, i want to talk about those. and i'm going to start with the medical case. so this will relate to the questions 2 and 3. as i mentioned before, the plaintiff has the burden in this case to prove that the smoke -- that the throat cancer and that the pulmonary, c.o.p.d., was caused by smoking. it says was addiction to -was the addiction, but that means smoking a cigarette, did that cause you to get these diseases. can we -- did you drop — juror calderon: thank you. mr. reid: are you okay? so let us talk about -- you can take this one down. let us talk about the throat cancer first for a little bit. how did they carry out their burden, how did they carry their burden? look at the evidence they brought you. they brought you one doctor, dr. wingert. and dr. wingert never saw her at the time of the surgeries or the treatment, had nothing to do with the treatment, he saw her nine years later, he saw her maybe six times, and he was not involved in any of her treatment. he was brought in, frankly, because he was the doctor who was down the hall from dr. harper, the real doctor in this case. he was down the hall. so that was -- that is the evidence on one side, dr. wingert. on the other side, you heard from dr. -- and his opinion was very firm, it was -- it was laryngeal cancer, and he said it was caused by smoking. so he was very firm on that. dr. espinola you heard, and she testified that when -- in her opinion, it was cancer related to h.p.v. so you have -- you have two contradictory witnesses and you have to look at them and you have to decide what evidence is there for each one. now, the best evidence would have been somebody who would have taken that tumor cell and done an actual test on it and we would know the answer. but we do not have that, so we have to look beyond that. and there are three or four reasons that support dr. espinola's view. number one was the location of the tumor. now, you saw a couple of reports today where other doctors used the term laryngeal cancer. well, these were not doctors that treated or did anything, they are just doctors that wrote that on their reports, and i do not -- i really do not know what the basis of that -- putting that word down. they obviously had not looked at the evidence i'm about to share with you. but let us talk about the evidence that you have seen in this case. dr. harper said it was hypopharyngeal, in other words, it was in the hypopharynx fold, and you see his -- first of all, he wrote it officially in his history. now, ary- -- aryepiglottic fold is in the same area. hypopharyngeal mass. he wrote that in his official history. so when he sat down and thought of everything he had thought about in this case, that is what he said. then we have an operative report. and you have got to -- you have got to consider these to be fairly credible from the doctor who spied the tumor and treated it and did all the procedures and treated ms. reese. once again, the same evidence. preoperative diagnosis, hypopharyngeal mass. and then they did a c.t. scan at the same time. again, this is done on ms. reese at the time she is being treated when the tumor is still there. and you see it again, left pyriform, remember, that is the area, that is -- and the aryepiglottic fold. and there was pathology, they sent it out -once they took a sample of the tumor, they sent it out, same thing. and then there is a tumor registry, and this is important, because the doctors try to get this right because other doctors are going to look at it and they look for patterns of tumors and so forth. hypophar, and then ary are the same, short versions of the same thing. the only thing they could point to you was that on that first report, that first map you saw a little scribble and it said two things. it said supraglottic, which means it is what we say, and then he wrote the word larynx. now, i do not know why he wrote larynx. it is in the same general area. but that is the only piece of evidence they had, that and dr. wingert who saw her six times and had no involvement at all, and then these other doctors who never saw her. the doctor who did the work and the pathology and the c.t., they all say it was somewhere else. and they agree that if you believe -- if you believe it was in the -- it was hypopharyngeal, then that is not caused by smoking, if you believe that. and we do not have the burden to prove it, they do, and they brought in this one doctor. now, the second area, the -- not only the location, but the -- the description of the tumor, and remember, it was the warty growth, again, left a.e., that is the same area. exophytic growth, near the arytenoid, same thing. so the way the tumor looks, the fact that it is warty is -- because h.p.v., remember, is also consistent with things that you get warts on your hands, so that is another piece of evidence that you have got to consider. and then the third thing is its quick response to radiation. this was a remarkable situation. it was -- the radiation was done over a fairly short period of time and it cured her and it is never come back. even though she is continued to smoke, it has not come back. that is -- now, when they cross-examined dr. espinola, today they say she made too much money and she wrote larynx in that report. but they cross-examined her about epidemiological studies. remember, that is not about ms. reese. they did a lot of that in this case, about epidemiological studies. that is about big populations of people. and we do not disagree that certain cancers, a risk factor is smoking and alcohol coequal, as well as gerd, which she had, and so forth. but plaintiff has the burden, and if you will look at number -let us have 112. first, they talked to you about this teeter-totter thing. remember in opening they said well, they only have to tilt it a little bit? well, you have got dr. wingert here, he treated her, and then you have got all of that on that side. i submit that they have not carried the burden to prove that this was laryngeal cancer, and, in fact, it was cancer that is not related to smoking, and i would suggest that -- the answer to that question should be no. now, i want to talk about the c.o.p.d. once again they brought you one witness, one witness who is the only one who said this is c.o.p.d., and there is nothing else there, there is no asthma. and he read to you today three or four times, dr. pitchenik, no asthma, not a bit of asthma, no asthma. c.o.p.d., nothing else. he is the only witness who said that in this case. he never saw ms. reese except he called her a couple of times to clear up a couple of facts about her history. he is the one that told the lawyers they needed to have the pulmonary function tests in order -- because they read dr. klein's report and found out that was required, and that is why, remember, it was done for litigation, i will not show you those two slides again, but you remember that was the reason that they told the doctor they were there. and the only basis for his opinion then was that report, the p.f.t. report. so that is dr. pitchenik. but you know interestingly enough, during his direct examination, he never mentioned the other findings on that report that i'm going to talk to you about, and more importantly, he never showed you the second page, and he never told you what dr. eisenberg's view was, the one who actually did the test. so that was dr. pitchenik. you have to balance dr. pitchenik against dr. klein, once again, makes too much money, the fact that he lives -- when he said that he spends all of his time testifying, you heard what he said, he spends ninety percent of his time seeing patients. he would just saw 30 patients or something the day before he was here. he is seen thousands of -- he is a practicing doctor with great experience. and what did he say? you remember, we had a little chart when he was here. he said that in the lung situations, you can have fixed obstruction, and you can have reversible. and reversible, if it is reversible, it is asthma. if it is fixed, it is smoking, could be. but it could also be asthma. you know, he talked about this lung remodeling because you can have untreated asthma, remember that, untreated. and we are going to talk about what ms. reese told her doctors over the years and whether she would even have complained about the asthma. but he said that is a possibility. and he said that there could have been -- dr. eisenberg could have answered the question if he had just done a little more, if he had done a little bit of treatment, and then another p.f.t., we would know the answer. but for whatever reason, the lawyers who sent her to see dr. eisenberg did not tell him to do that, so we do not know the answer. and they have the burden. they have the burden. remember, he found something else interesting that -- and then did not -- they did not really cross-examine him about any of this. remember the five surgeries. you did not hear about this from any of their witnesses, '94, '3, '4, '4, and '8. and he said, he testified that they would not put a person under general anesthesia without doing a check on their ability to breathe. that makes -that is common sense, that does not surprise people. and that means that there was really nothing to suggest that this problem was existing except once in '04, they found that she had wheezing. wheezing is -- can be asthma. they treated it with a bronchodilator. and what happened? it cleared up and they did the surgery. that is proof that it was reversible. that is proof. so that is what dr. klein told you. now, we have a conflict here. dr. -- neither one saw the patient, but you have to decide, did the plaintiff's burden, did they carry their burden with dr. pitchenik, or did dr. klein raise these issues that calls that into question. well, let me tell you who breaks the tie. you may be surprised. dr. eisenberg. dr. eisenberg. dr. eisenberg agrees with dr. klein. he agrees that this test has evidence of reversibility. and that is the part that dr. pitchenik did not show you. let us look at slide 115. dr. pitchenik did not mention this to you. you would not have any way of knowing about this because -- and i would not, none of us, but this percent change, after they take the bronchodilator, dr. -- dr. klein said if it improves, just like over there, that is evidence of asthma, reversibility. he said the d.l.c.o./n.a. -- v.a., rather, now, they quibble about whether 77 is close to 80 or whatever, but his opinion was that is further evidence. and finally, dr. eisenberg wrote in his report that you did not see until we brought it out "severe airflow obstruction." so we know there is obstruction, wherever i have it here. we know there is obstruction. nobody argues about that. we are not sure what causes it, whether it is smoking or asthma. and some reversible component. so we know there is reversible. we know it is a combination. their -- they ask you to believe dr. pitchenik who says it is only c.o.p.d., it is not asthma, forget it, there is no asthma. dr. eisenberg agrees with dr. klein. could we see 116, please? this came from these pages. i'm not going to pull every page out. dr. eisenberg said asthma can be obstructive, in other words, right here, dr. eisenberg said it can lead to irreversible obstruction due to lung remodeling. he said her disease could be untreated asthma, which can result in shortness of breath, wheezing, consistent with asthma, periodic airway inflammation, air trapping, obstructive lung disease can be a result of asthma. in other words, this can be caused by this. he said nothing in her medical records excludes asthma and nothing in her medical records that is inconsistent with asthma. and then he said -can we see the next slide? "there is some reversible component," which is asthma. dr. eisenberg, their doctor, agrees with dr. klein. i would suggest that they have not carried their burden with dr. pitchenik, who is the only witness who says no asthma, all -- and asthma, by the way, there is no dispute, is not caused by smoking. so if it is asthma, it is not smoking. so they have to show -- i'm not saying that it is clear our way, i'm not saying it is absolutely, but we do not have the burden. what i'm saying is, is that they have not established that this part is the substantial cause. and, in fact, they have denied all of this. but now you know that it is there. so i would suggest to you that the -- they have not carried their burden that c.o.p.d. in this case was caused by smoking, have not carried the burden. now i want to move to the next question in the same group, and that is the addiction question. that is really the first question of whether she was addicted, and then the second part of that is whether the addiction caused her various ailments. and maybe we could just put 118 back up to remind us where we are. now i'm going to talk about this one, and then i'm going to talk about the cause part. in other words, was it asthma? i mean, was it smoking addiction? or was it choice? did she make a choice to smoke with the ability to quit, knowing the risks? that is what you will have to decide. and you heard that asthma -- you heard asthma was a psychological condition. you heard from a doctor who specializes in treating people who have addiction. i do not know what the significance is that only 50 people have come in with nothing but smoking when he is treated thousands of people who have smoking and something else. he obviously deals with both of them. but he is board certified, he has experience. i'm not going to talk about the fact that he charged for his time because he did not charge as much as dr. proctor charged, but that should not -let me just say this, if you are going to decide this case based on how much one expert charged, then i may as well sit down because i could never convince you of anything else if that were your job. and i do not think that is going to happen here, because everybody -- unfortunately, litigation has gotten complicated, you have to bring in professionals to help juries, and you have to pay them. and dr. proctor has been doing this against tobacco companies his whole life or for much of his professional life. and so -- but that is not the reason that i'm going to say that you should rule in the favor of reynolds in this case. you heard about the definition. he is the only one that gave you a definition. and you know counsel said this morning that dr. pitchenik looked at the d.s.m., but he said he never used d.s.m. in his practice, and dr. abramson gave you -- that would be 119. he gave you the definition, maladaptive patterns of substance use leading to clinically significant impairment or distress, that is right out of the d.s.m. so there is a standard that psychiatrists have put together for this. and their expert, as we will talk in a minute, did not even deal with this, did not know it existed, did not know it. so he is the one with issue, did have, when you compare credentials. but this case is really, the bottom line is about ms. reese's choice to smoke and to continue to smoke. it is not about some other person. it is not about some group of a big national survey that was done, an epidemiological study. our evidence in this case focused on ms. reese and when we looked at generic things, such as the schoolbooks we will talk about in a little bit, we looked for schoolbooks that she would have been exposed to. and you did not see any of that on the other side. ms. reese smoked because she chose to smoke. remember, she told you why she smoked. and all i could tell you is -- she said -- now, counsel said you cannot really rely on this, but that is what she told you. there are people who -- and even their experts agree there are people who do enjoy smoking or using tobacco in different forms. and ms. reese, it is clear that -- was one of those people. and they want you to believe that she was captured by nicotine, that she could not make -- she could not make a decision to stop nicotine, that she was just tortured, she was a tortured smoker is what they tried to tell you. well, you have met her. and you also know what she said in her testimony. if i can see the next one, please. i did not -- again, those are her words. that is how she describes herself. does that sound like somebody who was a tortured smoker and -remember, cigarettes did not just jump up into her mouth to smoke. does that sound like -- you have to decide. but the most important thing we have in this case is ms. reese's -you can take that one down. ms. reese's -- the question is whether she really wanted to quit or not. and we have a lot of evidence about that in this case. think about it this way, is it fair for somebody to say i am unable to quit, which is what you heard today, she cannot quit, she is unable to quit, is it fair to say that and come in and ask you for 7 million dollars that they just asked you for, is it fair for her to come in and say that when she never even tried? now, if she had tried to quit, if she had gone to smoking cessation groups and she had asked doctors, if she had quit for long enough, like the one time when the nicotine was out of her body, she still continued after that, that would be one thing. but to come in and ask for that award because she claims she cannot quit, is that fair when she never really tried? now, i asked her, i went through her whole life in segments, you know, 1945 when she -- '29 to '45, she became a regular smoker then, and we went up to '79 when she met mr. berry, and then went up to when she had the cancer, and then we went up to modern days. what did she tell you about her state of mind? she is the best judge of this. she said -- we know she quit for five days during radiation and we know she had no withdrawal symptoms. dr. pitchenik had to admit that. and we know that at least one other occasion with the chantix and those things, she quit for a couple of three days. now, she did all that after the lawsuit was filed or in the same year that the lawsuit was filed, the chantix and the earlobe and that. but except for that, during the entire life, from her beginning smoking until yesterday, until she was on the stand, she did not stop. she testified that she did not try to stop. she testified that she did not think about stopping. she testified that she did not want to stop. she even hid information from her doctors because she was so firm in her decision to continue to smoke. now, you have heard counsel argue today that is because she was afraid of oxygen, she did not want oxygen. but the fact is she never said that before, she said, rather, she did not want -- she wanted to keep smoking and did not want to be nagged. remember, she said it was like a wife, that was her testimony, people nagging her about smoking. she never asked any doctor or any family member to help her. do you know people who've quit? when people try to quit, they go around and ask their friends, did you quit? how did you quit? how did you quit? do you know anybody who quit? or you go to your doctor, when the doctor says you should quit, it seems to me if you really wanted to try to quit, the answer would be can you help me quit. she did not say that. she said, well, i'm never going to tell this guy that i smoke again because he s going to tell me to quit. that is what -- that is the answer there. and she never used any of the aids. and you heard about -- she -- and now let us move forward, even till right now, 2010, or during this litigation. let us see 123. this is what dr. eisenberg, who did the p.f.t., wrote that she "candidly and amiably admits no likelihood of that occurring." that does not really sound like i'm not going to quit because i cannot, i really am going to try. that sounds like somebody who enjoys smoking and just frankly is not going to quit. could we see the next one, please? again, dr. eisenberg, "indicates no intention of smoking cessation." it does not say i cannot quit. it says she has no intention of even trying to quit. can we see the next one, 125, please? "have you ever said to anybody, mr. berry, your doctors, your friends, or anybody, have you ever said i really want to quit and i'm going to quit, have you ever said that to anybody in your life?" she says never. "no." what about 126? "have you actually told people the opposite, that you really do not want to quit?" and her answer to that was, "yes." her smoking is not about addiction, ladies and ?entlemen, it is about choice. and it is -- if you ind that choice is the cause, then you have to answer that first question, is she addicted -- rather the second, third question, which asks for cause, you have to answer both of those no, because it is not the nicotine, it is not addiction that caused it, it is her choice. now, i want to talk just for a second about the evidence they brought you to prove that she was addicted. you heard from three doctors, you heard from two lung doctors and one ear, nose, and throat doctor. you heard from dr. wingert, he was the substitute doctor we have already talked about, and he said -- now, think about this for a minute. if a doctor is going to diagnose somebody as being addicted or dependent on nicotine, what is the fundamental, first fundamental thing that that person needs to know? it would be i need to know something about your smoking, how long have you smoked, how much, have you tried to quit, or how did you do it, so forth and so on. dr. wingert said at page 1 -- at slide 127, he did not know when she started, he did not know when she became regular, he did not know anything about her smoking habits or whether they changed, he did not know anything about her quitting habits. so he knew nothing about it, and yet he came in through a deposition and was willing to swear under oath that she was addicted, he made a diagnosis of addiction, a psychological condition, addiction, having admitted all of that. he admitted he never treated anybody for addiction. he told you that the only basis for his opinion was that he took some friends to an a.a. meeting for alcohol, and that is what he knew about addiction. you cannot possibly -- you cannot possibly diagnose someone based on that. now, dr. eisenberg, the other lung doctor, he was asked -- he also was asked in the same question, they got him to say was she addicted, yes, she was addicted. well, slide 130, you will see the same thing. and he is a -- he is a -- i'm sure he is a great pulmonologist. and please do not think that i'm criticizing him at all, because he is telling the truth. no specialized training, not an expert, not an expert, not an expert. not an expert. none of the above. so he was not -- compare him to dr. abramson. think about that. and the third was dr. pitchenik, the other lung doctor. and he was willing to be an expert on anything that he was asked about. he was willing to be an expert on lungs, which he is, but he was also willing to be an expert on addiction, on pharmacology, on behavior, and so forth. he admitted he was not a pharmacologist. and he said that his opinions about pharmacology, now, these are the opinions about what effect does nicotine have on the brain, that is the pharmacological question in the case, and he told you all about that, told you all about it, and he said, well, it comes from some reading that i've done and it comes from -- it comes from the common sense knowledge of a clinician, meaning a lung clinician. now, counsel said he teaches -- he teaches in the medical school, and i imagine he teaches about lungs and so forth, but he says he is not a pharmacologist. and you know that he is just completely wrong. because remember he told you that he was talking as an expert in pharmacology, the effect on the brain, he told you nicotine has the same effect on the brain, that is the same amount of dopamine, remember dopamine is the substance that is created that makes you like to do something, some activity or food or whatever, it is the dopamine, he said nicotine is the same as all of those, that the dopamine is the same, and he tried to tell you that even the withdrawal is the same. and he said there was no withdrawal for cocaine, but you now heard there is a psychological problem, withdrawal from cocaine. but now you know he did not know, frankly, what he was telling you. let us look at 132. and you know they did not -- they did not cross-examine dr. abramson about this at all. how can a witness come in and tell you that nicotine and cocaine and amphetamines are all the same when it comes to the pharmacological effect, in other words, how addictive are they? well, he cannot if he is -- he cannot because he is not an expert. and they never contested that. and then the next one, the next slide you also saw, well, dr. abramson told you that they measured -- they measured the output of dopamine in certain activities, and again, you see the difference in these things. remember, i asked dr. pitchenik, i said, "by the way, you are aware, are not you" -- he said -oh, he got the d.s.m. out, he studied certain surgeon general's reports, i said, "are you aware that the surgeon general in 1964 said that smoking was not addictive based on the accepted international medical definition?" and this is what he said, not familiar with that, or the world health organization, not aware of that. how can an expert come in and ask you to believe him and accept his expert opinion when just fundamental things like that he does not even know or never bothered to look up? he spoke to her a couple times on the phone, and that was it. that was his study of ms. reese's smoking behavior, which led him to make a psychological evaluation. the bottom line is that they have not carried their burden. they have not presented you with credible, believable evidence from an expert who has any skill or training in the area that they are asking you to accept, that is the question of addiction. now, i want to talk a little bit more about the causation part, in other words, did her addiction, did she smoke because of addiction or because of that other. i will submit to you, and you have heard this now, and you will have to decide what addiction means. the judge is not going to describe it for you. let us see the next slide 135, please. as you have now heard evidence, it has not always been called the same thing. it was called either addiction or habituation. remember john quincy adams or columbus. counsel was arguing just a little bit ago that this was a secret. he showed you a document where somebody in the tobacco company said in the '50s that there was a pharmacological effect of nicotine and said that was a secret. well, it was not a secret to john quincy adams, and that was passed around, and it was not a secret to christopher columbus, and it was not secret to ms. reese, either. you know, definitions have changed. in '64, the surgeon general said it was habituation. that is because they did not have intoxication. in '88 -- that is the definition they used all those years. if a psychiatrist had evaluated ms. reese during this time and had exactly the same, they would have had a different result. '88, surgeon general changed the definition and so forth. the constant is that everybody has known it is difficult to quit. some people it is more difficult than others. think about it. i would submit to you that a plaintiff who brings a lawsuit has a duty, a lawsuit claiming that i could not quit, has a duty to at least try. and in this case, the only evidence of her -- ms. reese ever trying was after the lawsuit was brought, or the same year. one of those may have been before, but it was in 2007. her entire life, the only time she tried to quit was after -- was in connection with this lawsuit. and then they come in and say, well, she is addicted, she is addicted. there is no evidence that ms. reese is different from any other people in the country who've smoked and have quit. everybody has different abilities and so forth, and you have seen -136. you have seen the statistics, 60 million people, ninety percent quit cold turkey without any aids. and as you heard the doctor say, people do not usually quit the first time, you have to be motivated. but ultimately, we have more former smokers in this country today than we have actual smokers, and everybody, all 60 million and ninety percent, they all smoked the same cigarettes, they had the same advertisement, they either liked to smoke or did not like to smoke. there is really no difference. there is really nothing unique about ms. reese that says of all the 60 million people in the world, there is something about her that keeps her from stopping. you didn t hear any testimony about that. now, perhaps the most important thing, ms. reese told you that she did not believe that she was addicted until about 1967. let me see the next slide. "you believed you were not addicted until '67; is that correct? the middle years. "well, then i knew i was addicted." that would be age 35. and her mind says if you are addicted, it means you cannot quit. that is a pretty good definition. that is a pretty good definition, actually. the addiction question is can you quit or can you not, and ms. reese, i believe, has the ability to quit. but the point is that she smoked for about 20 years from the time she became a regular until the time she felt that she was addicted, that she could not quit, and she never quit. she never quit during that entire time. and think about it. think about it. by '67, you had the surgeon general's report had come out in '64, and you saw all the advertisements and all of the publicity about that. the warnings had gone on the pack in 1966. so during all that time, ms. reese said i could quit, basically, i was not addicted, i could quit. and she never tried. she never tried. and counsel said anybody today who uses tobacco, i do not remember the word he said, but anybody today who uses tobacco after everything that they know, kind of suggested there was a problem with that person, they should not be in the court. well, what about somebody who smoked for 20 years and did not believe she was addicted and never tried to smoke {sic} and knew about the risks. that is ms. reese and that was her testimony. and i asked dr. pitchenik about it, and he agreed that is what her testimony was. we know, and i'll show you the evidence in a minute, but we know that she was fully aware of the risks of smoking during that whole period, from the '40's on, and yet she made no attempt. her smoking -can we go back to 118, please? addiction was not the cause. addiction was not the cause. the cause was ms. reese's choice to smoke. now, i want to talk about another count that they are bringing, and that is the count of concealment. could we see 138? those are the two questions that you are going to be asked about concealment. and i'll put this up because i want to talk about it a little bit. i figured out how to make it level during lunch. okay. we are going to talk about some of that in a minute. but this question is whether reynolds concealed or omitted material information, were a legal cause. now -- and then you have this conspiracy question. if you find out that -- if you decide that we concealed something, then you have to decide if we joined with other people to conceal things from ms. reese. again, causation applies. you have to show that something was withheld from her that she did not know from any source, because if she knew it, it is common sense, if she knew it, it is not concealed. if she knew it from her family or friends or t.v. or reading, it is not concealed if they know about it. and then you have to show that if she had known this secret information about smoking and health, she would have stopped smoking, she would have done something different. that is really what this question is. and i submit to you, ladies and gentlemen, the evidence in this case, not only have they not carried the burden, it is exactly the opposite from that, ms. reese was a fully-informed smoker for most of her life. she knew that it was risky to her health. now, counsel says, well, she did not know the medical cause -- what you -- what you call these diseases that she did not have. nobody had explained to her what c.o.p.d. means. but the point is not whether she knew the name of the medical condition, the point is whether she knew that she had physical problems. and if you think about it, we will talk in a minute, all of her physical problems that she had back along the way are the very same ones that she has -- that she is claiming now. there is wheezing and there is difficulty in breathing, and so forth. it was not till 2010 that she ever had the p.f.t. so her symptoms have been identical throughout all these years. she admits, she admits that nothing reynolds did changed her choice to smoke. and she still smokes today. and she still has not even tried to quit. now, what knowledge did she have? and that is what this timeline shows a little bit of. this is when she started -- she was born back here, at age 10, in '39, she rolled cigarettes. and then in -- and then starting in the -somewhere along in here, she believed, and i'm going to talk about some of the actual testimony, but she believed that it was harming her health, and her husband told her and her doctors told her and she saw warnings on the packs, and all of that happened before she thought she was addicted in 1967. now, dr. martin, dr. martin is a historian. somebody one day some years ago said i would like to get a historian to do research on this particular part of history, the knowledge of smoking and filters. he was an expert long before anybody showed up to ask him to look into this. he was an expert in studying what people believed or knew. he had done one actually on alcohol, he told you about that one. dr. proctor, he is written articles based on the testimony he gives in these cases. there is nothing surprising that experts would write articles maybe about what they are doing. you heard dr. proctor say i think i -- we were sort of kidding around with each other, and i said it is sort of like groundhog day, if i came into a courtroom now or in two months or three months ago, it would be the same testimony. but the point is dr. martin was a historian. and let us say that you want to believe that somebody asked him to do it. you cannot argue about what he found. you can argue about that you did not like the way he looked at you when he testified, but you cannot argue with the facts, with the evidence that he showed you, and you need to compare that to the evidence that dr. proctor showed you. dr. proctor was the first witness, said proudly he knew nothing about ms. reese. he was their historian, their scientific medical historian. dr. proctor admits he does nothing. lost my bridge. dr. proctor admitted he has nothing to add to this. he said -- i said, well, tell us how much time you spent preparing -- this was shocking. tell us how much time you prepared to testify in this case, knowing that, you know, causation is an issue. he is been in these. and he said zero. zero. that is what led to our little talk about coming in and -- dr. proctor never was interested in the least in knowing anything about ms. reese. now, what goes around, again, we will talk about money, i do not want to say $4,800 again for every single day whether he is flying here, going there, whatever, because you are not going to decide this case on that, i do not believe. but how can he -- how can he give opinions about the scientific issues and so forth if he does not even know about the client? compare that with dr. martin. dr. martin read the deposition, he read the interrogatories. he spent the necessary time learning about ms. reese and her life. and he went out and looked for evidence that would relate, that would be part of the causation of this case. he -- he -- he showed you the school material from the very schools that she would have gone to. let me put up this one. remember this one, the -- 139, please. almost every one of these applied to ms. reese. almost every one. you know. she -maybe -- maybe she did not remember the government or the p.s.a., but friends and family, schools, mass media, doctors. she remembered she had seen the movies and she had watched the t.v. shows. that is how people find out about things such as the risks associated with smoking, and you saw that. but he went -- he did not just bring in books, he went to the areas where she had been in school and found the books that were required to be used in her school and then he found books actually used in her school. now, i'm sorry, he cannot go any further, if she probably does not remember what she saw, but he went to that extra effort to try to help you determine if this causation bridge has been built or not. he looked at the magazines that she actually read. he looked at the newspapers in the towns where she lived when she said i read that newspaper, then he would put it in. if she did not read it, he did not put it in. the t.v. shows, walter cronkite, edward r. murrow, she did not see these -- she knew about them. that is why he talked to you about it, unlike dr. proctor who just talked about generics. dr. proctor basically talked about somebody who is not in this courtroom and not part of this case. that is the problem with dr. proctor's historical analysis. dr. martin, on the other hand, talked about this. and when they cross-examined dr. martin, they did not talk about ms. reese's awareness. they talked about stuff like an f.t.c. report that she never saw or never heard about, or things -- or other issues. they did not talk about her specific because they did not want to talk about that, because that is not helpful. that is not helpful to prove -- i would say it is fair to -- you have not heard any denial of this. i would say it is fair to say in this case that that point, that is, is ms. reese, was she a fully-advised person throughout her entire life about the risks associated with smoking, that would have to be almost a stipulation by the parties, because they have never contested that, they have never come in and said, no, no. all they said is she did not know to call it c.o.p.d. when the doctor said your smoking is causing all your symptoms, because he did not say, hey, you have c.o.p.d., they did not say, well, that means she did not know that smoking was bad for her. that was their cross-examination. and the polls. there was some talk about polls. well, gallup polls demonstrated the message was getting through. the first message that got through was that people had heard about it. show you number 140. remember, there is a difference between heard about something and then believe something. well, so when this poll comes up, they say, oh, dr. martin, just because ninety percent heard about it, does not mean they believed it. okay. then let us look at the 141. now we are going to ask about belief. "do you think cigarette smoking is harmful?" it is smaller, seventy percent, so these people now think or believe. then they said, well, yeah, but they asked about other things. there was this one where they said, well, only 5 percent said lung cancer. as i remember, it was 30 some percent who said diseases of the bronchial or lungs or something like that. so you saw that. then he comes up with -- then the next poll, the 142 that you saw, is very focused, "do you think that cigarette smoking is or is not one of the causes of throat cancer?" exactly our case. and what you find is in '77, those people said yes, in '81, that many said yes, and in '99, ninety percent said yes. in other words, over time, the knowledge was expanding, and the more people -- the people who had heard about it back in the '50s were now believing it. that demonstrates the message was getting through to everybody, including ms. reese. now, we talked about the warnings. they want say 7 million times she puffed a cigarette. well, i did not figure it out, but a pack and a half a day, that is 30 cigarettes a day for 50 years, every time -- every time you picked up that pack to take that cigarette out, there was a warning right there. she received a personal warning every time she picked up the pack. now, what did she say about that? she said, well, i read them, and then after a while, i just did not pay them any attention. i did not want -she did not want to believe them. she wanted to keep smoking. you cannot blame a company for putting warnings on a package that a consumer says i read it, i understand it, and frankly, i just do not want to agree with it, i'm not going to try to quit, which is what we have in this case. now, so really what we tried to do is to show you kind of the broad view through dr. martin what the people out in the culture knew. then we sort of narrowed it down to the areas in which ms. reese actually lived, you know, her school, her newspapers, or so forth. so then we move it from one -- you see, the -maybe she was not as sold on the idea when it was the whole, but as you get more down and more focused, she becomes -- to become more -- to learn more, she heard in the '40s, in the 1940s, that smoking was risky. and she said i did not believe it. let us see -"in the '50s, you heard people say smoking might not be good for your health?" answer: "yes. "did you hear that in the '40s? "yes, but i never believed it." so here we have a person who heard but did not believe yet. but by the late '40s, the late '40s, she joined a different group. let us see the next one. "and in the '40s, when you switched from -- to kools, rather, you were having physical problems associated with smoking that caused you to look for a different brand at that time; right?" answer: "yes." so now she is gone from the i heard it, i do not believe it, now she believes it because she is going to do something about it. cigarettes are aving an effect on her health. and we know -the next slide, please, 148. we know that all of her husbands, all -- over the years warned her. now, these are getting to be very personal sort of warnings. we know that. we know that in the 1950s, -149, please. she heard people, you have already seen that, she heard about it in the '50s. and in 1967, there was a very significant event. she actually went to a doctor because of smoking -- because of problems breathing and panting and so forth, and that doctor said to her personally this is smoking related. this is smoking related. could we see 151? and talked about, "and did the doctor tell you in '67 why he wanted you to quit? "well, i guess i was coughing and panting and puffing, i think so. "do you think you were coughing and panting? "yes. "and the doctor told you to quit smoking?" and she says, "yes." now, we are not talking about being part of a big poll, we are talking about an individual sitting in a doctor's office who is given a direct warning by the doctor. i want to digress for a minute. he showed you a minute ago this government report that said -- he read -- showed you parts of it, you remember the hearings before some congressional group. and one of the things that showed in there, it said that some people say that the companies are not being truthful about filters. some people say that. so that -- they show that to you to -- to prove the point that -- that filters do not work. now, that is -- that evidence never got to ms. reese. she never was at that hearing, she did not read it, she did not talk to those people. she did not know that the government had said that somebody said that filters do not work. now -- so put that here. now, on the other side, put what her doctor told her in 1967. do you remember what her doctor told her? he told her the filters -- he said have you quit? she said no, but i switched to filters. and the doctor said, "they are no good, either." so that is -- that is really this case. they put up all of this testimony from federal agencies and government, things that ms. reese never saw, and say see how bad it is, and then you turn around and say, well, wait a minute, she was personally told this by her doctor, a very credible source. that is a perfect example of what is happening over and over in this case when they show you all these generic things and do not -- and never relate it. she knew that smoking -- and she knew that -now, i'll say this, the government said filters are bad, but you are going to hear me talk about them in a little bit and when we talk about the tobacco working group, and remember, the government worked with us to try to make filters better. so they might have said that in congress, but they were trying to get us to do something to work with the filters. anyway, by the '70s, now we are moving ahead, along the timeline, by the '70s -could we see 152? "before the '70s, you knew smoking was bad for one's health -- for your health? "i knew then, sure, because i felt it." in other words, she has personal feeling about her physical condition that tells her smoking is harming her health. you cannot get any more direct or personal in terms of a warning to somebody than that. could we see 153, please? and then "what did you" -- "associated with" -- "why did you feel that you associated with your health with smoking? "coughing and coughing and breathing and breathing," and that is all she could think of then. actual knowledge. they have not said any of this is wrong, by the way, and that is why i'm taking the time to show you the actual words. this is the transcript we get from this lady every day, all the people get all these printouts, and we know what everybody said, and i want you to see what was actually said. and now we are into the '80s. and in 19 -- in 154, what we find out is that she began to have a throat problem in connecticut, she had swallowing problems, and she said those are the same problems that she later had in the '90s, so about a decade before. "the symptoms are similar to the symptoms you later had in the '90s, swallowing." so she had exactly the symptom that she later discovered was related to her cancer. and she did not go to the doctor. why not? because she knew it was relate -- she thought that it was related to smoking, and she did not want the doctor to tell her stop smoking. that is -- that is very strong proof that ms. reese was aware of smoking and that it was relating to her health. and the fact is, 156, we do not have a lot of medical records going back because she did not go to doctors very often. and she would not tell doctors the truth about the physical condition because she did not want to stop smoking. that is probably the strongest piece of evidence that she knew all those years when she was not telling the doctors the truth, she knew that the doctors were going to say your physical condition that you have is such that you need to quit smoking. and so for that reason, we do not have a lot of medical records from back in that era. but ms. reese has said under oath really the same thing i'm saying. could we see 157? "do you believe any tobacco" -see, we get to take her deposition, everybody. this is our chance. "now, tell us what this case is all about. what do you claim in this case? do you believe any tobacco company has withheld information from you that would have affected your smoking decisions?" and the answer was, "no." the concealment question, that answers it right there. she cannot -- she cannot point to anything that was withheld about -- and we are talking about smoking and health. nothing. and that should end -could we go back to the verdict form on this? nothing was concealed about smoking and health that ms. reese did not know from other sources throughout her entire life. and i would submit that your answer to that question should be no. and the second question has to do with conspiracy, but you still have to have the connection. they still have to show that it is a legal cause, that the conspiracy had some effect on ms. reese's illness. i would submit your answer should be no. now, the next question i want to talk to you about is 157a. there has been very little talk about this in the case. this is basically what, you know, what you might call products liability claims. was reynolds' negligence -- and the court, you know, the finding is that there was negligence, but the question is was it a legal cause, or was it defective or unreasonably dangerous. now, that means essentially there was something wrong with the product that makes it unsafe. but you -- but you are going to be told in this case, ladies and gentlemen, that the manufacture and sale of cigarettes is a lawful activity protected by federal law. therefore, i instruct you that reynolds cannot be held liable merely for manufacturing, selling, or advertising cigarettes. now, they have to prove that something that reynolds did -- something that reynolds did caused the injury in this case with regard to the design or manufacture of the cigarettes. and all you heard today was that the smoke was inhalable. well, that is a natural -- that did not happen -- reynolds did not make that up, you know. he said that we designed the cigarette. well, remember, that came because somebody let a fire get out of hand in a curing barn and they realized that flue curing would make it -- the smoke different. but that is an inherent part of the cigarette. that is not a defect in the cigarette. they talked about ammonia, they read a quote from some article. not a bit of evidence that there is ammonia in this case, no evidence. they threw that out. in fact, nicotine, they said nicotine. well, remember, you heard from dr. proctor, because he was not happy with this because he would like, frankly, to see smoking outlawed, but the federal drug -- the f.d.a. regulation now, congress specifically said you cannot require that nicotine be taken out of cigarettes. so again, it is not defective because it has nicotine. the government expressly permits that. so the bottom line here is that they have not pointed to anything about cigarettes that is defective, you know, that means that it was designed badly or different from the way it is supposed to be designed. they have not proved anything. mr. kaiser: objection, he is going beyond the finding. mr. reid: that caused — i'll rephrase. the court: sustained. mr. reid: i'll rephrase. they have not shown any defect that caused any injury in this case. they have not shown the nicotine, the ammonia, the fact it is inhalable. the government knew all of that when they said it is okay to sell cigarettes in their current form. and i would submit that your answer to both of these questions ought to be no. now, the next thing i would like to talk a little bit about is ms. reese's admission that she is at part -- she is at fault in this case. may we see 158? this was in papers that they filed, and counsel pretty much said it to you today, she bears some measure of fault, but less than one hundred percent, for causing her respective smoking-related injuries. "plaintiff's acts or omissions related to the frequency and duration of her effort to quit smoking were a partial proximate cause." and he told you that this morning. well, i'm not sure exactly, there was no -there really were no quit -- other than the chantix, that was the only formal kind of quit, she stopped for five days while she was having radiation, so when they say the frequency and the duration, i'm not sure what that means exactly because there were none, but what this means basically is you have to compare the evidence that you have heard about what r.j. reynolds did that relates, that causally relates to ms. reese, and then compare that to her choices and what she is done. and i would submit to you -let me see the verdict form, could we, 159. you get to put percentages in. now, you have heard virtually no evidence from plaintiffs about specific things that reynolds did that had a direct relationship with ms. reese, that caused ms. reese's condition. they talked about all the generalities and all the generic people, but they have never related any of this directly. now, balance that against her admission, for instance, that she was not addicted, that she could -- her definition of addiction is you can quit. she said i was not addicted until 1967. that meant she could quit. so she smoked for 20 years, for 20 years with full knowledge of the risks. there is no -- they have never contested it, that she had full knowledge. all they can say is, well, she did not know about the technical medical term, c.o.p.d. you know, it is sort of like if you get run over by somebody and you have got an internal injury to your liver, you do not have to sue them because you do not know what a liver is yet, but you know you are feeling bad and you know their car hurt you. they are saying that, well, until you know that it is the liver and you know the technicalities of what happened to your liver, that is -- well, that is not the case. ms. reese knew about the smoking and the risks associated with smoking. she smoked for 20 years as a regular smoker and never quit after those couple of days, quit, tried to quit, thought about quitting or wanted to quit. if she quit in '64, we would not be here, when the surgeon general came out with all that publicity. if she had quit in '66, we would not be here, when the warning first went on the pack. she had the ability to completely avoid everything about this case if she had quit before she was addicted. and i submit she had the ability to quit later as well, and there is no reason that she could not quit, except that she did not want to quit, she did not think about it, she did not try, because she wanted to smoke. you could say that she should be a hundred percent because she had the ability until -- at least until 1967 to stop. after that, you could decide based on what you know about her. reynolds had nothing to do with her starting to smoke or that -- when she became a regular smoker. remember, she became a regular smoker, she smoked roll your owns and then she smoked camels because her parents had it until she was about 16. so reynolds was not involved in that part of her, she did not come in -- oh, they said something today about youth marketing. let me just say this. there is no claim that ms. reese was enticed to smoke when she was a youth, that something the tobacco companies did enticed her to smoke when she was at a younger age. that is not even a claim in the case. and he said that was not a claim. so all of that talk about youth marketing, once again, we are back to the same story, it has nothing to do with the case here. now, i -- you know, he showed you some documents, and one document said, i've forgotten, 21 or something, and it said people who are as young as 14, when they mature, well, sure, they are going to be smokers some day when they get -- but it talked about smokers being 21 and above. but nothing to do with ms. reese in this case. she is known about the risks ever since the '40s. she was so convinced of the association, she did not tell the doctors the truth. she was warned about smoking by the doctors and by her husbands over and over, and with all of this, she never even tried, never even tried to quit except 2007, i'll say she took chantix, but she did not quit except one of the times for a couple days. so the percentages -- they took it down, but the percentages will be your judgment. but remember, she had the ability until '67 to quit, to quit. that is what the records in this case establishes. now, we have been through all the different claims for what is called compensatory damages. now we have to talk a little bit about punitive damages. and you will -- when you get the verdict form, you may have -- no, they do not have the verdict form; right? the court: um-hum (affirmative). mr. reid: oh, they do have it. okay. i do not know if you have looked at it, but it is got this whole series of questions and it says if you answer yes to certain ones, do this and do that, and you will follow the -- but you may not get to punitive damages, because you can only find punitive damages if you found that we concealed. you have to answer the concealment question. if you find that we did not conceal because she already knew it, then the instructions are going to tell you you do not get there. unfortunately, we do not try the case in that way, where you get to go back and decide the first couple and then i get to come back and make some arguments about punitive. so i have to talk about it now, but you should not take that to mean that i think that you are going to get there or do not, obviously, want you to get there or that i think the evidence supports it. i'm talking about it because i have a requirement under the way the procedure is. so let us talk about punitive damages. this is the question, under the circumstances, state whether punitive damages are warranted. now, if you give ms. reese money for anything, for her illness, for her cancer, or for her c.o.p.d., if you have awarded some money that fully compensates her, and you get to decide that, i should say this, he may get up and say, well, mr. reid did not say anything about 7 million dollars and he must agree with me. well, i do not. but i understand it is completely within your -- your area of responsibility to decide that number, and you use your common sense. you heard his common sense argument was that people who are, i think he said, waitresses or waiters made 20, 30, or $40 an hour, and that became the basis for coming up with his number, i do not know, and then going forward, those waitresses would be getting 60, 70, $80. i do not want him to be able to get up and say -- you know, i've tried cases before. i do not want him to get up and say i agree with that number, because i do not. but anyhow, going back to punitives, if you have given any money, if you decide what is fair compensation, that is the compensation for all of her claims, and punitive damages are the over and above, they are extra damages. and they do not go to the government, they do not go to cancer society, they do not go to fund research for antismoking or anything. they go to the party who is making the claim. and then if you get to this point, and we will have to have some more trial based on -- and there will be evidence as to an amount, but that is -that is not for today. now, the criteria, first of all, it has to be by clear and convincing evidence. now, remember the little tilt thing. well, this means you have got to tilt it a lot more than just a little bit. in other words, it is more significant evidence. and the only count in the complaint that you can base it on is if you found that we concealed something and that that concealment caused her injury, because for punitive damages, we still have the bridge of causation. you still have to show that the behavior that they are claiming, whatever bad things that they say my client did, they have to show that it had a direct causal relationship, that it caused ms. reese's claims that she brings in this case. and the judge has told you already, i cannot get used to the fact that he is already done it, i started to say the judge will do it, the judge has told you -could i see 162, please? these are the kinds of words that describe, and you will read the whole thing, but gross and flagrant, reckless disregard, lack of care, conscious and wanton, reckless, intentional, and so forth. and you -- so those — that is the test. so you have to judge what about the concealment here, in other words, you have to find that we actually concealed something from ms. reese that she did not know. so whatever that was, you have to decide if it was done with that state of mind. now, there are two reasons, there are two reasons that we have punitive damages in the country. one is to punish somebody. so you have to decide that if you decide that there was something concealed that caused ms. reese to -that she would have made a different choice about smoking if she had known it, then you have to decide if reynolds should be punished. the second thing is you want to deter or keep reynolds from doing anything in the future in the same way. you will hear people say to punish and deter. so i want to talk to you a little bit about that. specifically, let me tell you this, the findings, the -- that list of findings, the judge is going to tell you that you may not award punitive damages based on any of that, or already told you that already, that was the generic, you know, smoking causes cancer, smoking is addictive, and all those things. this has to be directly related to the evidence about ms. reese in this case. and you cannot -- you cannot award damages, you have heard talk about something called a class action, you cannot award damages to anybody else. if there are other people that have similar complaints, they will get to file their own case and they will get to come in and put their evidence on. your punitive damages only relates to -- can only relate to what you ve heard in this case. now, what evidence have you heard? we have heard very little connected to ms. reese. you saw a relative handful of documents cherry picked out of the 60 million pages. and i looked at the documents they put into evidence to kind of get a feel for what they -- what they show and where they come from and so forth. could we see 163? in this case, remember, there are 60 million pages of documents available. they have one document that is dated in the '20s. these are companies -- documents of the three companies, reynolds, american, and brown and williamson. they have six documents in the '50s, they have five in the '60s, eight in the '70s, and so forth. so that gives you a sense of the 25 documents out of the 60 million that they have put into evidence relating to my client. now, there are some other documents that were in the public, like the press releases and the ads, those were not secret, so those are out in the public, the tobacco institute. these are supposedly the secret documents that they want to punish my client for, even though they cannot show any connection. but i want you to remember, counsel said -- we disagree on a few things you probably noticed. but there is one thing we agree on, it is a different world today from the time most of these documents were written. number one, i cannot explain why somebody wrote some of the things they wrote. i mean, you have heard them and they are stupid, and that is all i can say. you know, i was not there in the '50s and the '60s when they were writing this. but the more important question is do they have anything to do with ms. reese and the claims that she makes? the other thing to keep in mind is many of the things and some of -- at least the ones i have read to you, and they may get up and read some more, were things that were already in the public domain, when they talk about somebody saying that smoking has been -- there have been studies that smoking is shown to be associated with certain diseases. when a reynolds document says that, guess what, so did reader's digest, same thing, or so did t.v. shows or news reports, things like that. if the question is whether or not ms. reese was aware of problems with smoking, risks to health and addiction, she was. so the fact that somebody internally at reynolds, claude teague, they showed you that one document where he says addiction -nicotine is a -- has a pharmacological effect, and nicotine has been studied for over a hundred years. it was no secret to anybody who was interested in knowing about this that nicotine had this pharmacological effect. it was not a secret at all. now, they read a document where claude teague says it is a pharmacological effect, and they say, see, they are hiding this fact from somebody. not from ms. reese, because she knew about that it was hard to quit, for instance. and he may get up, after i sit down, and read some more, so i trust as you listen to him, you will think about the questions that i have suggested to you. i did something else, too. i made another little chart here. i looked at the internal documents, okay, and i said how many of these were written by a company whose cigarettes she was smoking when they were written? and guess what i found out? not a single one. for instance, there was no american tobacco company document during the 37 years she smoked pall malls. so not only does it not relate to her personally, but does not even relate to a company whose cigarette she was smoking then. same with camels, no reynolds documents during this period. no -- philip morris is not in the case, but same with kool, brown and williamson, reynolds, and so forth. so what does it have to do with ms. reese? that is the point. they have read these really bad documents, and some of them are real bad, there is no doubt about it. but, you know, those were written in a different world, a long time ago, and none of those people are around anymore. and you heard about all the things reynolds has done in recent years, it is a different company now, and that talks about this deterrence, for instance. now, let us talk about a couple of things that they sort of talk about. they want to -- they talk a lot about this meeting at the plaza hotel and the frank statement and forming a t.r.c. well, i'll say to you now, and i think i've said it before, it is a strange way to start a conspiracy to invite the attorney general of the united states and send him the papers and to have exactly what you are planning to do, that is, fund this organization and so forth, have that reported in the new york times. the frank statement, ms. reese never saw, has nothing to do with this case. and if you go through it, some of it, dr. proctor said it was half true or quibbled about this or that, but it said stuff like we are going to form this organization, we are going to do research, we are going to get people eminent in the scientific field. so if you go back and look at that, you will see that it said that people had questioned some of the tests that had been presented, no doubt about that, people were not -- there was still debate going on in 1954 about whether smoking was related or not. but the point is ms. reese never read it, never saw it, it had nothing to do -- it does not add a single brick to the bridge of causation. so that is sort of the -- the meat. the second was this whole issue of this council for tobacco research, the research organization. the new england medical journal had, in an editorial, had said companies need to set up something like this, and they did. and they said distinguished scientists, and they had them. remember i went through a whole list with dr. proctor, and he agreed, these were all eminent -- dr. little, who was the head of it, is the former president of the university of michigan and the president of what later became the american cancer society. they did 6,000 pieces of research. you did not see a single problem with any of them. you saw -i asked you about a couple that were local, one was at u.m. and one was up at university of florida, and they had to do with nicotine. that is what you had. they were cited by numerous surgeon general's reports, hundreds of these articles were included. and as an aside, you remember dr. proctor admitted that the scientists at my client, reynolds, who were doing work during this period, were also cited and commended. that one book that the tobacco industry funded, the surgeon general complimented and commended the industry for paying the money. it was a basic -- it was called the green monster, and they said you -- this is the basic research tool for people who want to get started. and there were five people who later got nobel prizes, who got grants. so this whole argument about this conspiracy and this front organization, it just does not hold water. now, the other issue that comes up a lot is -has to do with whether -- the company's position over time regarding the association between smoking and health. and dr. proctor told you that we should not have questioned science. finally, he said, well, you should not have questioned it after about 1953 or '4, something like that. well, you saw documents from r.j. reynolds where people said, you know, this has not been proved yet, there is still questions about this. the court: mr. reid, how much longer do you have? do you have an idea? mr. reid: you want to take a little break? the court: somebody needs to go to the bathroom. mr. reid: let us take a break. it is a good place to stop. i'm not going to use all the time i'm allotted, i do not think, but i would rather -the court: that is okay. i just wanted to see -- do not worry. all right, ladies and gentlemen, you are not to discuss the case amongst yourselves or anyone else. you are not to form definite or fixed opinions about the merits of the case until you have heard all the arguments of the lawyers and the final instructions by me. go to the bathroom. i'm sure everybody has to. the clerk: all rise. (jury leaves the courtroom.) the court: all right, you might want to go to the bathroom, too. how much you want? mr. reid, since you are in the middle, how much time do you want? how much time of a break do you want? mr. reid: i'm sorry? the court: how much time of a break do you want since you are up? mr. reid: i'll run to -- run out for a minute, five minutes. the court: ten? mr. reid: ten. i'll do ten. (recess taken from 3:42 p.m. to 3:55 p.m.) the court: y'all ready? bring them out, please. the clerk: all rise for the jury. (the jury entered the courtroom.) the court: all right, mr. reid -- you may sit -- ladies and gentlemen, you may sit down. you may proceed. mr. reid: thank you. i was talking about punitive damages, i was talking about some of the evidence that they have suggested to you warrants a finding that reckless behavior on our part had a direct cause of injury to ms. reese and i had talked about the conspiracy and so forth. now i want to talk about the issue of the legitimate debate. dr. proctor says, look, you guys should never have questioned it, when that first study came out, that first epidemiology, you should have just said you are right, it causes it, and maybe gone out of business or whatever. but you have now heard evidence about what was going on at the various times. you have seen some documents that where they say company employees have said it has not been proved yet, they criticize that. but the fact is, as you know from the whole evidence, that a lot of people agreed with that at that point in history. now, first of all, there is no evidence that that position, whatever position we took about that debate, whether we agreed with it or did not agree with it, had any effect on ms. reese, she did not -you heard no evidence that she read or saw anything that the company said or did about this scientific debate. but it is important to know that throughout the whole decade all the way up until the surgeon general's report, which is when we had all the publicity, all during that period, there were eminent scientists who agreed with the position that my client was taking. could we see 166? and i went through all these with dr. proctor. but national cancer institute, questioned whether there had been -- see, all they had at that point were some epidemiological studies, then they had the mouse skin painting studies, but as one of the mouse skin painting doctors said, the fact it causes it on the back of a mouse is really not proof that it causes it inside the lungs of a human. that was his initial thought. dr. heuper of the national cancer institute, remember, this is the federal agency, dr. hammond, american cancer society, dr. heller, dr. mayo, dr. burney, the surgeon general, went over to congress and when he was asked has it been proved that smoking causes various diseases, he said it had not been proved yet. in 1957, the surgeon general of the united states. and they are criticizing my client because we said the same thing. journal of american medical association. dr. robbins, u.s. public health. none of these people are -- would be considered, you know, in the pocket of big tobacco, so to speak, or friends of tobacco, these were the leading scientists at the time. and we obviously did not have time, we can only go so much in these cases, but you have heard samplings of those kinds of things. you also saw some of the -- in one of the -- i believe it was a newsweek article that we showed or u.s. news they asked dr. wynder, i think it was wynder, no hammond and horn, has it been proven that smoking causes -- they said does smoking cause cancer, and he said that is what we are trying to find out, and that was in the mid '50s. and remember what dr. proctor told you. dr. proctor told you that two-thirds of the doctors believed -- or questioned whether it has been demonstrated. two-thirds. this was 1960, two-thirds of the doctors. and they are asking you for punitive damages against my client because we at various times held the same view that two-thirds of the doctors in the country held. does not make sense. there is no reason to punish reynolds for taking the same position that two-thirds of the doctors and all those other people that you heard from. and more importantly, the claim that any of this was secret to reynolds is now belied by the fact that you have seen that people were saying it. reynolds -- almost anything they have pointed to internally that smoking -- that nicotine has a pharmacological effect, even though, as you know, cigarettes have less nicotine than they have in the field, that nicotine has an effect, that it is hard to quit, that there is an association some doctors believe, all of that was in the public domain. and i did not want to pull up all the different articles through the '50s and '60s and so forth that you saw. people were being warned. now, what did dr. heller say about this? 168. he was the head of the national cancer institute. and he said in 1957 that newspapers, radio, t.v., and other media have done an excellent job and an objective job, exceedingly valuable in the way of informing the public. they want you to think that we were keeping this secret. and they cannot say we were keeping a secret from ms. reese, because as you know, ms. reese knew it. she maybe did not know the names of the disease, but ms. reese knew that smoking had health risks and it was hard to quit. let us see. dr. burney. this is the surgeon general in 1957. "we have informed the public through excellent coverage of the press," the journal of american medical association. let us see the next one. this was in '64. this was the year the surgeon general's report came out. "the health hazards have been well publicized for more than ten years and are common knowledge. labeling will not" -- they were against labeling, because they said, "labeling will not alert even the young cigarette smoker to any risks of which he is not already aware." and that is from the journal of the american medical association. and dr. horn, dr. horn said essentially the same thing. can we see the next one, please? he was the national clearinghouse on smoking and health, which is a federal agency. "you can stand on a rooftop and shout 'smoking is dangerous' at the top of your lungs and you would not be telling anyone anything they did not already know." they want you to -- they want you to agree to bive punitive damages because they claim this was idden, this was a secret thing that reynolds, only reynolds knew, that smoking was bad for you or had been associated with cancer. that is what this case is all about. now, you have to decide what -- the evidence supports the claim that we should be punished for what happened, did our actions toward ms. reese warrant punishment. but first of all, you saw -- you saw all of the information that she was exposed to. and you heard her -- you heard her testimony about -- about starting here and going all the way through her knowledge. so the only basis for punishment, remember, is concealment. they have to show that we concealed something from her she did not know, and they never even suggested any of this. they never have even -- they have never stood up here and said ms. reese was totally unaware that smoking caused any problem, and that you misled her into thinking smoking was safe. does not say that. they cannot say it based on that evidence. now, let us talk about the company conduct. dr. proctor told you, he -- again, they mentioned 70 carcinogenic substances. dr. proctor told you -- oh, and then they played a clip of one executive who said we will take them out if we can. well, some have not been taken out, and they criticize us for that. why do you think it had not been taken out? can you imagine the -- can you imagine the benefit, the competitive benefit a company would have if they could -- if they could invent a truly safe cigarette? if they could take out certain things out of the smoke? imagine what an advantage that would give that company. they suggested the company does not want to do that, but it does not make sense, it is not -does not make economic sense if they could do it. you have heard from dr. proctor. it is really hard to take these substances out because it is not because of tobacco, it is because of anything like that that you burn. now, we made some jokes and they made some jokes about you do not smoke broccoli and you do not smoke hamburgers, but the point is, the point is that when you burn a substance such as that, you get the same problematic things, but you get them in very, very small doses. and you heard dr. proctor talk about nanograms and picograms and so small you could not even see with an electron microscope. it is hard to take things out of cigarette smoke. it is hard. and the companies have worked on this, and they have not been successful. but they have worked on it, as you are going to see in a minute when we look at the rest of a couple of these documents. but they want to -- they want to punish reynolds because we have not invented something that nobody has ever invented. now, what did we do about the fact that in the '50s there began to be questions about smoking and the safety? the first thing we did, slide 172, they keep calling this a secret document. they opened the page and just showed it to you where claude teague said the summary of all this material here is there has been an association between smoking and certain diseases. well, folks, remember, every one of these things is in the public library somewhere. it is not a secret to reynolds. the fact that dr. teague, they keep calling this a secret document, well, it is secret in the sense it was not handed out on the street, but it does not have secrets in it because all of these documents are available to anybody that wants to read them. and what he did in that, the thing they showed you today or they read to you today, is just his summary of what those documents say. it s not secret, it does not warrant punishment the way they say. in 1956, dr. rodgman, they showed you this, this tells you what reynolds was doing. they knew about polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons. they are known as carcinogenic -- as carcinogenic in animals. that was the state of the science. "the current controversy about cigarette smoking increased incidence has not been settled." that was absolutely positively true. and they have not brought anybody in to say it was not. and then he said what are we going to do about it? let us investigate to try to reduce these in cigarette smoke. in 1956, he admits that there is something that is been attacked, it has not been proved, but he said let us get started on it. then in 1959, they only showed you the front page of this where he said that there is evidence that these compounds will produce cancer, there is no evidence in man, there is evidence in animals, and so forth and so on. this is what he said to do. he talked about an extraction process that they are working on to try to take those things out, length of filters, variations of paper, additives, cigarette yield, they have been — 120 separate experiments with a half million cigarettes. that is the second -- that is why i said you have to look at -- if you go the back and look at any of those documents, read the whole document, because you are going to find that reynolds was doing this. and this is just an example of the 25 or so cherry picked documents that you have seen. these are three that when you look at the whole document and you hear the truth, it is a completely different story from what has been suggested as a basis for punishment. now, for ten years, r.j. reynolds worked with the federal government and with the health agencies to try to do something about making cigarettes safer, it is called the tobacco working group. if you want to punish reynolds because it worked on those -let us look at the next slide, these, 175. these are the things that they worked on. two things were actually invented by reynolds. they were looking at filters, additives and redesign. they read something to you that some federal agency said filters were not any good, same thing ms. reese's doctor told her, but the government and the public health community were working on trying to see what they could do about filters. reconstitute tobacco, porosity. this worked. this was going together, it was a collaborative effect to try to find a safer cigarette. and then dr. proctor told you why it quit. they quit that because the federal government decided that it was bad politics to work with big tobacco. and government canceled this program, notwithstanding that they complimented reynolds for its involvement in some of the things they did here. it was a political thing. reynolds tried to work with them. should they be punished because they invented these things, because they worked with the government for all these years? that is what they are asking you to do, they are asking you to punish reynolds. they talked to you about these smoking machines, remember the f.t.c., and then they showed you an ad today that had some of the stuff. well, you heard the whole story about that. we told them there was a problem with that technology. they said you have got to use it anyway. and then they said, they went a step further, and they said and not only do you have to use it, but you must put the results into your advertising. the ones you saw, i think the first one did not have the results, but then later, they had to put the levels of tar and so forth. we told them it was not right. they want you to punish us because the government made us do that. there is another reason for punitive damages that i mentioned to you, that is to deter, to keep us from doing something bad in the future. well, you heard about what reynolds is doing today. it is not the same company that claude teague worked for or that alan rodgman, even though they were doing some good things. it is a completely -mr. kaiser: objection. he is misstated the evidence as to the company ownership. the court: overruled. mr. reid: i did not mean who owns the stock, so i'll just make it clear. what i was saying is that what reynolds is doing today differs from some of the things you have read in some of the more egregious sounding documents. you have heard about premier. remember, the problem is that if you burn tobacco, it releases these carcinogenic substances. so somebody had the idea, let us see if we can figure out a way to heat it, encapsulate it and heat it. and they worked on it, and they spent hundreds of millions of dollars -mr. kaiser: judge, objection, facts not in evidence. mr. reid: dr. proctor testified to that, i can find it. the court: overruled. the jury will determine what is and what is not. mr. reid: i do not have time to -the court: what the lawyers say is not evidence. mr. reid: i said a billion and he said, no, it was hundreds of millions. it was called premier, and it was a commercial flop because people did not like the taste. so they did not stop, they went back and tried it again, it is something called eclipse. and eclipse is still being sold. and it is not popular for whatever reason, people just are not buying it, but we are trying. we are spending a lot of money trying to improve the product to answer the questions raised by the public health community. you also heard that reynolds is working in areas of smoking cessation. dr. proctor admitted that. that we are actually trying to develop things to help people stop smoking now. they have put -- they have talked about our website. look at 176. we say -- we now say cause -- we did not always say this, but now we say this. 177, we say we do not contest addiction, if you -- given the definition that is used. and we direct people, if we can see the last one, to the public health office. dr. proctor told you that the restrictions on tobacco have been growing over the years. there are now rigid rules about advertising and labeling. the f.d.a. now has authority to govern and control tobacco it never had before. for all of these reasons, there is no reason to award punitive damages to cause reynolds to do something different, because you have heard the evidence about what they are actually doing today. i would suggest that the evidence is that there was no concealment of anything ms. reese did not already know, and, therefore, there should be no punitives. but if you get to that question, there is no basis for punishment or deterrence on the evidence that you have heard as it relates to ms. reese and her case. now, there is one last thing i want to mention. you are going to be asked a question about when was ms. reese aware she had smoking or smoking-related illnesses. could we see 188, please? "did ms. reese know or by the use of reasonable care should she have known on or before may 5th, 1990," that is the crucial date, "that she had throat cancer and that there was a reasonable possibility it was caused by smoking?" and then that she had chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. and the evidence, you have heard the evidence about this, and i will not go through it again, but we know that beginning in the '40s and going forward decade by decade, ms. reese was aware of a whole variety of lung, breathing problems which she associated with smoking. she perhaps did not know there was a technical name for this, c.o.p.d. in fact, it might have been, you remember it might have been -- it might have been asthma, it might have been reversibility, it might have been obstructive disease, but there is no question, and i'm not going to go through all the quotes again because you have seen them all today, she was told over and over that she had these various ailments which she directly and completely associated with smoking. now, as for the lung -- as for the throat cancer, remember in 1980s, in about -- in the early '80s, she had exactly the same symptoms, she thought they were associated with smoking, and she did not go to a doctor because she did not want to be told not to smoke. it turns out those symptoms reappeared in the mid '90s, and you know the story about her -- her throat cancer. again, she was aware, many months, many years before may 5th, 1990, that she had a reasonable possibility of this disease that is there -- that is caused by smoking. so you will have to answer that question, and that is a yes or no, as you can see, as to each of the illnesses. so, for instance, if you decide that she knew about one and not the other, then obviously, your damages would only relate to one and not the other, but -- that is called the statute of limitations, and that is -- that is really the question that you will be asked, and it is number 4 and 5 on the verdict form. so i'm about ready to sit down. i'm glad to. but i want to tell you this. i do not get to get up again. and it is tough on a lawyer, tough on all the lawyers, to have to sit down and the other side gets to go up because they have this burden that we have talked about, that is why they get to go first and last. and i'm sure that i have a lot of things to say. now, i've tried to anticipate, i knew what they said this morning and i responded to it. counsel may talk about something that i did not know he was going to talk about and i have not responded. i would just ask you, i hope as you have listened to me, you have been critical in terms of when i suggested to you the evidence said something, i hope you have thought about it and thought about is there an answer to that or did he really say that. that is really how this system all works. but i would ask when counsel gets back up here, especially if he goes into things i have not had a chance to respond to, i hope you will do the same, i hope you will just say what would ben reid -mr. kaiser: objection, your honor, as to what ben reid would say. the court: sustained. mr. reid: i hope you will think about whether or not on the evidence, in the evidence in this case there is a response, because i will not be able to come up and give you the response. and the last thing i would say to you is, i would want to tell you that this whole jury thing that we are doing here, we -- without your realizing it, there is a pact, an agreement between jurors and the parties and we each have obligations, and what we say is this, we say to you, the parties say to the jury, when you go back into your room to deliberate, you and you alone have the complete decision-making part. the judge cannot tell you what your verdict should be. it is entirely up to you. and when you come out with your verdict, it will be what it will be, and nobody's going to rush over and say why did you do that and, well, did you think about this. that is entirely -- the parties have agreed by demanding or asking for a jury trial that we give you that right. now, you have promised us something. and what you have promised the parties, and it is not just me, it is reynolds, you have promised us that in return for that authority that we have given you, that you have agreed to decide this case solely on the merits. in other words, you will not decide it because -because you feel sympathy for ms. reese or because you feel something about big companies or you will not decide it because smoking is not that popular these days or you do not like smoking or you do like smoking, all the kinds of collateral things that we talked about remember way back three weeks ago or two and a half weeks ago in voir dire. so you have agreed that that will be the basis of your verdict. and that is why the system works. that is why, when i sit down, i know that i'm comfortable that when you go back, you will do your duty and you will carry out your side of the pact just like we will carry out our side and you will not hear any complaining about -- we may not be happy, somebody may not be happy, but it is your decision to make. and so i would just ask you as you retire today just to do your duty. that is all that we ask. so on behalf of the several thousand people that work for reynolds and all of us who have been sitting over there, i want to thank you for your attention and your careful consideration for everything you have heard. thank you.