- - - closing argument mr. chestnut: good afternoon, jurors. you are almost there. certainly appreciate your patience throughout this process. there is been a long process and watching you throughout, and i've seen a -- i get the faces, and we appreciate your patience in spite of -- if you would bear with us a little longer, we are almost there. these are closing arguments. we are going to sum up our case and the defense will do rebuttal and we will do a rebuttal. i just want to talk to you. i think you have seen a lot of documents. i think you have seen a lot of exhibits, heard a lot of expert testimony. this is just time we have a dialogue. this is one of only opportunities we have to do that. i want to start out by telling a story my grandfather telling when he would take me fishing. it was in an old town in mississippi way back in the day. a small town, quaint town, no paved roads, no traffic lights, just dirt roads. as we say, country. and people will come in from what we now call a suburb from the country-country into town on weekends. it was a kind of a strip and there was a bar and a general tavern. there was a church, a bank, and people would come in and shop, grocery shop, post office, et cetera, every week. and every weekend, there would be this gentleman who come clean, creased, clothes ironed, seersucker suit, and he would walk into town. people would stop him no matter where he went. "hey, man, it is good to see you. how you been? thank you for that nice gesture last week. how you been doing? it is great to see you. how is your family? how is the wife and how is the kids? and every week there would be this guy, a little haggard, clothes a little droopy, used to be white, now they are brown, sitting in a tavern having a burger. and he would see this gentleman in a seersucker walk into town and everybody loved him and everybody reacted to him and he wondered why is everybody reacting to this guy in the seersucker? so one day he says, "you know what, i'm going to go talk to him." his name was truth. and so lie got up out of the tavern, walked over across the street and said, "truth, i just want to talk to you. man, how you been? "good. "good. "it is good to see you. how you been? "great. well, i want to talk to you." truth, said, "well, listen, i promised my wife i was going to be back home before dinner. so i got two miles to walk but you are welcome to walk with me. i've got to be on time because i want to keep my word." lie says, "fine, i will walk with you." they truck out of town. they are walking down this dirt road. they walk about a mile and a half and then lie says, "you know, truth, i'm tired, man, let us take a break." truth says, "okay, there is oak tree just up the way next to the lake." they take a break and they walk over to this oak tree and they sit down under the oak tree and it is hot. it is mississippi. it is sweltering heat. they are sweating. they take off their suit, go down to just, as they call them, dungaree shorts and t-shirts. take a nap. and lie says, "you know, this is an opportunity for me to change my image. this is an opportunity for me to be loved. i'll bet it is truth's clothes. so lie takes truth seersucker suit, puts it on, walks back into town. truth wakes up, looks around, "wow, lie struck again." so at that time, truth has an option. he can either walk on as it is or put on lie's clothes. and truth decided that rather than to go home cloaked in a lie, he would rather go home in the naked truth. and, ladies and gentlemen, i tell that story because that is, in essence, what we have been dealing with over the last few weeks: truth and lie. truth: a company must not needlessly endanger the public. a company, any company must not needlessly endanger the public. it is america. you can be -- grow as big as you want, make as much money as you want, but you cannot do so by needlessly endangering the public. you cannot put profits over the safety of people. and when a company, a tobacco company, manufacturers a cigarette that is defectively addicts and causes harm to smokers, that company is responsible for the harms and losses of affected smokers. moreover, ladies and gentlemen, when a tobacco company lies, conspires, and defrauds the american public and the american government to conceal the addictiveness and the harmful effects of deadly chemicals put in its cigarettes, that company must be punished with punitive damages. let us talk about what we have in this case: truth and lie. you know, it is probably most appropriate that we start with just some of the habitual inconsistencies we have seen throughout this trial. and i want to start with damages which kind of -- it is probably unconventional, but let me just make one more analogy. there was a saying that saying a drowning swimmer has no allies. a drowning swimmer will pull on anything or anyone to get their head above water. they will throw anyone down just to save themselves. a drowning victim knows no allies. tobacco, ladies and gentlemen, is a drowning victim. and they have spared no expense, nor exercised any discretion in pulling down anyone inside or outside of this courtroom to preserve what? their money. if you think about over the last few weeks, they have been misleading you consistently with nonevidence or half evidence. no evidence or half evidence. and i think it was mostly immediately highlighted not only today but yesterday. you know, in the south, we take reputation very seriously. and if you reflect back on yesterday, dr. giakas came in and not only challenged but directly attempted to destroy the virtue of a woman by asserting that she would engage in infidelity while her husband was on his deathbed. how low can you go? moreover, if you are going do make such an accusation about a lady, especially in this community, it is generally appropriate to do so face to face, at least offer her the opportunity to confirm -- mr. baringer: objection, your honor. this is improper argument. the court: sustained. rephrase. mr. chestnut: members of the jury, yesterday dr. giakas accused mrs. robinson of basically cheating on her husband. mr. baringer: objection; mischaracterizes the evidence. the court: sustained. rephrase. mr. chestnut: said that she was pregnant from her husband at a time when her husband could not have marital relations. members of the jury, a few days before that they had mrs. robinson right there on the stand. they could have cross-examined her on any issue face to face. they did not. they waited. they back-doored her with an expert witness. a drowning victim has no allies. we saw a series of mischaracterizations of testimony. you recall that in addition to ms. robinson, they attacked her on not being familiar with her husband, not knowing the name of his business. they attacked her on leaving the funeral early. they attacked her on rarely being home for the evenings. and that was the basis of one of their expert's opinions. but if we look at the evidence, the evidence shows that she was home most evenings. he worked sunup to sundown, which means they were together at sundown. they deep-fried chicken and rice all the time. it was a staple meal. she could not have left the funeral early because she rode in the funeral car with the rest of the family. the testimony is that she said, "i wish he would die." the testimony was, "i was pregnant" -- she told someone she was pregnant when he was on his deathbed, but the evidence showed what? documentation of what conversation? what did the evidence show? the evidence showed she had a tubal ligation in 1992 so she could not have been pregnant. the evidence showed, ladies and gentlemen, that mrs. robinson was accused of not wearing a ring and giving the ring back to mrs. johnson, mrs. hazel johnson, had her ring on every day. had her ring on every day. she is been in court. the evidence has been wholly inconsistent with the half truths. why do we get the half truths? through depositions. we saw that in about 19 depositions were published on the screen yesterday. nineteen of them. all taken by who? the defense. all of them asked questions. mrs. robinson testified that in the deposition not only did she feel badgered and threatened but it lasted three days. mr. baringer: objection; misstatements the record. the court: overruled. mr. chestnut: the deposition lasted three days, that the same question was asked five different ways. the expert comes in and says he relies on his deposition testimony to come to his conclusions. he published an opinion that said, what, he challenged michael johnson, jr.'s relationship with his dad. he said -- he led you all to believe based on his opinion that he published on the screen that michael really did not have a relationship with his dad until 1992. but in reality, the deposition testimony showed that michael johnson lived with his dad for the first five years of his life, and after that, he still went fishing, they still hung out together. they still went down to the pier. they still had a viable relationship. they took one question out of a deposition, flipped it. the one question was: when did you first have a pattern of visitation with your dad? that was in 1992. mr. baringer: objection; misstates the testimony. the court: overruled. mr. chestnut: that was in 1992, ladies and gentlemen. and that is been consistent, we get half truths and then ask you to make conclusions off of half truths. members of the jury, why would a company go to such lengths, make some accusations, present evidence in such a fashion? money. money. yesterday's demonstration or attack on the johnson family was an undergird attempt to convince you to lower a number on pain and suffering. one of the elements you are going to have to judge this case on when you get to damages is pain and suffering. what is the pain and suffering of mrs. robinson and mr. johnson that is fair? you have to evaluate the evidence as it comes in to determine pain and suffering. that is fair. but you are entitled to get both sides of the story. and the challenge here is that they would throw this family under the bus, give you only half the truth. we have to try to bring out the other half of the truth on cross-examination and then expect you or ask you at some point to zero out this family on pain and suffering. a drowning victim knows no allies, but a drowning victim can maintain his honor. what also is shocking about this, ladies and gentlemen, is if we stop, just pause and think. sometimes you watch so many commercials, you get caught up in the tv show. if we just pause and think what is really happening, like what is subconsciously is going on here, what is the subconscious theme here? the subconscious theme, the defendant, tobacco company's presentation is, "we are a new company. the smokers got to accept some responsibility. we are a new company. we are different. yeah, the plaintiffs have shown you all this evidence. you have been here for weeks. you have seen all these documents. you have seen all these videos but they are from the '60s and '70s and '80s. this is jetson's time. we are current. this is" -- mr. baringer: objection, your honor. this is phase 2 argument and there is been no evidence on this issue. the court: overruled. mr. chestnut: so, ladies and gentlemen, part of what you have got to consider is the authenticity, their credibility, not only of the presentation, not only of the witnesses but the presentation of the evidence. so here as a company, that is basically trying to sell you that we are a new company, that we are different, that we have changed. we are honest. we no longer conceal. we do not abide by those rules. we no longer subscribe to the teague documents. but, in essence, that is what they are doing. because if you just evaluate the presentation of evidence to you, how often did you receive half truths? how often did you see an objection where we had to say, will you please read the rest of the sentence? how often did we have to raise the other half of the deposition testimony? how often did they come to you and make one evaluation and then we have to bring somebody back in to give the other half of the story? and that is litigation; two sides to every story. but if you are going to present it, present all the truth. maybe this company really has not changed. maybe the only thing they understand is money. and maybe the only way to get them to understand is to punish them. mr. baringer: objection. your honor, may we approach? the court: jurors will step out, please. (the jury withdrew from the courtroom and the court: jurors are out. mr. baringer: your honor, he is arguing punitive damages. he is not just talking about entitlement, he is talking about phase 2 issues. he is talking about -- he is anticipating a defense that has not been put on. this is all improper. this is ignoring which phase of the trial we are on and trying to try phase 2 right now. and it is inappropriate and it should be stopped. the court: mr. chestnut? mr. chestnut: yes, your honor. i've not made any mention of wealth or value of this company. i've not made any reference to their net worth or money. i've not asked for money, your honor. part of what we have to prove, the burden is on us, is to get to the punitive damages stage. so i think i'm entitled to argue that punitive damages are entitled, and that is all i've argued. the court: well, your point is a fine line of semantics. the issue here is whether this jury should, from the evidence, conclude that you are entitled to receive punitive damages, and that could result in punishment if they get there. so let us do the first and you can save the last -- rest for later. so you can talk about how the evidence may establish your entitlement and get to it appropriately, please. mr. chestnut: understood, your honor. the court: thank you. call the jurors when they are ready, please. (the jury resumed its seat in the jury box and the court: counsel, please continue. mr. chestnut: so, jurors, you have seen a lot of evidence, and you have to evaluate not only the credibility of the evidence, credibility of the witnesses. and honestly, ladies and gentlemen, sincerity as well. i assert to you that there is been a lack of sincerity among the tobacco company for years. and one of the things we have to be conscious of is today's environment is wholly distinct from the way it was when michael johnson was alive. when michael johnson started smoking in the 1970s, the awareness about the harmful effects of tobacco was not known. and that was not by circumstance, that was by design. and we have shown you documentation where tobacco deliberately conspired among themselves -- to conspire, multiple people are getting together to commit an act. multiple tobacco companies got together and said, "listen, our -- our products are addictive, and they are harmful." now, let us just break this down a little further. what is most shocking about tobacco is the chemicals that are in the cigarette. americans did not know that the chemicals -- there were so many chemicals in the cigarette. yes, tobacco has nicotine. nicotine is addictive. but if you recall the documents, what happens? nicotine travels too slowly to the brain, they want to speed it up so they can free base, so smoke is free base. they get the nicotine kick as you saw in the documents. what causes the nicotine kick? well, that is where the ammonia, carbon monoxide, rat poison, arsenic, all these fatal chemicals that are in the cigarettes are put in the cigarettes to help accelerate the nicotine to speed it up so the smoker gets a kick. so yesterday, we saw this chart, it had like methamphetamines, they were decreasing bars. and at the end was nicotine. and it shows the effectiveness of nicotine. again, ladies and gentlemen, if you recall that chart, that was a half truth. what are we really saying to you? we are saying, yes, nicotine is addictive, but what is most harmful in nicotine cigarettes are the chemicals they put in there to accelerate the affect of it so that people continue smoking. we are not suggesting to you that nicotine causes cancer. battery acid causes cancer. carbon monoxide causes cancer. mr. baringer: objection; misstates -- the court: rephrase. mr. chestnut: battery acid can be deadly. ammonia can be deadly. and we have shown you the documents. we have shown you the formulas. i do not want to pour back through them, but i want to tie this together for you. these harmful effects are what is killing people. these harmful effects are what the tobacco company realized they needed in cigarettes to accent the high and accelerate the high to keep people buying cigarettes. that is highlighted by the fact that when there was a suggestion about nicorette gum, nicotine gum, we saw a document that referred -- that referred back to pavlov's dog, that they had done a lot of research, tobacco research, this part of the conspiracy, they were working all together. and pavlov's dog said what about the lever? this rat, that the rat has food and presses the lever and gets the food and then it -- and then ultimately it begins to naturally press the food expecting -- press the lever expecting a reward, which typically was the food. and that same document said the smoker is the same way. so they were reluctant to give up cigarettes, even though they knew they were killing people and the gum was not because the gum did not have the harmful chemicals to accelerate the nicotine kick. but the gum had two problems, right? one, it did not have the lever, the psychological effect. what was the other problem? the fda. the gum would have been regulated by the federal drug administration, and then they did not want to be regulated by the federal drug administration. why is that? because that higher level of scrutiny would have exposed decades earlier these harmful deadly chemicals, the list of which we have shown you over and over again. so they did not want the public to know about these chemicals. now, i'm going to talk about the surgeon general's warning. there is a difference, ladies and gentlemen, between saying that cigarettes can be harmful to health and cigarettes have nail polish ingredients, hair dye ingredients, rat poisoning ingredients, rubber cement ingredients, lighter fluid ingredients. that is a different type. so when we asked about personal accountability and that theme was presented to you about personal accountability of smokers, not only factor in the time and the reality in the '70s and '80s, early '80s, but also just think about overall. what if we bring it present day forward? it kind of reminds me of the banking industry. the banking industry, toward the late '90s, were making a lot of money. mr. baringer: objection, your honor. improper argument. mr. chestnut: may i respond, your honor? the court: finish your argument, counsel. mr. chestnut: the real estate. the real estate boom. wall street is doing well. banks are doing well. and then the real estate bubble bursts. now, wall street was driving that real estate bubble, banking was driving that real estate bubble, but the moment the bubble burst, who was to blame? all the sudden, it was middle america. middle america for living beyond their means. middle american, individual americans for taking mortgages and buying houses that they knew they could not afford in the first place, for being fiscally irresponsible, and now they cannot make their bills. but who created the environment? the bankers, mortgage companies. and some of big banks even bet on the bust, so they made money on the bubble growing -- mr. baringer: objection, your honor. this is irrelevant. the court: sustained. move along, counsel. mr. chestnut: why is that relevant, ladies and gentlemen? because the same model works for tobacco. why is it even more relevant? because what did we see in the presentation of evidence? the same big corporations not only employ the same strategies, they employ the same people. some of the experts -- mr. baringer: objection, your honor. this is irrelevant. mr. chestnut: may i make -- the court: counsel, finish up. mr. chestnut: we had an expert on the stand, dr. bennett, who said not only had he testified for tobacco in defense, he would also testified for ford in defense. he would also testified for a pharmaceutical company in defense. and he also said, what? in all of the cases he is testified in trial at, not once has he ever found that the company, for whom he was testifying, was at fault. which means what, by implication? that the person, the plaintiff who was suing, was at fault. that is exactly what the banking industry did. when the bubble burst because they -- mr. baringer: objection, your honor. improper argument. the court: sustained. move along, counsel. mr. chestnut: so, ladies and gentlemen, sometimes we have to consider the environment that is created. and then consider the options that are there for people. and then consider if a company is really changed. if from -- if it is really a new day. if they are really accepting fault. mr. baringer: objection; same issue. the court: counsel. keep moving. mr. chestnut: if they have really turned over a new leaf, if accountability is ultimately what is important, then why is not the corporation accepting responsibility? why are they taking -- mr. baringer: objection. the court: overruled. mr. chestnut: your honor -- thank you. so let us talk about lack of corporate responsibility and let us look at the evidence as it is. i'm going to briefly go through the evidence as we are talking about credibility and accountability. ladies and gentlemen, one of the things we have to prove is that michael johnson died of primary lung cancer. there is been a lot of argument about the evidence. we say it is primary lung cancer, they say it is not. then what is it? what is it? it is got to be something. but they have not told you what. yes, there was -- there is been this assertion, but never really directly stated, but there has been this air, it is like perfume spray in the air about testicular cancer just casually thrown up. what do you know the first most important thing about testicular cancer, the risk of developing testicular cancer does not increase by smoking. but guess what, the other cancers do. so breast cancer, colon cancer, pancreatic cancer, stomach cancer, lung cancer, all these cancers if you smoke it increases the risk of you contracting that cancer. but testicular cancer, it does not. it is pretty smart, is not it? it is pretty smart. the one cancer they choose to inject in this argument does not have an elevated risk from smoking. you know what it also does not have, there is been zero cases of testicular cancer metastasizing to a pancoast syndrome at the apex of the right lung. mr. baringer: objection; misstates the evidence. the court: sustained. mr. chestnut: your honor, dr. feingold testified on direct exactly to that point. the court: jurors, step out a moment please. (the jury withdrew from the courtroom and the court: counsel, you can argue reasonable inferences from the evidence. there was conflicting evidence. you can argue which one to believe, but you cannot say there was none. remember your evidence. mr. chestnut: understood, your honor. and i'm asking the court not -- i'm just asking for -- the court: just listen to your evidence and argue reasonable inferences and what the jury should do with it. mr. chestnut: your honor, but i do not want to make a misstatement. how should i best phrase it? that is what i'm trying to do. the court: i'm not here to tell you -- there was -- you heard the evidence. or were you here during all the evidence? mr. chestnut: understood. the court: and there was conflicting evidence. you know, there is some you can argue reasonable inferences, but do not ignore the evidence. mr. baringer: thank you, your honor. (the jury resumed its seat in the jury box and the court: objection sustained. counsel, rephrase. mr. chestnut: thank you. so one of the major issues that we have to establish as plaintiffs is that the lung cancer at the top of the apex of mr. johnson's lung was primary, was origin, began there. not that it began somewhere else and metastasized. now, dr. feingold came today. and when he testified initially he told us a few things i just want to remind us. one, dr. feingold testified that he has seen no cases in the thousands that he is reviewed as a pulmonologist, which is a lung cancer specialist, of cancer metastasizing, spreading from the testicle to the lung causing pancoast tumor. metastatic cancer -- and we heard a lot about that from dr. bennett. metastatic cancer can show up in the lung and the lung is one of the most susceptible organs to cancer. but when it is metastatic dr. feingold testified it looks like snowflakes. but if you recall that not only the demonstration he had physically there, but the demonstration he had on the screen here was that this was one huge tumor, possibly with one with a second one right under it. it was not snowflakes, it was a blob. that is major. because the blob is consist with pancoast tumor. now, how do we know that it is pancoast tumor and how do the doctors confirm it? well, the doctors confirmed it by symptomology. what were the symptoms? mr. johnson was not sweating on the right side of his face. why was not he sweating on the ride side of his face? because this big blob at the top of his lung was also hitting nerves and it was hitting back on backside. and remember it spread to the t3 vertebrae, starts in the lungs and spreads back and causes right arm pain. and this is important because they had dr. bennett come in from montana and throw every pensacola doctor under the bus. clearly, somebody does not hold pensacola in a high esteem, or at least the medical profession. mr. baringer: objection. the court: sustained, rephrase. mr. chestnut: dr. bennett says all the pensacola doctors got it. the chronology of his treatment is where? he starts off going -- mr. johnson goes to a general physician, and the general physician refers him to a neurologist because he thinks it is a nerve, perhaps. and the neurologist says -- takes the symptomology and conferred with dr. feingold. and dr. feingold said, i looked at this case for three seconds and automatically knows this is lung cancer. because what? because this guy is a 20 year smoker. when you take the totality of circumstances: 20 year smoker, no sweating on the right side of the face, eyes kind of drooping, right arm pain in his armpit, that is consistent with horner syndrome. horner syndrome is a subset of pancoast tumor, pancoast tumor is lung cancer, lung cancer is -- excuse me, the leading -- mr. baringer: objection; misstates the evidence. the court: sustained, rephrase. mr. chestnut: according to dr. feingold, the leading cause of lung cancer, smoking. so when you have a 20 year smoker, pancoast tumor, odds are this is the primary, not the testicles. now, today, we heard testimony about lance armstrong. dr. feingold came back and testified to what? the other day they suggested to you, very softly, that lance armstrong had testicular cancer that metastasized, that spread to the brain and to the lung, but he did not have symptoms. and the inference was since lance armstrong lived strong, could ride his bike without symptoms of testicular cancer, clearly mr. johnson could have had testicular cancer, not known it, and then it spread to his lung when the primary -- so really the primary was his testicles, not the lung. what did dr. feingold come and clear up today? he said it does not happen that way. dr. feingold said testicular cancer, you do not see it go from the testicle to the top of the lung and cause a pancoast tumor. mr. baringer: objection -- the court: overruled. mr. baringer: -- mischaracterizes the testimony. mr. chestnut: thank you. mr. chestnut: ladies and gentlemen, then you saw cross-examination of dr. feingold with a new york times article. dr. feingold was relying on a medical-published journal from the national institute of health. and so as we evaluate this evidence, as we go through this process, i also want to highlight or underscore one other thing, and that is, evaluate the credibility of evidence that had been presented to you. we have given you an answer. we have shown you more likely than not the origin of this cancer was the apex of the lung. they have not shown you what more likely than not, it was not. the mere assertion that it was metastatic without further proof fails. who passes a test by saying what the answers are not? you have got to circle the right answer. if you went to the act and circled what was not the answer you would not do well on the act. you cannot just win by saying what is not. unless you can prove what it is not. i encourage you all to hold them to that challenge. if it is not -- if lung cancer is not the origin of the cancer, show me what is. and if they do not, then i think you have to side with us. that more likely than not the apex, the origin, the primary of this cancer was mr. johnson's lung. the next issue was: was it curable? well, most of the witnesses you heard on both sides have to admit stage 4 lung cancer is not curable. it is stage 4. we saw -- we saw medical records, ladies and gentlemen, that -- i think record 22, they were calling in hospice. once hospice comes in it is a bad state, you are not coming back from that. now, there is going to be an argument, and i want you to be ready for it, there is going to be an argument, more likely than not, that because mr. johnson elected not to undergo chemotherapy or radiation he prejudiced his treatment and therefore we cannot know what the primary is of the lung. but, yes, we can. now, dr. feingold testified that technology was not in '96 what it is today, but what do we have to suggest that it was primary cancer? we have got biopsy, lung aspiration, we have ct scans showing it, and we have the symptomology, and we have medical records going all the way through. you know what is most important? even dr. bennett had to confirm that doctors basically take the totality of circumstances at time of death. well, dr. boatwrite, on the death certificate, says: non-oat cell carcinoma of lung. so by the end of this, dr. boatwrite has conferred that lung cancer killed michael johnson. three days before that he matured in his decision to say, you know what, i do not know if it is primary, but it is probable. probable. which means it is probably. which means, more likely than -- likely than not that his lung cancer was a primary. but they have not shown any other doctors who say the opposite, it probably was not. not that was there then. so here's the dichotomy, right? all of the experts that have come into the courtroom to testify to you for the defendants that challenge, the primary origin of lung cancer, that challenge dr. torres, that challenge dr. gerhardt's findings, that challenge dr. boatwrite's findings, all of them had to rely on what? dr. torres' findings, dr. gerhartd's findings, or dr. boatwrite's findings? so now how is it that you can maintain credibility by challenging the findings of the doctors who you are basically insinuating were not -- did not have conclusions in the first place? if they got it wrong in the first place, why would you rely on their records? that is what they are doing. that does not add up. more likely than not, this was the origin of the cancer. would the chemotherapy have cured the disease? evidence shows it would not have. it was stage 4. it was not curable. could he have learned it earlier? no, it is not uncommon for you to be symptomatic at stage 4 of primary lung cancer with a pancoast symptom. all chemotherapy would have done was prolong the inevitable with more suffering. and michael johnson has seen his dad suffer, he did not want to go through it. michael johnson died drowning on his own blood because the tumor had gone into blood vessels causing him to cough up blood and die a violent death. he did not want to prolong that life. he was living in his mom's house suffering with cancer every day, dealing with family issues, trying to get the family back together, but he knew it was inevitable. the chemo would not have helped. so the next question you have to answer is: was michael johnson addicted? was he addicted to smoking? you heard evidence of this, quitting in and of itself is not a sole determination of addiction. we heard from dr. giakas yesterday who said he used the dsm-v to diagnose the addiction. now, you recall we brought in an expert to deal with addiction as well. that expert employed the fagerstrom test. the fagerstrom test mr. johnson scored basically an addiction score. and this dsm-v he still scores an addiction score. it is funny how their experts casually would buy into the study, and then they would not. kind of the same thing with the depositions, they would buy into a deposition testimony of a witness who they thought was adverse to us. and then we pull out quotes of deposition testimony that was beneficial to the plaintiff, then all the sudden they disown the witness. you cannot have it both ways. but let us take their test and go through it again. there was an argument yesterday that this is not the test. what this clearly says: at least two of these are manifested then that shows a pattern of tobacco use disorder. and tobacco use disorder is what we basically have to prove, that michael johnson had a tobacco use disorder. this is the criteria. i just need one, i'm going to pick out three or four of them to show you that the evidence meets this and let you come to your own conclusion. obviously, anyone smoking 20 packs a day -- 20 -- a pack a day of 20 cigarettes a day and towards the end of their life having two to three has a craving or strong desire for use of tobacco. they smoke within 30 minutes of getting up, that is a qualifier for tobacco use disorder. ms. robinson testified sometime before mr. johnson would get to crispy cream he was reaching for a cigarette, first 30 minutes he got up. recurrent tobacco use resulting in a failure to fulfill major role obligations at work, school or home. members of the jury, ms. robinson testified this gentleman would get up out of his bed at night to go smoke a cigarette. he used to smoke in the designated area in the house, would have to leave. he was an alongshoreman. there were restrictions -- you heard evidence, he was an alongshoreman there was restrictions against smoking while -- mr. baringer: objection, there is no such evidence. the court: sustained. mr. chestnut: important social, occupational, relational activities are given up or reduced because of tobacco use. there is evidence that michael johnson would not ride certain cars with people. for instance, he would not ride with walter, his brother, because walter did not allow smoking in the car. he would end up driving his own car. he would not go to -- at walter's house, he could not smoke. he would go outside at family events to go smoke. that is the point. recurrent tobacco use in situations in which is physically hazardous. he continued to smoke in the house with oxygen tanks. he continued to smoke after he was diagnosed with stage 4 cancer because of -- because of smoking. it is the same thing. tobacco use is continued despite knowledge of having a persistent or recurrent physical or psychological problem. stage 4 lung cancer is a physical problem, i promise you. and he continued to smoke after he had done it. tobacco is often taken in a larger amounts or over a longer period than what it was intended. that was the first point. that was a major point. why is that important? we showed you in repeated deposition testimony as evidence that he tried repeatedly to quit. mark johnson, his twin, came in and testified about the time on the beach when he tried to quit. mrs. johnson came and testified he tried to quit and could not, said i'm trying and trying. mrs. hazel johnson, his mother, came in and testified and he said, mom, i'm trying to quit. it ain't as easy as you think. and there was testimony about michael johnson who talked about the gum. he tried to use the nicotine gum, it did not work. and that he tried quit for a few days and about four days later he would be smoking again. now, let me show you some additional testimony, ladies and gentlemen. the dsm-v, which was used, talks about prevalence among daily smokers, half of them have quit. mr. baringer: objection. your honor, this is not in evidence. mr. chestnut: your honor, the dsm-v we went through thoroughly. the court: move along. mr. chestnut: this is what dr. giakas relied upon in coming to his conclusions. i also want to show -- because, you know, you are going to hear some testimony about -- should have quit, should have quit, should have quit, because your daddy died in 1979, and he died because of smoking. but you see that genetic factors contribute to the onset of tobacco use about fifty percent. i was reading and developing tobacco use and tobacco use disorder with a degree of hereditary to that observed with the other substance use disorders about fifty percent. some of the risk to tobacco -- specific to tobacco, some in common with vulnerability to developing any substance use disorder. so there is a genetic predisposition, ladies and gentlemen, according to the dsm-v, to tobacco smoking disorder. and one other thing, in 1977, when mr. johnson's dad developed lung cancer from smoking and died in 1979, michael johnson had already been smoking. he had been smoking for years. dr. feingold told us if you had a threshold of about eight cigarettes in a day, you are basically going to get addicted. you are addicted. if you smoke eight cigarettes a day, according to dr. feingold, you are addicted. some will be able to stop, some will not. but there is a genetic predisposition that encouraged an additional hurdle to quitting. ladies and gentlemen, the evidence more likely than not shows that michael johnson was addicted to smoking cigarettes. he smoked kool cigarettes. we showed you that kool cigarettes were produced by rjr. we also showed you that rjr targeted kool cigarettes to who, minorities? and who else, high schoolers, it was newport and -- mr. baringer: objection, your honor. newport is not a reynolds product. mr. chestnut: may i continue your honor? the court: overruled. move along. mr. chestnut: now, there is going to be a lot of -- you know, a lot of this is kind of like a catfish in the water. well, if there is a catfish in the water, it tries to muddy it up and confuse you. do not become confused by catfish information. what do i mean by that? so back to the conspiracy. a lot of tobacco companies have acquired each other. you may hear argument that rjr did not know this cigarette, did not produce that cigarette. but they bought the companies that did. when you buy the company you assume responsibility for them. rjr is responsible for kool cigarettes. they targeted high schoolers, kids. and dr. proctor himself testified african americans were a target of the cigarette industry market. and the documentation of is extensive. mr. gary is going to get in that as well in his closing. but one of the things we also want to underscore is that we are not arguing that it was just isolated to african americans. the smoking and marketing plan was comprehensive, and it was -- as dr. proctor testified, it was almost like a marketing model. they are the pioneers of marketing, tobacco companies were. and so they targeted specifics, not only to gender, but they had some products targeting women, some products targeting men, some products targeting african americans, hispanics, asians, every market sector they would target to get into the psychology. and then they targeted children. and why did they target children? there is evidence and there' documentation that show tobacco that opined they killed an entire generation. mr. baringer: objection. the court: sustained, rephrase. mr. chestnut: they needed new customers, who better than to market to than a teenager? why is teenagers in the '70s so important? and why have teenagers in the '90s have been targeted so much about truth, the campaign truth and about tobacco? and why are people who grew up in the '90s and 2000s so aware of the harmful risks of tobacco? because they were targeted as teenagers to correct the past marketing to teenagers in the '70s. and what was that about? teenagers are susceptible. so a lot of the marketing you saw about cigarettes was to be cool. teenagers want to be cool, so then they fall into smokers. well, your brain is not fully developed, the receptors are not fully developed. so if you develop habits as a teenager, you are likely to maintain them. there is statistics in evidence that show most smokers were daily smokers -- many daily smokers started smoking before the age of 21. if you start after 21, the risk of becoming addicted drops of significantly. so teenagers were the prime market. they are susceptible, their brains are still developing, they are going to become addicted to cigarettes and they will probably be lifelong clients. nicotine, ladies and gentlemen, was addictive. now, how did they market to teenagers? you know, we saw videos and movies and the premise behind the videos was what? defendants showed you videos, one was james bond, another movie they showed was -- lethal weapon. murtaugh and riggs. and they said people clearly were aware that cigarettes were a risk, because why? because in the movie, in james bond, the guy said sure you can have a cigarette, it is going to kill you. it is going to kill you. let us just step back and pause and think about the subplot. a lot of movies and a lot of books have sub plots and themes. the villain gave james bond a cigarette and says it will kill you. that was james bond in like '78. james bond what made like five more movies since then. he survived that movie. because he survived that movie that makes him, what? the hero. he is the protagonist in the story. the antagonist gave him the cigarette. the antagonist was the one that was saying smoking is wrong. but who is the hero, who do kids want to grow be like? james bond, because james bond survived in the next movie. that antagonist or in the next movie, or the movie after that or the movie after that. it is same thing with murtaugh and riggs in lethal weapon. riggs smokes a cigarette. murtaugh give him a cigarette. this is going to kill you. but it did not. in fact, he is like bionic man. i mean, this is the only guy that can escape, he is underwater and he is got chains around him and he dislocates his shoulder on his own, and gets out and then survives, and then he is on three more movies. he is still surviving. he was a, what, hero in the movie. he was the protagonist. so the subplot or subtheme to teenagers who are not quite old enough to really challenge reality, even though they challenge their parents a lot, is what? that these people are cool and they survive. so you can be cool by smoking and still survive. that was not antismoking commercial. that was a pro smoking commercial. and that is what we want you to remember throughout these arguments, is that everything that is sold to you on the surface is not always what they are selling to you. step back, question, and question the under theme. because these are very sophisticated companies. they spend a lot of money on marketing. they spent a lot of money, understanding how the human minds works. we saw it back pavlov's dog and that was back in '70s. so they were studying human minds to condition them to want cigarettes. just like they have studied the human mind to condition them on how not to hold tobacco at fault for what they obviously are doing. we showed you evidence that in the late '70s and early '80s the healthcare costs of tobacco, billions of dollars. the cost of time missed at work -- mr. baringer: there is no evidence and that is irrelevant. the court: sustained. mr. chestnut: we showed you a study. mr. baringer: objection, your honor. mr. chestnut: there is evidence. and if you look for it, you will find it notwithstanding what anyone else tells you. ladies and gentlemen, there is also evidence of the time it costs the economy from the time missed from work that people missed -- mr. baringer: same objection, your honor. no evidence and irrelevant. the court: overruled. mr. chestnut: members of the jury, subscribe not to a blank picture because of the frame. just because they box it up, make it really pretty around the frame does not mean it is a picasso. it is not. see through it. see the truth. think about the amount of evidence that was presented to you from our side and the amount of evidence you saw from their side. compare half week's of evidence, three days of evidence. we have the burden to prove to you more likely than not, but they really have not proved to you that they did not. they did not prove to you that there was not marketing. there did not prove to you that there was not addiction. they did not prove to you that this was not a mass conspiracy to defraud the government. how did they defraud the government? they lied. each ceo, we showed you, passed a mic in a congressional hearing in 1994 and lied to the government, in '94. and then we contrasted that with documents back from '68 where they said they knew internally that not only cigarettes were addictive and not only did they have chemicals that were killing people, we should up it because it will up our market share and up our sales. and they were afraid that there were other products in the marketplace that were more potent and they would outpace them in the marketplace. ladies and gentlemen, do not subscribe to the picture because of the frame. thank you. mr. acosta: thank you, your honor. good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen. i'm going to talk to you for a little while and then mr. gary will talk to you. my job is to help you answer any questions that you might have, and i'm going to do that by going over some of the evidence and a little bit of the jury instructions and a little bit of the verdict form with you. i know that some of this might seem repetitive. i'm going to try to avoid doing that, and just go into some things that we either have not talked about or that i think that may need some emphasis. there is a lot of documents that have been put into evidence in this case, over 200 company business records that were kept in their file cabinets a long time ago. those records contain a lot of evidence, and contain the things that i'm going to tell you. if i tell you something that you did not hear on the witness stand or you did not see on the screen, it is going to be in those documents. the things that you wrote -- you have been taking great notes. we have watched. you have taken good notes. if you have something in your notes that is different from what i say and you remember it different from what i'm telling you, go by your own recollection. i'm not giving you the evidence right now, i'm just showing you what the evidence was in the trial. that is what this is all about. the first thing i want to tell you, if we go to the first slide i've got, the tobacco companies, reynolds and the others, they have never come clean about what we have proven in this trial. they never have. rjr, that is reynolds, has never admitted -- they have never admitted this. and you might remember dr. proctor was on the witness stand. he is the guy from stanford, the professor from stanford, historian of science. he says millions -- they have never admitted millions of people have died from smoking. they have not admitted that. they have never admitted that they are marketing targeted kids. they have not admitted that. they have never told the public that the tirc, ctr research -- that is this organization that they created as a front and a sham to protect them. they have never told people it was a public relations tool. they have never admitted that. they have never admitted lying to the public. they have never admitted making cigarettes more addictive. and they have. we have proved that they have. and if you read -- there are surgeon general's reports in evidence in the case. they are big thick books, but there is chapters on addiction. if you just read the first page of the first chapter of addiction in the 2010 surgeon general's report it will tell you a lot of what you have heard in this case. the 1988 surgeon general's report is in evidence in this case. you can read the different definitions of addiction that are contained in that report. that sheet that showed what -- actually there is a couple of sheets that show what rjr, reynolds' position was on addiction. to them if it was hard to quit it was addictive. think about going back in the 70's, 80's, 90's. what did addiction mean back then? this happened 18 years ago. what was addiction back then? dsm-5 was not around back then. i'll tell you that. they have never admitted that they assured smokers that smoking was safe. and they did that. they assured people that smoking was safe for years and years and years. michael johnson's father smoked. he saw that stuff. people saw that stuff. more people smoked back then than -- so many more people smoked than do today. seventy percent of men smoked back in the 50's and 60's. they have never admitted lying to the public, lying to congress. they have never admitted that. they have never admitted that their filters and their low tar or light cigarettes are not safer. and they are not safer. they knew they were not safer. it is all in those books. and it is in some -- you have gotten hints of that from the testimony in this case. they say that we do not make a safe cigarette and that it is risky and dangerous, but they have never admitted they were unreasonably dangerous. that had to be proven in the engle trial. that is why we have those findings. they denied that cigarettes were addictive, and they denied that they were dangerous, unreasonably dangerous. they denied that they caused cancer until 2000. they denied it. but they expect you to think that michael johnson should have known. they saw all that stuff in the newspaper and in the magazines and all the articles. they had all that stuff. why did not they believe it? they did not believe it because -- they actually did believe it, but they did not want to tell people that they believed it because if they did they would be admitting there was something wrong with their cigarettes and this whole world would have changed. things would be a lot different if back in the 1950's they told the truth about what they knew and what they had done in their own research laboratories. they represented to the world that it was safe to smoke, and they created a controversy that killed millions of people. these are bad companies. in fact, it does not get much worse. they never admitted that addiction causes death and suffering. you saw dr. gentry. his deposition was played for you. he is the vice president at reynolds, senior vice president in charge of sciences, on the leadership committee, and he testified, well, addiction does not cause disease. well, if addiction does not cause disease we would not have an engle class action. we would not have the criteria that you have to meet. there would not be anything like that, because the engle case found that addiction does cause disease. that is why we have to show you that it caused it in michael johnson. but they refuse to this day to admit these things. they are not a changed company. they are the same old r.j. reynolds that just thinks of an excuse and a way to continue to market its products -- mr. baringer: objection, your honor. the court: overruled. mr. acosta: -- to kids, to minorities, and they do it in a very sophisticated way. it is one of the wealthiest, most powerful industries in this country. and that is how they do it. i mean, they spend the money to do it. a lot of money. we showed you, and i've got it on these slides. i've got a lot of stuff on here. we are going to have to go through it quick like in the opening because we never have enough time to talk about everything we would like to. but in 1981 they spent a billion dollars on advertising, and that is in dollars that are over 30 years ago. i mean, a billion dollars in advertising. and then you saw a few letters where they boast about spending 120, 160 million on research for 30 years. but they spent a hundred billion on advertising. it is the advertising that overwhelms. it is not like something that we are always that conscious about, if you see it, you buy it, that kind of thing. that was not even the purpose of the advertising. you saw robert heimann from the 1980's, a sort of yellowish tv picture from a video deposition that was taken in a case in mississippi. he was the president and ceo of the american tobacco company, and he said that advertising works, we could not sell cigarettes if it was not for advertising. and as their advertising dollars went up, their sales went up. kool was on the chart. it was number five in the whole country. and there were lots of brands of cigarettes. kool was the number five. this company, and the other -- this company has never admitted forming a conspiracy to hide the hazards of smoking. it is never admitted destroying documents to win lawsuits. mr. baringer: objection. mr. acosta: they want to fight that. mr. baringer: objection. your honor, may we approach? the court: jurors step out a moment, please. (the jury withdrew to the jury room.) mr. baringer: your honor, there is no evidence that -- they have documents where there is talk about possibly destroying documents or getting rid of research reports. there is nothing, and they did not put -- dr. proctor did not tie it into winning lawsuits, and to suggest that in this context in the middle of a lawsuit is inappropriate. they can talk about what dr. proctor said about documents, but accusing reynolds without evidence and without laying the foundation -- you will remember mr. beach's argument on spoliation. they never met that, and they cannot argue this. and, frankly, your honor, this entire pitch about they did not accept responsibility or they did not do it is an improper argument. you cannot seek to punish a defendant for not admitting fault, and that is exactly what they are doing here. the court: counsel. mr. acosta: yes, your honor. i guess there is two things. on the documents, dr. proctor testified in the case, in this case that documents were destroyed. he testified that they would not admit that cigarette smoking was harmful or dangerous, because if they did they would go out of business. i mean, all of these things that i'm arguing are either in those documents, the documents in evidence, or it came from the witness stand. so, you know, i just disagree with him. as far as them admitting these things, i'm not -- i'm talking about to the public, and i thought i made that pretty clear that they have never admitted to the public that they do these things. and i think that that is reprehensible. the court: you need to crystalize your argument. objection overruled. call the jurors when they are ready, please. (the jury returned to the courtroom, was seated in the jury box, and the following further proceedings were had.) mr. gary: your honor, while the jury is coming out -- that is okay. the bailiff: jury is seated, your honor. the court: objection is sustained. counsel, please rephrase. mr. acosta: thank you, your honor. all right. you might remember the last thing that dr. proctor testified about when i was asking him questions. mr. baringer: your honor, can we take this down? that was the objection. the court: please pull it down. mr. acosta: he talked about what this company and the other companies have refused to admit to the public. that is what i'm talking about. happily for the industry we have nicotine. they addicted kids to the most harmful drug in the world. that is what they have done. they have manipulated nicotine through additives to make cigarettes more addictive, and then they played down the role of nicotine. they did not want people to know what it did. that is in some of these documents, this crucial role of nicotine. you saw these during the trial. happily for the industry nicotine is both habituating and has these physiological effects. they knew all that in the early 70's. they knew it before that. i'm going to show you one from '59. they put ammonia in it. all these documents are in evidence that you can look at. there is a reason they put ammonia in it, because it makes free base, like you have heard. they do that to make it more addictive. that is why it is done. if you read these surgeon general reports you are going to see it in there too. here's more proof of it. these are all documents that are in evidence, where they raise the ph to increase the nicotine kick. let me go back to this slide. they were designed to hook kids. they wrote school children and told them smoking would not hurt them, and they started doing it in 1963. rjr market research shows most smokers begin smoking at age 13 to 17. they know when people start smoking. they keep track of that, and they design cigarettes and advertising to cause new smokers to start smoking. here is one of their planning memorandums. some thoughts about new brands and cigarettes for the youth market. you may remember seeing that. if our company is to survive we must get our share of the youth market. these are the letters. they are in evidence. they go from 1963 to 1990. they are basically form letters that they send to schools to tell the kids there is nothing wrong with our cigarettes. we have been trying to find something wrong with them, which they did, but they lied about it. they said we have not found it. but they had. things would have been a lot different if they had admitted it. there is a survey that is in there, it is a big thick one. it is from the hew, a united states agency, and one of the elements, or one of the surveys asked people back in the 60's, '66, i think, what will it take for you to believe that cigarettes are harmful? and most people said, when the cigarette companies tell us. it was not the government. they wanted to hear it from the cigarette companies. and they would not tell them. this shows some of their marketing to kids. the one on the right talks about high school students. the one on the left, i do not know if you can see that, but there it goes down to age 12. they are taking numbers on kids down to age 12. just wanted to show you that just so you would see that there is stuff like that in these documents. addiction invalidates the choices that people make. 13- and 14-year-olds are not fully informed, and they were not informed that smoking was addictive. they are not responsible enough to make choices. they are too young. once addicted they cannot just choose to suddenly stop. they did not know that. that is in the 1967 ftc report. these are government reports where the federal trade commission studied this stuff. one of the most power -- it is one of the most powerful addictions in the world. you know, we do not think of it because you see smoking all over the place and you get conditioned to think, well, that is just normal activity. that is what people used to think. but it is a very powerful addiction. you know, mr. chestnut, told you about that bar chart. you might remember it. it had amphetamines at about 1000 percent and nicotine at ninety percent at the other end in terms of the dopamine release. well, people do not take amphetamine 20 times a day. when you smoke, and you smoke 20 cigarettes a day, you are getting eight puffs a day, so you are getting that spike repeatedly time after time after time. you do not get that with those other drugs. they have one big boost and it lasts awhile. nobody injects heroin 20 times a day, or -- or eight -- times eight for eight doses. it does not work that way. rjr knew the choice was lost to smokers even before michael johnson was born. this is a 1959 document. it is 8599. that is the exhibit number in the lower left there. and basically this says, we need to provide the optimum amount of nicotine, the amount that is required by the smoker. they knew that the smoker required nicotine. long before this time they knew how to take all the nicotine out of the tobacco. easy to do. but they manipulate it and control it. and this talks about in the 50's how they had to make sure that the smoker's requirement for nicotine was met. that was one of their criteria. it also says that we have got all these polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons in the tobacco, and we cannot remove them. at the bottom that is what it says. we cannot remove them. but they told the public, they told them over and over again -- you might remember, in '71, we showed a very short clip of a man on face the nation, it was in color, there were three panelists, and they were asking the man in charge of the tobacco institute at the time, i think it was howard cullman, and he says cigarettes are not injurious to your health, if we find anything in the smoke that we can -- that is causing harm we are going to get rid of it. then he says, you know, some women would like smaller babies, because he was questioned about how smoking can affect pregnancy. so they continued that to keep this controversy going. and it worked. it worked for a lot of people, especially for smokers, because people are addicted. who are they going to believe? are they going to believe the maker of the product, or are they going to believe somebody else? the government made them put the warning on. they were forced to put it on. they did not want the warning on there. they fought that. i wanted to show you this. this is in evidence. this is a philip morris pamphlet that came out in 2002, and it has inside of it statements from the fda on addiction, and it is -- there is a copy of it in evidence. you will not see a blue one. i think you will see a black-and-white copy, but it says: according to the u.s. food and drug administration, 87 percent of people who smoke cigarettes every day -- that is how many smoke cigarettes every day -- nearly two-thirds of smokers have their first cigarette within the first half hour after they wake up. in one study, 84.3 percent of those who smoked a pack or more a day had unsuccessfully tried to reduce the number of cigarettes smoked. in other words, almost all the people that smoked a pack a day, many of them could not reduce the number. a smoker who makes a serious attempt to stop smoking has a less than 5 percent chance of being off cigarettes a year later. each year in the united states 15 million people try to quit smoking, but less than 3 percent have long-term success. in one study seventy percent of current smokers reported that they would like to completely stop smoking. this is what another cigarette company said after the engle trial. reynolds has not done anything to help people stop smoking. this company has not done anything. michael johnson, when he was 23, chose to quit smoking. that was his choice. now he is a man. he chooses to quit smoking. he chose over and over again. you heard his -- michael johnson's mother say, every time i told him about his dad he would say, mom, i'm trying to stop, i just cannot quit. you know, this was -- that was going back. that is a long time ago, 30 years ago -- 20, 30 years ago this stuff happened. you know, and then people are asked today about what happened 20, 30 years ago, memories fade. it is difficult to remember every single detail, but she remembers that. and mark johnson, his twin brother, he remembers that one specific time in 1983. that is when he was 23 years old. you know, that does not mean that he did not try to quit smoking other times, just because these people remembered those times. he had over a hundred -- a million doses of nicotine. and reynolds and the other companies, they knew what choice meant. they knew it was defeated if you were addicted. and i wanted to show you this, and i'm going to show you that document again about -- about defeating addiction. this is another philip morris brochure to help kids stop smoking. reynolds does not have anything like that. you cannot really read this very well, it is kind of small, but what this says, i'm going to read it up close, it says -- oops -- it said: what you can say to your kids if you are a smoker and you are trying to get your kids to stop smoking. philip morris says tell them, i smoke, but then i tell you not to. does not that seem inconsistent? then philip morris advises, do not be afraid to admit that you might have made a different choice had you understood then what you do now. philip morris is saying people back then did not know what they know today. so when they talk about what everybody knew, here is another cigarette company in 2002, 2003, when this came out, admitting that people did not know. compare this with what dr. giakas said. there they talk about addiction. it says, addiction, the younger people are when they start smoking the more likely they are to become strongly addicted to nicotine. that is a cigarette company saying that. symptoms of addiction, paren, in parenthesis, having strong urges to smoke, feeling anxious or irritable, or having unsuccessfully tried not to smoke, can appear in teens and preteens within weeks or only days after they become occasional smokers. that is how susceptible young adolescents and teenagers are when it comes to tobacco. their brains are not developed yet. you saw that very long deposition of dr. benowitz. i know it was long. but he is the one that was the senior editor of the '88 surgeon general's report. when you see it you will know that. in fact, i think it was admitted in opening that he was the world's foremost expert on addiction to nicotine. now, i want to switch for a second to the cancer thing just so you will understand. dr. boatwright is not on anybody's side. i sat up there and pretended to be dr. boatwright and they asked me questions. this was his testimony. oops. when he was asked, he said this is probable primary lung because of the cavitating ct of the chest, the pathology report, and his long cigarette history. that was testimony that you heard. if that does not clench the did-he-have-cancer question, what would? i showed you these slides before. there is like over 15 references to probable lung cancer in his medical records. greed was rjr's choice. they had choices too. choice is not just about individuals, and it just is not about individual responsibility. corporations have responsibility too. who is the expert making cigarettes, the smoker or the company that makes them? who has a big scientific lab to figure all this stuff out about smoking, the cigarette company or the smoker? who hires all these marketing people and advertising people to sell their products, and it is sophisticated stuff that costs a lot of money, the smoker or the cigarette company? they have a responsibility to people. in fact, they said in 1953, we take the position that the health of the smoker is paramount to every other interest in our business. that was not the truth. they did not do that. they put their profits ahead of the health of smokers. they are the ones that chose to deny the truth about smoking and lung cancer. they chose to deny the truth about nicotine addiction and what it causes. they chose to manipulate nicotine. rjr chose to market to kids and black americans. rjr put money ahead of the truth and ahead of the health of millions. this is from 1963: moreover nicotine is addictive. we are in the business of selling nicotine, and addictive drug. this is another document you were shown, and it shows how kools were -- when they are free based with urea what happens? this is research that reynolds did in the 70's, and you can see these little diagrams down there. they had -- they had learned that the molecule shape of nicotine is the same as the molecule shape for opiates, which is heroin. right? now, today they still say, oh, nicotine addiction is totally different. it is ridiculous that it has anything to do with heroin or cocaine addiction. it is more like caffeine. well, some of the effects are certainly a lot more like caffeine, but it is not the same trying to quit. people switch from caffeine drinks easily, but not cigarettes. cigarettes are very difficult to quit because of this molecule that locks in your brain, makes permanent neuro pathway changes, and they knew that in the 70's. what did they tell the gov- -- they tell the government things. the government has to listen to them. the government has to listen to everybody. it has to listen to them. and they spend a lot of money making them listen, and what do they tell them? they do not tell them this stuff. in fact, they said, you know, if it proves to be something that might hurt us from a legal point of view we have got to hide it or discontinue it. that is what they did. this is a letter from senkus to crohn. he is in the legal department. this is the letter that talks about destroying documents. it is in evidence. you can read it. this is an analysis of the negro market, and it covers just about nine documents in evidence. they are in the 3900 group that talk about how they marketed to blacks over time, and they said disparaging things. the lower economic status of the negro does not allow direct comparison of coverage levels achieved with the -- with them versus those among the white population. i mean, you have to read these things to see how they were figuring out how they were going to get more sales to this group of people, knowing what their cigarettes were doing, and knowing that they were denying all the health harms that could go with it to take advantage of people. that is what they did. they took advantage of people. this is after -- this is when the surgeon general's report comes out in 1988. it is a press release from the tobacco institute. they deny that it is addictive publicly over and over. it was not just the ceo's going to congress and raising their hands swearing to tell the truth and not telling the truth. they advertised it. rjr wanted to keep smokers from quitting to make more money. they never did anything to help smokers quit. they lied to smokers, and then they tell you that michael johnson should have believed john quincy adams instead of them. mr. baringer: objection. your honor, may we approach? the court: jurors step out a moment, please. [#deleted sidebar#] mr. acosta: may it please the court? okay. you have seen this. i wanted to show you the exhibit number so you could find it after you take all the exhibits back into the jury room to deliberate, and the exhibit number -- oops -- the exhibit number up there is 1773, and this is the study in 1982, report about it from dr. teague, who was a director of science at reynolds. you know, he is been there since 1953, he is a ph.d. he was a director there, and he wrote that most people want to stop, and most people cannot. he knew that. and then what -- their reaction was, well, let us see what we can do to keep them smoking, or we are going to have to go out of business, or we are going to have to find some other kind of product to sell. but that is the way reynolds worked. and they hired senators and congressmen to do their bidding. you know, tobacco companies spent bags of money, and they were killing people. their pervasive advertising overwhelmed the little warning labels on the packages. that was a letter to a senator. i'll go through some of these quickly. this is that ftc report from 1981. but the warnings were completely ineffective, and they knew it. this is the 1957 ftc report, and what does it say? it says there is virtually no evidence that the warning statement on cigarette packages had any significant effect. that is in 1967. so they changed it in 1970, and in 1981 they changed it again. this is the 1981 ftc report. you heard this morning counsel read from the -- a letter from elmo roper. he worked for the tobacco institute. he had his own company, but he did work for the cigarette industry. but there is another letter in evidence that you can look at that shows from one of their people from philip morris, who hired roper, that says that all their figures were accurate. but anyway, the ftc says that -- this thing is skipping on me here -- the current warning is ineffective. they knew that it was not -- it was not causing people not to smoke, not to start. and michael johnson -- this is 1981, two years later he is trying to quit though. so he is starting to get it, but now he cannot. he is been smoking for ten years. and dr. benowitz said anybody that smokes a pack a day for ten years it is highly likely they are addicted. you might remember that from benowitz's testimony. i'm not going to go through all of these again. this is questions you have got to answer. i mean, is it more likely he was addicted to smoking, was he not addicted? is it more likely that addiction lead to lung cancer, or did he die from some unknown disease not caused by smoking? the bottom line from both dr. bennett and dr. harris was we do not know. these were slides that i showed you earlier. i need to talk about this for just a second, because we have to prove that there was reliance on the concealment. you know, people trust companies to tell them the truth. when you buy a product -- when a person buys a product they expect the company to tell you the truth about the product. if it is addictive, you would expect them to tell you it is addictive. if it causes cancer, you would expect the company to tell you that it causes cancer. and you buy the product. well, you buy it relying on the company to tell you the truth, because if they did tell you the truth you might not want to buy it. but they did not. but that is reliance. so when you see the reliance question that is what we are talking about. he did not have to see an advertisement and rely on it. that is not what we are talking about. that is what the -- that is what the defense wants you to think we are talking about, but we are not. we are talking about the fact that they did not tell the truth about their product, and when you do not tell somebody that their product causes disease, causes cancer, and really does, and they know it, and it is addictive, and you do not tell them, and you buy the product, that is reliance. and you can infer that from all the evidence in the case. you can infer that people relied. well, of course dr. heimann, their own -- the ceo of american says that they expected people to rely on them. and one of the findings talks about how the companies expected them to rely to their detriment. that is one of the findings. how much can you blame michael johnson for assuming a risk that the company said did not exist? that is where we come to this comparative fault issue where you are going to get an opportunity to assign a percentage. in the beginning mr. gary told you that you we would accept ten percent, 5 percent of the blame for michael johnson. maybe after 1982 he should have tried something harder to quit. he did not do it, you know. but you get to assign a percentage, and that is because we have accepted some of the blame. but we expect you to assign the vast majority of the blame on reynolds. reynolds is brown & williamson, brown & williamson is american. they are all the same company through mergers. brown & williamson made kools. now reynolds makes them. i just have to mention this briefly. you know, i want to make this analogy. there is a suggestion that she remarried, so that is a replacement part for the husband she lost. you know, if a person loses a child and then the family has another child, is the new child a replacement for the one that died? no, no. when you lose somebody, you lose somebody. and humans have -- i mean, what we are looking for is the value of the life that she lost, the value to her of that life, the value to michael, his son, michael johnson's son. he is referred to as the son in the jury instructions so you do not get confused, so we do not get confused. but this is a case about them and about their loss and about the value of this man, michael johnson, a good man. $10 million is not too much to put on his life for each of them. that is not too much. i want to go through these jury instructions very quickly. it will take me about five, ten minutes, and then i'm probably going to sit down and let mr. gary finish up. can we get page 10 up there real quick of the jury instructions? it is not very big. i'm going to skip page 10. this just outlines what the proof needs to be. one of the things i want to point out -- let me have the elmo. i'll just put it on there. oh, we got it big. can we go to the next page? he is going to tell you that we have to prove our case by the greater weight of the evidence. and you might remember, going all the way back to jury selection, there was issues about, well, if you win the game by one point you win. 51 percent is enough. it is more probable than not. that is our burden of proof. the greater weight of the evidence is more probable than not. we do not have to prove beyond a reasonable doubt. we do not have to prove one hundred percent. we have to prove 51 percent. we do have to make it to 51 percent. but it is more probable than not. that is our burden. so please just hold us to that burden. and the greater weight means the more persuasive and convincing force and effect of the entire evidence. and that is what that means, of all the evidence who has the more persuasive and convincing force of the evidence in this trial? you have to decide is it the plaintiff that has the more persuasive and convincing force of all the evidence, or is it the defense. let us go to the next page. this is the legal cause instruction. there is basically two instructions, and the first part of it is the -- says that a legal cause of death, if it directly and in natural and continuous sequence produces or contributes substantially. it does not have to be the only cause to producing the death, so that it can be reasonably said that but for the addiction the death would not have occurred. well, dr. benowitz said people do not get these diseases but for the addiction to nicotine. people do not get -- if you remember, early on a chart we showed where before 1900 people did not get lung cancer. they get it from smoking cigarettes. people do not smoke 20 cigarettes a day for 20 years or more without being addicted to nicotine. it just does not work that way. some people might not want to admit they are addicted, but they are addicted. but there is a second part to this, and this is important that you understand this: in order to be regarded as a legal cause of death addiction to reynolds cigarettes containing nicotine need not be the only cause. such addiction may be a legal cause of death even though it operates in combination with the act of another, the acts of michael johnson, or some other cause, if such other cause occurs at the same time as the addiction and the addiction contributes substantially to producing such death. now, let us say that five people each put a little bit of poison in a glass and somebody takes it and dies, and then you bring a lawsuit against just one of them, and that one defendant says, well, i only put a little bit in there. it would not have been enough to kill you. well, if it was a substantial contributing cause that is sufficient. you could say, but for that little bit the person would not have died. you do not have to satisfy the first one if you satisfy the second one. so if you think there is something, one of these issues or elements that -- that you think, well, i cannot say that but for that that would have happened, you can say -- you can say that it was a substantial contributing cause. all it has to be is a substantial contributing cause and you should find in favor of the plaintiff. and it goes with everything else, whether it was a substantial contributing cause in terms of the reliance issue, whether that would have made a difference. i'm almost done. okay. let us go to page 20, if we could. mr. chestnut: your honor, may we have a brief restroom break? the court: all right. we will take a brief restroom break for five minutes. (the jury withdrew to the jury room.) the court: recess for five minutes. (short break.) the bailiff: remain seated. circuit court is reconvened. the court: all right. i think we have everyone back. counsel, i want to make sure everyone gets together with the clerk to ensure that all the exhibits that have been introduced are properly identified to go back. the clerk: they did. the court: you did. thank you. strike that. ready to resume? mr. gary: we are ready, your honor. the court: call the jurors when they are ready, please. (the jury returned to the courtroom, was seated in the jury box, and the following further proceedings were had.) the bailiff: jurors have been seated, your honor. the court: counsel, please continue. mr. acosta: i was going through the jury instructions with you and then i remembered i saw this board that we did not -- we need to show you again, because this is from dr. feingold. you might remember he was here today of course. but these are all the questions. he is answered the questions for you that will be on that first part of the verdict form that mr. gary is going to go over with you after i'm done. but i wanted you to see that michael johnson was addicted to nicotine, he had primary lung cancer, he died from primary lung cancer. the addiction was a cause of the lung cancer. by the way, if you look at those surgeon general reports, around page 45 of the 2004 surgeon general's report you will see a chart and some discussion about what happens when you stop smoking and how long the risk remains afterwards. you will see it is about fifty percent of what it would have been had you continued to smoke. and it goes up with time as you age. you will see that there is two charts in the 2004 and the 2010 report in the cancer sections that show how addiction is a cause of lung cancer. now, going back to page 22 of the jury instructions. this particular instruction is the one on reliance, and i'm just going to read this. there is really no way to see it unless your eyes are a lot better than mine. it says: plaintiff need not provide direct evidence of michael johnson's reliance on any specific statement or concealment by r.j. reynolds or its co-conspirators. plaintiff need not prove that the statements made by the company were relayed directly to michael johnson if their content reached him through other sources. you may instead infer michael johnson's reliance on such statements or concealment. so i wanted to make sure that you understand that you can infer from all this evidence, according to these jury instructions, that when he bought those cigarettes he was relying on them to tell him the truth. i wanted to point out the one on 24, page 24. this is an instruction that talks about the warning labels that were there. we do not have a claim that there should have been something different on a warning label. we are precluded from doing that. but we do have a claim that the warning label is ineffective all the way through, and that they should have given this information in other ways, which they have done. they could have put package inserts in there. they could have put press releases out. they could have gotten this information out to people a lot of different ways. and this instruction says the fact that these warning labels complied with federal law does not preclude a finding of liability for the plaintiff's claims. in other words, we still get the claims that we have made, you can still consider the evidence for the things that i've told you and argued about this afternoon. the last one i want to mention is the one on page 25. this is the intentional misconduct. we are asking that you determine whether or not punitive damages are warranted. that is all we do in this part of the case. if they are warranted. and they are warranted when there is intentional misconduct and the defendant had actual knowledge of the wrongfulness of the conduct and there was a high probability of injury or damage to users of its products. despite that knowledge it intentionally pursued that course of conduct. one out of two people get fatal diseases if they smoke cigarettes. what they did was deliberate. they should be punished. that is all i'm going to say for right now. thank you very much. mr. gary: your honor, may i take a minute? you do not have to send them out. please the court. good evening, members of the jury. i know it is getting late and you have been here a long time. as a matter of fact, you have been here a lot of days. a lot of days. and i want to take a moment just to say thank you. thank you. jury service is not easy, and it takes a lot out of your life. but i say thank you because you all have answered the bell. we started some 24 days ago, and you have been here, and on behalf, starting with the head of the courthouse, judge terrell, and all the lawyers, and for sure my client, i just want to say we are proud that we had eight people that did not even waiver in accepting their responsibility to do the right thing. so for that we are grateful, members of the jury. and then i want you to know that i feel good about the fact that you have been here, you have given your undivided attention. i've seen you taking notes. you are interested. you are into this case. and no matter what happens, nobody can challenge your service, because you have given it 1ten percent. and i want to just take a moment to say on behalf of my clients, both of them, they wanted me to make a special effort to say thank you. it is been a long journey for them. it is been 18 years and more. but they never lost faith in you. they could have thrown the towel in, because it is been a many dark days and a lot of dark hours. but they knew that one day -- they knew that one day justice is going to rise, and that is this day. this is judgment day. and it is judgment day for a defendant that has killed a lot of people. they have, members of the jury. they have flat out killed a lot of people, and they have gotten away with it. mr. baringer: objection, your honor. improper argument. the court: jurors step out a moment. (jury withdrew to the jury room.) the court: the jurors are out. mr. baringer: your honor, it is totally improper argument. he can talk about people dying of smoking-related diseases, but there is been no finding on -- when he talks about killing he is analogizing it to criminal activity, and he said that they got away with it. suggesting that they got away with a crime is a far different matter than saying that their product is associated with 400,000 deaths a year. but he has crossed the line. he is saying -- he is analogizing it is criminal, and what he is doing is he is saying that all those people would have had a legal finding that reynolds' wrongful conduct resulted in their death. it is one thing to say someone dies from a smoking-related disease. it is quite another to say that the company killed all of those people that died from smoking-related diseases. it is designed to inflame the jury. it is designed to incite passion, and it is clearly, clearly improper argument. the court: mr. gary. mr. gary: your honor, i think there is testimony from dr. proctor saying 880 people -- i mean, 480,000 people die every year, and the deaths could have been avoided. they did not have to die. that is the testimony coming from the witness stand. the court: i understand. the language does infer some other suggestions. so you certainly will not be able to say that. mr. gary: i can change it. the court: but let us move it along. objection overruled. govern yourself accordingly. mr. gary: all right. thank you. the court: call the jurors when they are ready, please. (the jury returned to the courtroom, was seated in the jury box, and the following further proceedings were had.) the bailiff: the jury has been seated, your honor. the court: counsel, please continue. mr. gary: thank you, your honor. as i was saying, members of the jury, and you do not have to take my word for it, our responsibility was to produce the evidence through witnesses and documents. you saw dr. proctor, and i know you have got to remember dr. proctor, because he was -- he told the truth. he did not lie. they have been lying for years and years and years. they are flat out liars, and they know it. 800 -- i mean, 480,000 people dying every year because of their foolishness, their greed. money hungry. money-grubbing people. now, you make a choice, and it is your choice. that is all right. i'll live with that. but when you withhold, when you refrain from telling the truth, and you flat out lie to people to get them hooked so you can make more money, that is not right, and you know it is not right. nobody's pleased with that. god's not pleased with that. mr. baringer: objection. the court: sustained. mr. gary: it is not right, members of the jury. how many more are going to have to die? how many more are going to have to go down? how many more are going to have to die? this is serious business, members of the jury. this is about saving lives. mr. baringer: objection, your honor. the court: overruled. mr. gary: and we talk about the damages for the loss of the life of michael johnson. 30-some-odd years old. gone. be here no more. $10 million for each one of them may not be enough. $10 million for each one of them, his son and his wife, may not be enough. 10 million for each may not be enough. when is it going to stop, members of the jury? when is it going to stop? you know, dr. proctor was probably one of the most credible witnesses that took the stand. if we do not do something we are on a course of a billion people from cigarettes worldwide. a billion people in this century. in this century. they have got to be stopped. mr. baringer: objection, your honor. the court: overruled. mr. gary: they have got to be stopped, and you have got to do it now. you may not get the opportunity ever again. and i know they have the money, they have the power, and they have the influence. but they do not have the power that you have. you have a lot of power members of the jury. do not you take it lightly. you have the power to see wrong and make it right. you see suffering, and you can stop it. you can bring major corporations to their knees when you catch them wrong a billion people going down. nobody, nobody -- and we have been fighting this case for a long time. nobody stand up for these people. oh, yes, you seen the doctor the other day. they paid him 80-something thousand. his bill is probably going to be over $100,000. they can do it. maybe they will beat us down. i tell you what, i will not go down without a fight, and you can believe that. ten thou- -- $10 million each for the loss of a young man that was a good man, and you know he was a good man. everybody in this courtroom, even the defense said opening statement that he was a good man. sit down and took time and painted a portrait of the president. he was just 19 years old. he could have been out doing anything, but he was putting his time in. and you heard cynthia. her family, they grew up serving their country, serving their country. some 30 years, some 35 years. her brothers fighting. fighting for america, fighting for justice, fighting for old glory. there she is up there. fighting for her. you have a rare opportunity, members of the jury. you can get it right. you can get it right. they have got influence. oh, yeah, over washington they have got influence. mr. baringer: objection, your honor. the court: sustained. mr. gary: but you can make it right, and i know you are going to do that, members of the jury. and let me tell you something. if you decide $10 million for each one of them is not enough you can change that. you make that call. talking about how powerful they are. let us see what the historian says. dr. proctor again. what he said: this is one of the most powerful industries in the united states. they have many powerful friends in congress. they manipulated congress. they paid people. they paid doctors. members of the jury, if mr. johnson -- if you want to say he was wrong, at least let us have a fair fight. all i want is a fair fight. that is all. it is not a fair fight with these people. you cannot match them. but your verdict can say no more. eight people, ordinary people in pensacola, florida. not a big fancy town, but you can change history. mr. baringer: objection, your honor. the court: sustained. mr. gary: you can do it, members of the jury. you can do it. you can do it. talking about influence. anyone's got to be thinking of a product that is killing people by almost a half billion people a year -- almost a half million. mr. baringer: objection, your honor. can we approach? mr. gary: i'm sorry, your honor. almost a half million people a year. mr. baringer: this violates -- this violates williams and state farm talking about worldwide. that is not what this case is about. the court: sustained. mr. gary: well, let us take -- let us take the 480,000 that are killed in america by their foolishness. and that is what it is. somebody's got to stand up to them, and it is going to be you. it is going to be you. it is going to be this jury. they are talking about the warning, the warning, because they want to set everybody up. well, if you had a warning then -- look, if you are going to put a warning on a product, tell me what it will do to me. do not fool around with it. this is important. these cigarettes are killing people, members of the jury. they are killing them by the hundreds of thousands. this is not a toy. this is not like you have a bad toy in the kitchen and your child may get hurt. they are killing people, and they know they are doing it. you think they are going to stop? no. you think $10 million for each one of them is going to stop them? no. and we will talk about punitives later. members of the jury, this is the point. we talked about this even in jury -- if you are informed, you know what you are doing, it is your fault, mr. johnson's fault. but do not lie to him. you lie to him, and then you blame him for believing your lie. now, you tell me what is that? that is why, members of the jury -- and he was a good man. members of the jury, these people have lied, they have lied, they have lied, they have lied, they have lied, and they have lied, and it is going to catch up with them. now, members of the jury, let me say this. this is where it is out of bounds. you are a woman, you are a man, we are adults. pick on me, it is okay. i accept it. they increased marketing to who? the kids. the kids, members of the jury. they are marketing -- and what did dr. proctor say about what they were doing and did they know what they were doing? it is my opinion that the industry was lying to their public relations people putting all this stuff out there. going after the kids. going after the kids. well, even mr. baringer said -- in opening statement he said, yes, choices do have to be -- what -- informed, in the sense that you have to know. well, you cannot lie to people. you cannot lie to people. even he admits that you cannot do it, and then say, well, you should have known, or it was in reader's digest. how many people even read reader's digest? why did not they get on tv and say, look, it is cancerous, we know it is cancerous, we know it will kill you, but if you smoke it anyway -- then if i smoke it then it is my fault. blame me. but then do not get up there and mislead people. why do you think you have got the engle findings? that is from -- the supreme court put their stamp on it, said these people were conspirators, they were liars, and they were doing fraudulent stuff. that is why i say, members of the jury, $10 million for each one of them, and this boy lost his life -- lost the enjoyment of life, everything, he will never be able to do nothing with his father. how much is that worth? how much is that worth? $10 million for each one of them may be peanuts, and it is to these folks. mr. baringer: objection, your honor. he is distorting the law and the legal standard for compensatory damages. the court: sustained. mr. gary: let me get to the point, members of the jury. let me tell you, when he went after our kids -- when they went after our kids that is out of bounds. they are talking about, well, he should have known, he should have known that cigarettes would kill you. well, even president kennedy in 1960, he did not even know. he was the president of the united states. and you heard dr. proctor say it. he was president of the united states, and he did not even know that smoking was cancerous and it would kill you, because they were hiding it, sugar-coating it. let us just talk about our kids for a second. this is really important. when you market -- when you go after our babies that is out of bounds. we are adults. fight us. do it to us, but not to our children. and they lied. dr. proctor told you that they went after our children like gangbusters. what did they say? and you probably remember it. what did they say was our future? the high school students. and that is about as low as you can get. you cannot get no lower than that. fight a fair fight. doctor told you about the brain of our children are not like ours as adults. they will fall for anything. they go for it. that is why these people with their money and their power, billions and billions and billions of dollars, they went after them. our kids. think about the little five-year-old that wrote to them and said, look, you are going after us by creating candy cigarettes. you know they knew what they were doing. and they even talk about putting nicotine in bubble gum. they have got to be stopped. what would you do? what you going to do? what you going to about it? members of the jury, it is not a fair fight with the kids. think of a weightlifter. it is not fair if you are a 250-pounder and take on a 75-pounder. it is not right, and you know it is not right. they do not put heavyweight champions in the ring with bantamweights, but that is what you are doing when you are going after our children. they are innocent, members of the jury. are you going to say that they should make an informed choice at 13? if you say that let us pack up and get out of here. it ain't no justice. and i know you are not going to say that. i know you are going to do the right thing. you are going to stand up and just do the right thing. that is all. it is judgment day. it is judgment day. they ain't fighting a fair fight. and how is it they are going to ever get up here and tell you that they did not go after our children like gangbusters? members of the jury, they want to talk about the warning, that the warning should be enough to deter you from smoking. how can they say that when they are doing 100 billion viewings of cigarette advertising on tv? that is within a year. how is anybody going to get around our heros, she-roes, people we look up to, people on the evening news sitting there smoking a cigarette in their mouth, and they tell you some little measly warning on the back of a pack of cigarettes is going to take care of the problem. it is your fault. members of the jury, they went after kids. read it. that is what dr. proctor said. you read it. did they market to -- they did not say young adults. kids. kids. how many of these kids -- they went after these kids. how many of these kids saw these ads. well, lots of kids. not adults, not young adults, but kids. millions of kids. they do not -- they do not -- they do not want to get in a fair fight. i'm an adult. fight me. fight you. but not our children. you get them at age 10, 11, 12, 13. these people went out to the schools. they said, well, where do we find them? their research groups in -- in -- in half of the cities in this country, they went out like gangbusters. they said, well, we do not know where to find them. you will see it in the records. it is in the print. this is evidence. you are going to get it. say go to the schools, go to the parks, go to the playground, go to the water fountains where the little kids hang out at and get them. that is what they do. that is what they did. sure. you think they are going to get up here and say, well, when michael was 13 he did not call the defendants, he did not call us and tell us -- what is he going to do at 13? what kind of phone call is he going to make? what kind of reader's digest you supposed to expect him to read at 13, at 12, at 10, at 9? they know what they are doing. they just do it, and they get away with it. well, the buck stops here. you ain't going to go for it, members of the jury. you ain't going to go for it. they ain't going to pull this on you. and this is -- this is -- remember, they talked about the money bags? it is all about money. mr. baringer: objection, your honor. irrelevant. not in evidence. the court: link it to your point, mr. gary. mr. gary: i will, your honor. the court: get to it. mr. gary: read the top person's in the country -- what is the name of the gentleman? the surgeon general's report. this comes from the surgeon general's report. that is the evidence. that is -- it is in evidence. we spend $96 billion a year. 96 billion. do you think it is coming out of their pocket? no. you think about it. that is what we spend. members of the jury, and it ain't just -- they could do something else. they could tone it down. now, this is the point i really -- i was going to do this on direct. in their documents. look for it. you know what they say? well, we could make a safer cigarette, but it will cut down on the money. we could make a safer cigarette, but we just will not make as much money. mr. baringer: objection. misrepresents the record. the court: sustained. rephrase. mr. gary: they say if we wanted to we could make a safer cigarette. mr. baringer: same objection, your honor. mischaracterizes the evidence. the court: get to your point, mr. gary. mr. gary: thank you, your honor. thank you. we could make a safer cigarette. did they do it? no. but they said, we got a good thing going here. we got be able to snow the jurors. we have got a big legal team. mr. baringer: objection. the court: sustained. mr. gary: that is the way they look at it. $96 billion annually. 96 billion on -- this is our government picking up this tab for cigarette smoking-related illnesses. where does it stop? that is why you have punitive damages. not only just for them, but other cor- -- you could deter other corporations. you can make a wrong right. you can make a difference. you have to be bold, but you can do it. you can do it. members of the jury, i'm getting pretty close now, but i do want to talk about this, because this is near and dear to me. give all the right to this want. i just want to talk to you. i just want to talk. you heard cynthia talk about her brothers and her daddy put it on the line for this country. some of them were lucky. they made it home. mr. baringer: objection. your honor, this is completely irrelevant. the court: counsel, take it down. get to your point and move along. mr. gary: you are going to see -- the court: take it down, please. mr. gary: you are going to see a letter from the veterans administration of foreign affairs. it is in evidence. you do not have to take my word. you are going to see a letter, a letter from them to reynolds saying in essence you sucker punched us. mr. baringer: objection. your honor, this is irrelevant and intentionally prejudicial. [#deleted sidebar#] mr. gary: thank you. members of the jury, you will have this evidence back there with you, but i wanted to just confirm what i was saying. it says -- and this is a letter to the american tobacco company, that is now reynolds, and the veterans of foreign wars was saying to them, tobacco people: for the information of all of the members of this post we would like to know more about the recent scare the american medical association gave the people of this country that cigarettes cause cancer. they thought it was just a scare. they thought it was a joke. we all remember that during world war ii we were given all the cigarettes we needed, and many young men and women started the smoking habit who had never smoked before, and who had never intended to smoke. they did not even intend to smoke, members of the jury. and i could go on and on about this, but the point i was making is that while they were fighting for their country, they dodged the bombs and bullets and they made it home, just many of them. they were writing that letter because they were wanting to know. some of them were sick. you get that letter and you read the whole letter. some of them were sick. they was having problems. and they said to reynolds, you know, tell us what is going on? y'all said that these cigarettes were safe, and they are not. write us back at least. well guess what? they never got even a response. they did not even get a response. now here they are, they have gone to war, they have fought for their country. mr. baringer: objection. your honor, this is far beyond -- the court: move along. mr. gary: they come home to die from cigarette smoking. cynthia johnson robinson, born into a family of 10 or 11 children, two-room shack and outdoor toilet. you may say $10 million, because she is poor she is bound to try to win it. whatever you want to say, because that is what they are going to do. they run a smear campaign. that is what they do. members of the jury, you notice even when she was on the witness stand they did not ask her about this garbage. they did not say a word. they took three hours of deposition. they did not say a word. you know why? because they sneak up on you. they ambush you. that is the way they do business, and they get away with it because they have got the money and power to do it. mr. baringer: objection, your honor. the court: sustained. mr. gary: they took all of those depositions. let me ask you this. why did not they bring those people in here? mr. baringer: objection. the court: sustained. mr. gary: members of the jury, i would like to think if there was any truth to any of that garbage -- and that is what it was, garbage -- they would have at least been big enough to face their -- mr. baringer: objection, your honor. the court: sustained. mr. gary: good woman. good marriage. where were they when he was dying? think about it. who was there the morning of his death? who took him to the doctor? who took him to his doctor appointments? who was there through the thick and the thin when they did not have -- when they got evicted, when they got foreclosed on, who was there? when he was sick and could not work who was working? then they try to put her down. that is not right. you know it is not right. this lady, all she is done all her life, she still to this day, working some 20-some-odd years almost, maybe 30, i forget the exact number she said, some 20-some-odd years working taking care of the handicapped. and she did it with no pay. and then they come in here and they try to smear her. and it is not right. they ambushed her. good woman. what is this world coming to? grew up in the church. said, my mama taught me to tell the truth. they do not tell the truth. and i'm not talking about the lawyers. i'm not talking about the lawyers, members of the jury, even though i'm pointing at them. i'm talking about reynolds, the defendant in this case. they are liars. and that is why our supreme court told them they were liars. that is why the judge read you those instructions and said you do not have the option to agree or not agree with those instructions. they got busted. they are liars. and they misinform people, and they gave false statements, and they withheld information that could have saved lives, and they did not do it. and it was all about a buck. it is a shame. thank you for just entertaining me, members of mr. chestnut: thank you, your honor. good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen. the jurors: good afternoon. mr. chestnut: this is rebuttal argument so this will be me responding to a lot of mr. gary's -- a lot of comments by -- that you just heard by the defense attorney. we have got a long way to go, short time to get there. so i'm going to get right to it. first question is: did michael johnson have lung cancer? ladies and gentlemen, the defense asserted that perhaps he did not and we did not meet our burden. but i'm going to remind you that not only did we met our burden, we overwhelmingly met our burden. now, before i get into this, i want to talk to you about this board, this is a flip-flop. there will be a number of points i'm going to bring up to you -- to you through this rebuttal that is going to discuss flip-flop because that is what the defense has done. and i do not know if anybody's familiar with a flip-flop you get at a restaurant. so sometimes when you get a sweet tea and a lemonade, some people call it an "uptown." some people call it an arnold palmer. some people call it a flip-flop. well, i'm going to point out a number of flip-flops from the defense because what happens when you put the sweet tea on top of the lemonade, you have got two drinks. you stir it up. you cannot tell the difference. you just stirred it up. so our evidence has been very explicit. it is been very direct and they are trying to confuse you. legal cause, did michael johnson have lung cancer? absolutely not. absolutely he did. was it the primary location? absolutely, it was. did we have the burden to show you that? yes, we do and we did. now, today -- can we have our first letter board? today defendants want to come in and -- and try -- the next record -- and win over -- can we highlight? thank you. win over your affection by saying that dr. boatright was never really sure. dr. boatright consistently said unknown primary. but, now, you recall three days ago, they paid dr. bennett to come all the way from montana and throw out not only dr. boatright but every other pensacola doctor under the bus. mr. baringer: objection, your honor. that mischaracterizes -- the court: sustained. rephrase. mr. chestnut: unknown primary, most likely lung cancer. this shows that dr. bennett -- excuse me -- that dr. boatright told that the primary location was lung cancer. now, dr. bennett came in, the defendant's expert, he testified that it probably was not and still was unknown, that additional testing would have confirmed lung cancer. if you will go to the death certificate. now, defendants kept saying that we cannot know the primary location of lung cancer because mr. johnson opted out of additional testing, but we know a couple things. one, by this time, mr. johnson has stage 4 lung cancer. it is not curable so chemotherapy and radiation will make no difference. the only additional testing is to confirm what dr. boatright already knows, his oncologist. and -- and let me just highlight this, ladies and gentlemen. sometimes -- you know what? here it is. i've got two pens here, one pen here. and my kindergarten teacher used to do this. you put it together, it is three. we did not need a calculator to confirm that because sometimes you can use circumstantial evidence. sometimes it is common sense. two pens -- two markers and one pen equals three. you do not need a calculator to confirm that this was non-oat cell carcinoma of the lung. also dr. bennett had to give up that mr. -- that dr. boatright could have qualified, if he was not confident in his conclusion, that lung cancer was the origin. if it was not the primary, that means the -- the lung cancer started somewhere else. if it started somewhere else, he would have modified or qualified the death certificate. he did not. that means more likely than not, which is our burden, non-oat cell carcinoma of the lung was the primary cause of death of michael johnson. now, we -- let us just talk about dr. bennett a bit because he -- he raised three points, and i want to go through that. i'll come to the elmo. so we have already dealt with the pathology, that the pathology does not determine the primary location because we have confirmed that the circumstantial evidence, symptomatology, does. what is symptomatology? pathology is not the only way to determine whether lung cancer was a primary location. symptomatology can. what was the symptomatology? symptomatology confirmed pancoast tumor. pancoast tumor is isolated to the lung and is caused by what? smoking. and dr. feingold said that and dr. bennett had to -- had to -- had to agree to it. mr. baringer: objection, mischaracterizes the testimony. mr. chestnut: so -- the court: overruled. mr. chestnut: -- pancoast tumor causes pain under your right arm, no sweat on the right side of the face and droopy eyes. mr. johnson had all of those. symptomatology confirms primary lung cancer. characteristics of lung cancer. the masses indicate metastatic disease. dr. feingold came in and testified a couple things. one, when -- when cancer metastasizes to the lung from somewhere else in the body, it is like snowflakes. we showed you. up here, we showed you a picture of a pancoast tumor. the pancoast tumor occupied -- it was half of his lung. it was the entire top side of his lung. so if the cancer metastasized from somewhere else in mr. johnson's body, there would have been snowflakes on the ct scan. but we showed you a ct scan of what it looked like and it was the top half of the limb, so -- of the lung -- excuse me. so, number two, we can throw that out as well because the characteristics confirm that lung is the primary location of cancer. lastly, ladies and gentlemen, we did not hear this today, but before dr. feingold came back for rebuttal, there was this insinuation that the lung cancer metastasized from mr. johnson's testicles, and they used the lance armstrong analogy. i think we understand that there is no way that this cancer could have gone undiagnosed in his testicles and then metastasized to the lung without it being noticeable in the testicles. so strike two is out. and without knowing the primary location of mr. johnson's cancer, you cannot determine the cause. well, we just proved the primary location of cancer, so now we can confirm that -- that he was the cause. now, let us just talk a little bit more about dr. bennett. and, ladies and gentlemen, sometimes, again, on the flip-flop, we have got to evaluate the credibility of witnesses. because dr. bennett also said, well, because mr. johnson elected not to have additional testing, we could exhume him and i could perform an autopsy, and that will determine whether it was metastatic or primary cancer. dr. -- mr. baringer: objection, your honor. mr. chestnut: dr. bennett did not know -- the court: excuse me. mr. chestnut: and you recall -- the court: grounds? mr. baringer: there is nothing -- that misstates the record. that is not true. the court: overruled. mr. chestnut: thank you. dr. bennett did not grow up in a funeral home. so you will recall, we walked him down of what happens to a body. and he ultimately had to agree and admit that digging someone up 18 years later in pensacola, florida, where it is hot and moist, he was not going to get enough evidence because there was not enough of mr. johnson left to get the evidence. so, ladies and gentlemen, evaluate the credibility of the witnesses presented to you by the defense. there is been a lot of flip-flop. next, ladies and gentlemen, the second question is: was michael johnson addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine? well, we have established one. i put a star because it is, to me, abundantly clear. was he addicted? now, we have heard a lot of evidence about addiction, and most of what you heard from the defense was about quitting. now, again, ladies and gentlemen, i want to talk about flip-flop, credibility of evidence. we have heard a lot about these depositions. we have heard a lot about the 19 depositions that were taken. ladies and gentlemen, excerpts were taken from these depositions and they are misleading. so look at this. it says most people who knew mr. johnson were not aware of any effort to quit. you see here, sister-in-law, jessica brenson, option. mr. baringer: objection, your honor. this is not in evidence. mr. chestnut: what is not in evidence? mr. baringer: that -- that evidence. mr. chestnut: your honor, every -- the court: go ahead. mr. chestnut: their expert, mr. giakas -- the court: overruled. mr. chestnut: thank you. mr. giakas used these depositions to come to his conclusions, which is exactly what i want to challenge, are his conclusions, because mrs. audrey says directly -- let us just read page and line. [#deleted sidebar#] mr. chestnut: okay. thank you, your honor. so, ladies and gentlemen, we were discussing efforts to quit. and that is important because really quitting is not about -- is not what is really before you. smoking is what is before you. well, let us talk about addiction and the nicotine addiction and the addictive effects on mr. johnson. now, mr. giakas -- dr. giakas repeatedly relied upon deposition testimony in finding that mr. johnson was not addicted. now, first of all, let us just look at dr. giakas, who, he is come down, yale-trained, board-certified psychiatrist. however, ladies and gentlemen, he does not treat smoking cessation cases. he said that. and -- and i said -- i believe him. you know why i believe him on that point? because i do not know many crack addicts or smoking addicts who could afford 350,000 -- $350 per session and $120 for every 15 minutes. and we know that smoking -- smokers -- rjr, they target who? the poor and the uneducated. so there probably are not a lot of people in his hometown that can afford to pay him what rjr has paid him to consult on smoking. secondly, ladies and gentlemen, dr. giakas says that he relied on deposition testimony of verdell salter, amongst others. but mrs. salter said in deposition, contrary to what he presented, and i impeached him on it, that mr. johnson tried to quit four or five times, that he used the nicotine gum. now, they say, well, nicotine gum was not even out in the '80s. it was out. you just had to have a prescription for it. his sister-in-law, mrs. brenson, we went through that deposition. she said he repeatedly tried to quit. he was trying to quit for his wife. he loved his wife, but he just could not. she testified that it was -- smoking interfered with their way of life because smoking cigarettes -- he had to buy cigarettes. they were expensive. so every time he would go to the store and buy pampers, he would buy cigarettes, that adds up. that was a reason for him quitting. that goes back to the dsm-5 about interfering with your daily life. the same criteria that dr. giakas tried to use to say that mr. johnson did not qualify for addiction, we have evidence that shows he did. so here's what happened. why do not we compromise, ladies and gentlemen? they have experts. we have experts. what if we just use common-sense experts, the people who knows the best? because giakas told you he would never mr. johnson, never met mrs. robinson, never spoke to them, never interviewed them. he said he used the dsm-5, but we went through the criteria. and most of the criteria, he had to agree there was evidence to support that -- that mr. johnson met the criteria. and there was only two out of the 11 that he had to meet. we established that he met two out of the 11. he did not even use the fagerstrom. so he only gave you half of the evidence. but why do not we just use common sense? mrs. robinson, who knew mr. johnson better than mr. giakas ever would, better than most of would, he knew -- she knew mr. johnson for the challenges he could and the challenges he could not overcome, loved him through it anyway. she said firsthand, but before we go to what she said, which was that he was addicted, i'd like to also add another credential on to her. in the midst of dragging her through the mud and her reputation, defendant said that her first husband she divorced because he was a crack addict. well, who better than -- than mrs. robinson to tell you to be able to evaluate an addict? so if she says her husband's addicted, he is addicted. we can discount the experts. his brother, mark johnson, came in and sat right there, testified. even though he is lost a father and a brother to smoking, he is still smoking. he is been through smoking cessation. he is been through the gum at the va. he went through counseling at the va, the patch. he still has not been able to quit. he said, "i'm addicted. my brother was addicted too." common sense. the people who know mr. johnson best said he was addicted. his sister-in-law, who they listed on this -- let me just show you. they said most of the people who knew mark -- mr. johnson said he did not quit. i cannot find the spot right now. and they list mrs. brenson. well, mrs. brenson -- mrs. brenson testified in deposition that he did, that she knew he was trying to quit. they told you the opposite. that is a flip-flop, deliberately misleading you, ladies and gentlemen. so the next cause: was addiction a legal cause of michael johnson's lung cancer? now, here's what we have learned about cigarettes, tobacco and smoking, and what have they done overall to people. ladies and gentlemen, they did the research in the market to know that nicotine causes addiction. they did not educate the public on the chemicals that were in the cigarette. the cigarette companies knew that these were deadly chemicals, naphthalene, rat poison, benzene, carbon monoxide, ammonia. and they said they put in the ammonia to get a nicotine kick, to freebase. that is the same thing that is done to crack cocaine, freebase. they added these additives, knowing it was going to cause cancer, knowing that it was going to cause -- due to addiction, knowing that the more you are exposed to this, the higher risk of causing cancer, i.e., the higher risk of you dying from cancer. and they did it anyway. so let us talk more about causation as it relates to mr. johnson. now, there was a lot of talk about choice. and, members of the jury, there is a difference between a choice and an informed choice. and if we really just pause and think about it -- because, again, this is a flip-flop. this is an attempt to deceive. well, what do you mean by that, mr. chestnut? well, let us just think about the system as a whole. there is a juvenile court. then there is an adult court. what does that really say about our system? that juveniles are held to a different standard than adults because juveniles do not have the same level of information or life experiences as adults. they are kids. so information affects choices. it is the same reason we go to school and get education. so different people are held to different levels of standards. the experts that came in here, not only were they doctors, they were board-certified, which means they had more information, which means they are supposed to make better health-care choices. be it a pulmonologist, they can make a better choice about lung problems -- lung cancer. an oncologist can make a better choice about cancer itself. a cardiologist can make better choices about the heart because they are informed. they receive the information. now, let us consider choices between tobacco, rjr, and the information they had about all these chemicals and what michael johnson had. there is no comparison. so to blame michael johnson on a choice to say he chose to smoke, to smoke in lieu of? no, because by the time he really got the information that could break or make an informed decision, he was already addicted, and we have shown you the evidence of that. moreover, ladies and gentlemen, this goes to the -- to the -- basically the conspiracy, the intentional and deliberate effort of this company to not only addict consumers, but they knew they were going to kill them. and now they come in and woe us down as if they are repenting, but they are not. they are not because the first thing of repenting is what? admission. they have not accepted any liability. they could not make it in any church with this argument. mr. baringer: objection, your honor. the court: sustained. mr. chestnut: members of the jury, nicotine is a nec- -- nicotine is necessary in cigarettes for addiction. these drugs are not. and we showed you the documents that showed that -- that -- that told you that tobacco specifically contemplated putting these chemicals that are deadly in the cigarettes to accelerate the effect. that is causation. that is deliberate. that is intentional. but where is the conspiracy? well, then they had this research institute, and they tried to tell you that this research institute, the theory behind it was to learn about the health effects and try to protect the public. no, no, no, no. see, it is a flip-flop. the research institute, if you look at the documents, was not designed to address the health concerns about these drugs; it was designed as to how to counterspin, how to countermarket the health concerns, meaning they knew that the information was going to come out. they knew they were going to be exposed, like that letter we showed you from the veterans administration, where the veterans administration said, you gave all these cigarettes to our soldiers. now they are coming back addicted and sick. you said they would be respected. you did not tell us that they were killing -- they were going to -- that they were going to kill people. so this research institute get together and say, hey, man, they are going to catch on to what is going on. we have got to figure out how to spin it. so what do they do? they inundate the market with misinformation. now, you heard the argument about choice. well, michael johnson saw his dad die of lung cancer. ladies and gentlemen, let us just stop a minute. stop. when you can inundate -- marketing is about impressions. the more impressions you get, the more you can condition the consumer to do what you want them to do, to buy their brand, to go to the store, et cetera, et cetera. we showed you evidence that tobacco inundated the market, that at one point, tobacco had more billboards per capita in the united states than any other person. they were killing -- except for commerce, nobody else could get in. okay. we want to advertise too. they cannot get it. tobacco owns everything. they inundated the market. two, marketing at that time was different. so marketing today has evolved. today, you cannot turn on a tv for three minutes without seeing a lawyer commercial. in 1975, lawyers did not advertise on tv. they could not. today, you see tv commercials four or five times in a program, but that is evolved into what? paperclip and google. so we have to retro back to time. what was the marketing for michael johnson's time, for his life? what was current then? it was grassroots organizing. it was relationships. well, what do we know about that? we know that tobacco deliberately went to hollywood. they made sure that celebrities were smoking in movies. they made sure that walter cronkite was smoking on the evening news. leaders were smoking. the pastor at the catholic church was smoking. the nuns were smoking. the teachers in school were smoking. it was grassroots advertising. that is advertising. it is just a different employment of money. now, the dad, you saw your dad. you knew that there was a risk of dying. but we also know this, ladies and gentlemen, that children are impressionable. at this time, michael johnson's 13. you know, it reminds me of grand theft auto. no matter how many times your mom or dad tells you not to be violent, do not go steal, if a kid comes home every day and for four hours plays grand theft auto, the risk of them becoming violent increases exponentially, so much so that grand theft auto was banned. mr. baringer: objection, your honor. the court: sustained. mr. chestnut: members of the jury, a parent cannot compete with the marketing dollars of big tobacco. so choice really is not an issue here. it is a flip-flop. what is the total fault? at least, ladies and gentlemen, ninety percent to rjr, at least. let us talk about damages briefly. let us talk about damages briefly before we go forward. now, the judge will instruct you to check -- to start off, total amount of damages. let us talk about the characterizations. so they have raised all these issues about mrs. robinson and what was and what was not, and we addressed a lot of that yesterday, ladies and gentlemen. but before i do that, let me just deal with one other issue and that is on the warning because defendants dealt with warnings and the warnings that were on tobacco cigarettes. again, warnings, the warnings on the cigarettes, were no comparison to the amount -- to the billions of dollars that they have spent over time in advertising. how do we know that? we showed you the federal trade commission report that said less than 3 percent of smokers read the warning placed on cigarettes, less than 3 percent. the warnings deliberately were not effective, and they were worded in such a way as to discourage it. and that is what the federal trade commission found. as to damages, so we have talked about mrs. robinson and -- how much time, your honor? we talked about mrs. robinson. they went through a checklist on damages for mrs. robinson that just are not true, ladies and gentlemen. first, they say, well, mrs. robinson gave her ring back to her husband. well, she just gave me the ring, her wedding ring, right here. she wore it today. here it is. so if what they are saying is true, she would not have it here today. mrs. -- let me make sure this gets back to her. moreover, ladies and gentlemen, they attacked mrs. robinson about the foreclosure, and i think that is a major point because they are attacking her credibility, saying she is lying. and clearly the defendants have never had hard times. because anyone who is been through hard times, who is had to endure a foreclosure, would know the foreclosure may been have initiated in 1993, but they do not knock on your door and kick you out in 1993. it was fully plausible, that is, 1995, before the eviction was actually effectuated. it is not -- this is not a reflection on her lying. this is a reflection that they have spent so much money on cigarettes, they do not know about hard times. mr. baringer: objection, your honor. the court: sustained. no predicate. mr. chestnut: i think that is my time. thank you. mr. gary: please the court? good afternoon. the jurors: good afternoon. mr. gary: members of the jury, we have come down to the end of this trial. i said it before. i want to say it again. thank you. it is been great for this case, our clients, this court and everybody associated with the judicial system. your presence is what it is -- it is all about. and because of you -- and let me just say this: while we have benefited from your service, you are going to benefit from this. i've watched -- in years to come, y'all are going to know each other. you have made relationships and you have made friendships here that will last way beyond this trial, i guarantee you, because you have spent a lot of time together, and you are going to benefit from it. and, members of the jury, i just, you know -- and i -- and -- and let me tell you something. i know you are not going to fall for what you have heard today. you are not going to fall for that because that is a distortion of the facts in the worst way that you could ever even think about in a trial. they distorted the facts and we have proven our case by a greater weight of the evidence. we have proven our case by clear and convincing evidence. there is no question about it. these people -- and i told you yesterday and, yes, he -- he made a point to say it, but they are liars. that is what they are. they said there was no connection between what happened to mr. johnson and what they have done. well, they got busted by the supreme court. mr. baringer: objection, your honor. mr. gary: judge terrell did not -- the court: sustained. mr. gary: you have the engle findings and i want you -- he is claiming that there is no connection between what they have done and mr. johnson. well, he bought their cigarettes. they put them out there. they put them in commerce. they put them on the market, and let us see what the engle -- engle findings say about that. this is the law that you must follow. this is not willie gary's law. this is -- this is the law. is that a connection? the cigarette companies placed cigarettes on the market that were defective and not just dangerous, unreasonably dangerous. that is the law. and they do not even want you to see a connection. if he bought their cigarettes and they -- they do not even question that. that is the connection for punitive damages. mr. baringer: objection -- the court: overruled. mr. baringer: -- inaccurate. mr. gary: that is the connection for punitive damages. and, members of the jury -- mr. baringer: objection, your honor. may we approach? mr. gary: let -- let me -- the court: jurors, step out a moment, please. (jury excused.) (the following proceedings were held in open court outside the presence of the jury:) the court: jurors are out. mr. baringer: your honor, he -- he is talking about the design defect finding, which is an unintentional tort, and as was established before we started this case, they cannot get a punitive entitlement on the unintentional tort. he is now just told the jury that they can consider this finding for punitive damages, which is absolutely wrong as a matter of law. now, he is confused them and they do not understand the difference -- what evidence applies to punitives or not. the court: mr. gary? mr. gary: it is a fact they can consider, your honor. it is a fact -- the court: well, the purpose -- if it has applied to the unintentional torts and intentional torts is what gets you the punitive damages. mr. gary: right. the court: that is not what this is about, the slide you just put up. mr. gary: the -- the engle -- the court: engle findings are what they are, but they are applicable to what they apply to. this does not apply to punitive damages. mr. gary: okay. mr. baringer: i'd like that clarified. the court: intentional torts are the only things that are the hook to get you to punitive damages. mr. gary: okay. the court: they can consider all the evidence, but just be clear. do not confuse -- mr. baringer: your honor, i would like that clarified either by the court or mr. gary. mr. gary: i -- i can do it, your honor. the court: well, we will clear it up. call the jurors when they are ready, please. (jury present.) (the following proceedings were held in open court in the presence of the jury:) the bailiff: jurors have been seated, your honor. the court: members of the jury, intentional torts are a finding that is required prior to any determination of whether punitive damages should be awarded. with that clarification, counsel, please continue. mr. gary: thank you, your honor. and can you put that back up for me just a second, please? members of the jury, you -- you -- you-all have -- you have had the opportunity to see the engle findings, one after another, over and over and over again. and -- but that is the law. that is the law. and let me just say this, members of the jury, the argument that you just heard is playing on your intelligence. and let me tell you the reason why. they are playing games with you. they are playing games with you to say that this -- to say that michael did not have lung cancer is a joke and you know it. there is a -- a mountain of evidence that proves that. there is no question about that. to say that he was not addicted, one to three packs a day, that is 20 to 60 cigarettes a day for 20 years. and he comes up here -- and i do not know how he did it with a straight face -- to say that michael was not addicted. you do not have to check your common sense at the door. he got up here and stomped and raged about he was not addicted. now, that is not -- you know he was addicted. and it ain't just about whether he was addicted and could not quit. that is not the law. see, the law is whether he was addicted. and the engle findings say that nicotine in the cigarettes causes what? addiction. there is no question about that, members of the jury. but they -- that is -- that is playing on your intelligence, and i know that you will not stand for that. they -- he distorted the truth in a way like you would not believe. and they want to talk about a million dollars -- $10 million for mrs. -- cynthia johnson robinson is outrageous. how can he say that? losing your husband, losing -- they -- they killed him. they did it. and then he waltzes up here and acts like that is -- they spend billions of dollars, not 10 million, not 20 million, billions of dollars. he said it, advertising to who? our children. and then he comes up here to say $10 million to her is outrageous. but that is their mo. that is the way they deal with this, members of the jury, because they are experienced at it. let me show you the reason why. this is one of their documents. do we have that for the big screen? if not, that is okay. this is one of their documents, members of the jury. they have plotted and planned about what a jury might do or what a jury might not do. they have got the money. they have got the power. that is what they do. and this document here, a jury might, whether instructed or not, operate on the theory of comparative negligence. that is the percentage. now, listen to this. that is the percentage that he talked about. and my partner told you it should be at least ninety percent on the defendants because they put a product out there that they knew was killing people. they flat-out knew it. and you need to say enough is enough. they killed enough people. take the job away from the grave diggers. mr. baringer: objection, your honor, improper argument. the court: rephrase. mr. gary: thank you, your honor. they are betting on the fact that they are going to snow you. that is what they are betting on. they are going to snow you either on the liability, or they are going to snow you on the value of the loss to this young man, his father, and this lady, her husband, based on the billions that they spent on advertising to get kids hooked. think about it. he was 13 years old when he started smoking. and he said, well, he did not call reynolds. what did reynolds do to start him to smoking? they were doing billions and billions and billions of advertising spots on television, everywhere, all over the place. then they want to blame it, of all people, on his daddy. his daddy was a smoker. well, they killed his daddy. that is what this is all about. that is what the engle findings are all about. and they want you to just disregard those. and it goes on to say the jury, true, the value, mr. johnson was negligent in smoking a product he knew was dangerous and stop there. we did not come in here slipping and sliding and lying to you about that like they have. we said he had some responsibility. we admitted that. but then they go a step further to say, but he was lured by whom? the seller. and the seller's what? negligence was the greater -- in failing to make his product safe. they could have made it safe and they did not. and you have seen documents that said that. they could have made it safe. we asked dr. proctor could -- 480,000 people that died last year, could those lives have been prevented? and he said yes. they had the wherewithal to do it, and they did not do it because they were concerned about large money backs. they said, let us keep them hooked; let us keep them smoking; let us laugh at them and then let us get bigger money back and carry the money to the bank. now, you saw that. here's another. they have been -- they are way ahead of the game, members of the jury. they -- they -- they study how you are going to deal with this. they plan and plot on how they are going to get to the jury to go for this thing about, well, we were investing money -- we were investing money in the research. they invested money in the research that was going to do what they wanted to do, sell more cigarettes. and when those people -- and y'all saw it -- that they gave money to did not -- if they did not use it or did not write the reports that they wanted, they cancelled the donations. their grants were cancelled, cut off and terminated. and i do not have time to go back into all of those now but you know it. you have seen that. these people were all about making a dollar on the backs of poor people, the least of these. how can we build our profits? here it is right here. it is clear. the logic may be in the minds of the jury. yield to the emotions and reactions that -- let me start again. but the logic might, in the minds of a jury, yield to the emotional reaction that it is knowledge that was available to the seller. it was up to him, the seller. he has the means to do what? to make the product safe and they did not. they chose to make money. they chose to make money, members of the jury. and enough is enough because they are thinking that they still can get away with this. you can shut them down. and then they get up here and say, here's the death of a young man that has done nothing but the best he could, two or three jobs, went out to california, got a degree in -- as -- as an artist, came back home, started a business, playing by the rules, working hard, taking care of his family, two or three jobs. then they come in here with a bunch of dirt. and that is the way they do these cases. mr. baringer: objection, your honor. the court: overruled. mr. gary: they get people like the experts they put up there, that he -- that he had been paid $80,000, and it did not include his trial time, which was surely going to quick him over 100 grand or more, to say what he was saying. they drag out all of this dirt and could not even face her with it, did not even ask her a question about it before you. but that is the way they do business. that is the way they get by and they keep on doing it. and, members of the jury, you have the power to bring them to their knees and you can do it. we have proven a case that warrants punitive damages. enough is enough. put this lady down. members of the jury, nobody's perfect. none of us are. and in a marriage, if you have not had some problems, just keep on living. keep on facing life's obstacle courses. you are going to have some problems. you are going to have some ups and downs. but they had a good marriage. they loved each other. they were with each other. on the morning -- where was reynolds on the morning when he died from drowning in his blood? they were out there selling cigarettes, tracking down children. and in -- and if i get a little upset, please forgive me. trying to -- from my head and right to my heart, but this is not right. then he gets up here and says, he just was not even addicted. how on god's earth could anybody say it and look you in the face with a straight face? you know it is not right. then he is going to say he did not have lung cancer and brought someone in here who is going to talk about he did not -- he did not -- he did not deal with lance armstrong, that issue. you know why? because they had a witness up there, a high-priced, high-paid witness, running off at the mouth, just saying whatever he wanted to say and ended up saying, he knew that lung -- lance armstrong did not have any issues or did not have any -- any symptoms. mr. baringer: objection, your honor. that is not correct. the court: overruled. mr. gary: thank you, your honor. he said he did not have any symptoms of his testicle problems, his cancer, because that is -- guess what? they are just trying to prove that they do not want you to find that they are at fault. and they will say anything and they will do anything and it is not right. and you know it is not right. going to get up here and say, lance armstrong, oh, he got through this. the -- the cancer went all the way to his brain and he did not have any symptoms. and that was a flat-out lie. and they are used to lying. you saw that article. lance armstrong had symptoms long before it was diagnosed. his testicles were three times the size of a golf ball. he was having pain and -- and -- and he will take the stand, highly paid expert, under oath and make that statement about lance armstrong and did not know what he was talking about. but that is what they do. that is what they do because they -- they gamble. they gamble on the -- on the -- on you buying their story. mr. baringer: objection, your honor. the court: sustained. rephrase. mr. gary: members of the jury, $10 million. i say it without hesitation. i say it without any reservation for the loss. michael lost his daddy. she lost her husband. she lost her husband, one that she -- she was the one -- where were they on the morning when he drowned in his blood? she was there. the same lady that has worked one job for 21 years, 8:00 to 5:00, then going back, working free to take care of the elderly and he said that her loss is not worth it. members of the jury, this ain't about whether you are rich or poor, whether you -- it ain't about that. it ain't about how big you are. ain't about whether you are black or white. ain't about none of that. it is about justice. she is no beyonce. she is no highfalutin person. but would he have said that if it was the same situation? no, he would not have and you know he would not have. she is proud of her lot in life. she is just a person that is taking care of elderly people, handicapped kids. she do not even get paid for it. she does it because it is in her heart, and they get up here and drag her through the mud. it is a shame. they should be ashamed of themselves. you will get it back there. the day before he died, somebody had to take him to the doctor. who was there? she gets up 4:00 -- 3:00 or 4:00 o'clock in the morning to get on a bus, a handicap bus, to take kids that cannot -- that -- that she has to -- and her job is -- is an aide on the bus, just to buckle them in. they cannot even fasten their seat belt. she is been doing it 21 years and she loves doing it. now, that do not make her a big-time star. but i tell you what, it makes her an all-american citizen. and, members of the jury, this ain't about your lot in -- in life. he is talking about it is ridiculous, $10 million. it is not ridiculous. it may not be enough. i said it before and i say it again. and you make that call. where were they? where were they when she was there, providing for him? and then they -- they stoop low enough to make michael johnson -- now, listen to this -- a deadbeat dad. that man that they had paid all that money -- and what was his name? -- 80-some-odd thousand dollars -- mr. chestnut: giakas. mr. gary: giakas. -- that man would say anything for anybody as long as he could stuff his pockets. he get -- he get $100,000 for just coming in here. when he said all of this -- i mean, it is ridiculous. and then counsel's going to stand up here and say, what was his criteria for someone losing a father. the court: five minutes, mr. gary. mr. gary: thank you, your honor. if someone loses a father -- and you heard michael testify. my daddy, to me, my daddy thought i was his pride and joy. y'all heard him say that. you heard him. and you are going to -- now they are going to come up here with a bunch of dirt and garbage and make him a deadbeat dad? they ought to be ashamed of themselves. they ought to be ashamed. michael told you, said it was around christmastime. now, this hired expert got up there and told you as -- as if the man had not seen his child for ten years. why would he do that in front of this boy, who is nothing but a hardworking kid? they do it because why? they want to dunk and dodge responsibility. they told you that they have zero responsibility. can you believe that; tobacco will say they had no responsibility? of all the -- all the people that they have killed? mr. baringer: objection, your honor. the court: sustained. rephrase. mr. gary: his daddy was in tears on christmas day because he did not have the money to buy him the present that he wanted. i think he said it was a dirt -- go -- a go-cart, a go-cart. he gave him a skateboard and he said, i could see my daddy's face, how difficult it was. members of the jury, he loved his daddy. his daddy loved him. and -- and that is a lot that -- to do this to this boy, in his face, talking about his dad. in essence, his dad was a deadbeat dad, but the $100,000 paid expert, they cannot -- the guy said, look, even the defendants, if he did not give them the opinion that they wanted, they would kick him to the curb. that is the way they do business. well, members of the jury, these people -- this case is about reynolds and their lying. and they want to say it is not, but it is. you listen to the judge's instructions. it is about their lying. and i want to say this: the lie they told to congress that nicotine was not addictive, there is documented evidence in their files, 10, 15 years before that, that they had, behind closed doors, admitted that nicotine in their cigarettes was addictive. and they jumped on -- they went straight up to washington, dc, raised their right hands and swore before god to tell the truth, nothing but the truth, so help you god. and they lied. they lied through their teeths. and this case warrants punitive damages. you have got to say enough is enough, no matter how big you are, how much influence you have, how much power you have. it really does not matter. you have got to do the right thing. at the end of the day, we are all in this together. we are all american citizens. we pledge our allegiance to the same flag. they do not get no free ride to keep killing people. mr. baringer: objection. the court: sustained. mr. gary: thank you, members of the jury.