mr. baringer: thank you, your honor. good morning, everyone. the jury: good morning. closing argument mr. baringer: i wanted to start out by joining what mr. gary said yesterday. we want to thank you very much. we know that this has been a disruption of your normal life. we know it is been a sacrifice and we know it has been challenging, i'm sure, to say the least, to stay engaged during this two -- over two-week process, and to pay attention the way you did. and one of the things that i've been extraordinarily impressed with were your questions. you guys actually asked some better questions than we did. but it shows that you have been paying very close attention. it shows that you have listened to the evidence and have an appreciation for the issues. so i do sincerely want to thank you. you have made true a constitutional guarantee. you have made good the promise to have a fair and impartial jury that will consider the evidence and will render a just and fair verdict. you have done your duty to your country. you should be very proud of that and we thank you for it. this case is about michael johnson. it is about one smoker. and it is about what the evidence will show about the choices that he made and what effect, if any, reynolds' conduct had on those choices and what the result is. that is what we are -- that is what you have been here all of this time to decide about michael johnson. you know, there is an old adage in -- among trial lawyers: if the law is on your side, you pound the law. if the facts are on your side, you pound the facts. if neither are on your side, you pound the table. you heard a lot of table pounding yesterday, and that is because the evidence and the law are going to show that mrs. robinson was not able to meet her burden of proof to show that reynolds' conduct was the legal cause of mr. johnson's death, and that is what i'm going to spend my time taking about. now, in that table pounding yesterday you hear, you would think this case was a referendum on tobacco, on tobacco companies. but that is not what you are here to decide. there may be conduct that you heard about that you do not like, but if that conduct did not have an effect on mr. johnson, it cannot be the basis of your verdict and your decision in this case. it has to be tied to michael johnson. it is their burden to prove that it had an affect on michael johnson, not just that making you angry or making you upset about something like that. that is not what this case is about. now, people like dr. proctor whose book was about the abolition of tobacco and want to see cigarettes and tobacco done away with, they have an absolute right to have that point of view. of course you can do that. but that is not what this trial is to decide. remember that cigarettes are a legal product. and what that means is in 1965 when congress considered the results of the 1964 surgeon general's report, congress considered the fact that the surgeon general had determine that smoking causes lung cancer. the surgeon general determined that it is very difficult for some smokers to quit because of nicotine. those things were not secret from anyone. and congress considered that. and what was congress' decision? to continue to allow the sale and advertising of cigarettes but with the proper warning that congress mandated. and we will talk about and you have seen the warnings that congress decided were appropriate based on the evidence before congress. and why did they do that? because in the united states of america people are given a choice. yes, they have to be informed and that is what congress did through the warnings, but once they are warned, once they understand the risk, it is their right to take that risk if they want to. but every bit as american as the right to make a choice is the responsibility for the consequences of that choice. in 2009, the united states congress considered the whole issue again. and what did they do? they reaffirmed that cigarettes, tobacco would continue to be allowed to be sold in the united states even though congress knew very well about the 480,000 people that they say have smoking-related deaths ever year. congress knew that. but what did they do? they continued to allow it to be sold and they gave the food and drug administration regulatory authority, regulatory authority over the manufacturer, the sale of cigarettes. the fda has the power to ban menthol if it wants to. it has the power to ban the use of ammonia or any other ingredient if it wants to. but that is where the decision lies. and this trial is not about those issues. on the verdict form that you will receive, there will not be a question about whether or not cigarettes are dangerous, whether they are addictive or whether they should continue to be sold. those are not the questions. and we are here to have you answer the questions that are on that verdict form. and this is not a case about reynolds' conduct in general. the evidence has to be tied to michael johnson. and i told you about those 400,000-plus americans that you hear about. but the fact that they are smoking related, they are called smoking-related diseases, does not mean that reynolds' conduct or the conduct of any other tobacco company was the legal cause of those deaths. that is what trials like this are to determine. that is why we are here, and we are here not about the 480,000. we are here about one. we are here about michael johnson. we are not here to relitigate the engle class action, though for two weeks and virtually all of yesterday that is what you saw. a relitigation of those same common issues. that was not the question. the question was: how did they relate to michael johnson? what difference did they make to michael johnson? and you heard virtually nothing about that. and remember, on the findings, this is the instruction that the court read to you. the findings i have described to you do not establish whether michael johnson was a class member, or the degree, if any, to which r.j. reynolds' conduct was the sole or contributing cause of michael johnson's death. you heard all about the findings again yesterday. what did you hear about applying those findings to michael johnson? nothing. remember, the engle findings -- the engle jury, the class action jury heard nothing about michael johnson, almost like you. the engle findings do not establish that he was a member of the class. they do not establish that addiction to nicotine was a legal cause of his death. they do not establish he died because of the dangers of smoking were unknown to him. and the engle findings do not establish that reynolds is at fault in this case. during the course of the trial, you heard about a number of issues that had nothing, frankly, to do with michael johnson. the red herring. i mean, those are things that distract you from the real issues. and i want to get rid of some of those right away. the first is about cigarettes in general. cigarettes are dangerous and addictive by nature. they are not made that way through the manufacturing process. they start out that way. remember, roll-your-own cigarettes, dr. benowitz and dr. proctor both told you roll-your-own cigarettes are just as dangerous and addictive as manufactured cigarettes. if you went out to a tobacco field and you picked the tobacco, if you cured it, if you chopped it up and you put it in paper and smoked it, it could cause lung cancer if you smoked it long enough and it could cause addiction if you smoked it long enough. it does not need to be a manufactured cigarette for those things to happen. it is by nature. there is less nicotine in cigarette tobacco than in natural tobacco. in fact, if you did that roll-your-own tobacco, you would be getting more nicotine than if you smoked a manufactured cigarette. menthol cigarettes, dr. proctor told you menthol cigarettes are not more dangerous or addictive than a nonmenthol cigarette. additive-free cigarettes. you heard a lot about additives. they showed you lists of ingredients. but what was the bottom line? dr. proctor told you, their expert by the way, told you that additive-free cigarettes are not less addictive or dangerous. all the talk about ingredients, but the bottom line from dr. proctor was they are not more addictive. they are not more dangerous. about kool cigarettes in general, think about what dr. benowitz and dr. proctor told you. during the years that mr. johnson smoked them, there was no safer cigarette available anywhere. there was no less addictive cigarette available anywhere. and there was no cigarette easier to quit during the time that he smoked. and remember what -- for all that you heard about ammonia, remember what dr. proctor told you about kool cigarettes? there is no evidence of ammonia in kool cigarettes. so why did they spend so much time talking about it? they did not connect it to michael johnson, and that is what their obligation was. and very important, from dr. proctor, today's manufactured cigarettes are no more addictive than cigarettes in the '20s, '30s, '40s. remember all you heard about the reynolds' documents about nicotine. and they said, well, it was a deep, dark secret. they said they used that in the manufacturing of the cigarettes, implying kool. but dr. proctor told you all that manufacturing, all that research, all of that made no difference. they are no more addictive than they were before all of that took place. they did talk about ph. and they said, well, reynolds did research into manipulating ph and that was a part -- but the part he admitted that they did not tell you on direct was that was a part of an effort to reduce the health risks of smoking. remember the idea tar was where the problem was. carcinogens that you heard so much about are in the tar. and remember what dr. proctor admitted, the research that was going on about ph manipulation, changing the tar to nicotine ratio was so you would deliver the nicotine to the smoker but give them less tar in the process to try and make it less hazardous. but it failed. they could not make one that was consumer satisfying or consumer acceptable, so it never got marketed. they talked about satisfaction a lot. and mr. acosta when he was going through the reynolds documents with dr. proctor would come to a line in it where it said, you know, when -- and he would satisfying, that was a code word. that was a code word for addiction, was not it, and dr. proctor said yes, that was a code word for addiction, satisfying cigarette. the interesting thing is that the surgeon general of the united states used the same terms. and i do not think even they would tell you that the surgeon general was trying to make cigarettes more addictive. it was trying to make them safer. the surgeon general advocated trying to alter the tar/nicotine ratio using ph, whatever they could to have a satisfying cigarette that led to minimal exposure to toxic products. that is the truth about what it was all about. they talked about advertising. advertising was perfectly legal, is perfectly legal. and there is zero evidence that mr. johnson started or continued smoking because of advertising. what evidence did they -- did they bring to you about that? you heard and saw all about advertising yesterday afternoon. how did they tie it to michael johnson? what did you hear? did they have a single witness that took the stand and said advertising had something to do with why mr. johnson smoked? none. they did not even try. all they did was put a bunch of documents in front of you and make insinuations. they included brands that mr. johnson did not even smoke. you saw those, you saw the flinstones and winston. he never smoked winston. and they showed you a lot of ads that ran before mr. johnson was even born. remember the ads from the 1930s on kool cigarettes? what in heaven's name from ads from the 1930s have to do with what mr. johnson did about his choices about smoking? nothing. they have nothing to do with mr. johnson. they talked about youth marketing. and they showed you some documents. they showed you a document from dr. teague, and remember, it was a draft and it was a proposed new brand. ladies and gentlemen, you saw a lot of documents that were drafts, that were proposals, that were ideas. ideas do not influence what mr. johnson did. actions, if anything, might have. but they never told you that those proposals were followed up. they never said that the draft turned into a final version or anything happened to it. but the interesting thing was they read pieces of it to you but they did not read it all to you. they did not tell you that in dr. teague's document he said we should not in any way influence nonsmokers to start smoking. they did another one, they did a diane burrows document. they did not read you that rjr's consistent policy is that smoking is a matter of free and informed adult choice which the company does not seek to influence. they did not read you that part. the other thing they did not tell you is that the entire document was talking about brand switching from 18 to 24-year-olds. if you look at that document when you go back into the jury room, you will see that over 200 times the definition of the smokers they were talking about were 18 to 24-year-olds. now, they did talk about -- they showed you a chart from the back of this document. can i have the elmo for a second? you saw this yesterday from mr. gary. and he said they had information on 12-year-olds. why in the world would they be out collecting that information? the interesting part is that the source of the information, if you can read it, is hew, the united states department of health, education and welfare was the one that was out doing the research. it was not r.j. reynolds that was out studying 12-year-olds. and if you look at the entire document, you will see it is all about brand switching from 18 to 24-year-olds, not how to get 12-year-olds to smoke. this whole issue about what effect did it have on michael johnson? you do not have to guess whether or not advertising had anything to do with why he started to smoke or continued to smoke because mr. johnson told his brother exactly why he started to smoke. he mentioned that he started smoking cigarettes because he saw my father smoking cigarettes. that is why michael johnson started smoking, because he saw his father smoke and it made him want to smoke. it was not because the flinstones were on tv in 1960 when he was a baby. and it was not because joe camel ads ran in 1988 when he was 28 years old. and those are the only examples they gave you. they did not have anything to do with why michael johnson smoked. it was because he wanted to smoke because he saw his father smoke. one other thing. they read to you from the 1967 ftc report and they talk about all the exposure kids got from watching tv and all the ads that were on tv. well, two things happened. number one, congress gave the ftc the power to regulate. it also banned broadcast advertising of cigarette commercials starting in 1971 when michael johnson was 11. then in 1979, the surgeon general said, "as the cigarette industry has asserted, the major action of cigarette advertising now seems to be to shift brand preferences to alter market shares for a particular brand." and that was the analysis of the time when mr. johnson was a teenager. that was the effect advertising was having, not causing people to start smoking, but to alter -- shift the brand. and remember, that is very important when you think about that burrows document where she is talking about exactly the same thing. shifting the market share, not causing kids to start smoking. there was a suggestion yesterday and throughout the trial that in the 1970s when michael johnson was starting to experiment with cigarettes or became a smoker that no one knew, no one knew that smoking could cause lung cancer. they told you that. but the evidence is starting in the 1950s, there was tremendous publicity about whether smoking could cause lung cancer, about whether it was difficult to quit. remember, the surgeon general in 1957 said, "our position is that we have informed the public through an excellent coverage of the press, radio, and tv." dr. heller from the national cancer institute at the same congressional hearing said, "newspapers, radio, tv, and other media have done an excellent job covering this problem and a very objective job. this is an exceedingly valuable way of informing the public." the public was being informed long before michael johnson was even before. in 1968, remember, you saw this before, and dr. proctor agreed. daniel horn who was the federal official whose prime job was to inform the public to make sure the public was informed. what did he say in 1968 when michael johnson was only eight years old? "you can stand on a rooftop and shout smoking is dangerous at the top of your lungs and you would not be telling anyone anything they did not already know." the public had been well-informed by that point. and, remember, the publicity did not stop. and, remember, that millions of people were quitting. smokers began quitting in large numbers during the mid-1950s because of health concerns. prior to '65, 17 million people quit and they continued and accelerated quitting in the 1960s and the 1970s. and dr. proctor says that the 19 -- or the 1960s and '70s are when the important -- what he called the important quitting started. ladies and gentlemen, ask yourself, if no one knew, if no one was informed, why were people by the millions quitting? dr. proctor was very interesting. mr. acosta at one point asked him, he said, "well, nobody was -- nobody was worried about lung cancer, nobody was interested in quitting." and dr. proctor said, yeah, that is right." then, of course, mr. beach asked him, "well, you said that the industry got together at the plaza hotel in 1953 and had to do something. they formed the tobacco industry research committee. if nobody was worried about lung cancer, if nobody was quitting, why would they have met?" and dr. proctor said, "yeah, you are right." people were concerned. people were starting to quit. and that trend started in the '50s and it continued all along until we have reached 60 million people now that have quit smoking. now there are more former smokers in the united states than current smokers because people understand and they have understood for decades. i want to talk to you about, again, this case is about mr. johnson. these are the crucial issues in the case. this is what the case is all about. was he a member of the class? did he have a smoking-related disease, lung cancer caused by smoking? was he addicted? did his addiction cause his death? and did he smoke because he did not know the dangers of smoking because of concealment? they utterly failed to prove any of those elements, and we are going to go through and i'm going to show you why. they completely failed to prove their case. the first part was plaintiff did not prove that mr. johnson died because of the dangers and addictive nature of cigarettes were unknown to him. their whole theory on concealment is he just did not know. he did not know it could be dangerous. he did not know it could be difficult to quit. that is the heart of their concealment claim. but when he was a child, before he ever started experimenting, before he ever thought about it, he was warned by his parents. "when your children were growing up, you told them, including michael, not to smoke? "yes. "you told them it was not good for them, it was not healthy? "yes." mr. johnson, michael johnson's father, told them smoking was not good for them. as a young child, he heard that message. and remember what the evidence was, they would never -- michael and his brothers would never smoke in front of his parents because they had been taught from a very young age that smoking was not healthy and they should not do it. one of the other important parts -- and keep this in mind when we talk about it later -- you heard through dr. giakas, michael johnson's brother john. and what did john say about it? that michael johnson's father told them, "do not pick up the habit, it is hard to quit." it was not a secret that -- to michael johnson that it could be difficult to quit. his own father told him, "do not pick up the habit, it is difficult to quit." then, not only did his parents when he was a child talk to him about it, in 1970 he was only ten years olds. and remember, ladies and gentlemen, the evidence is he had not even experimented with his father's roll-your-own cigarettes yet and the warning from 1970 went on packages of cigarettes. they were on cigarettes long before he even thought about buying them. and in 1985, you know that the warnings changed. and keep this in mind from whenever he started smoking regular cigarettes, manufactured cigarettes, and his brother walter says he thinks it is about the time michael was 18, between that time and 1985, every pack of cigarettes he smoked had that warning. and from 1985 until he died, the cigarettes would have had one of those four warnings. every single pack of cigarettes he ever picked up in his life had a congressionally mandated warning on them. and before he was -- became a regular smoker, michael johnson believed his father's lung cancer was caused by smoking. the evidence is he did not become a regular smoker until around 1977 or '78. walter says 1978. in 1977, michael johnson's father was diagnosed with lung cancer. and every member of the family that you heard from said they all believed it was caused by smoking, most importantly, including michael johnson himself. i want you to think about this in terms of all they said about warnings. what possible message could have been given to michael johnson by r.j. reynolds or anyone else that would have been more powerful than the message that his own father died of lung cancer because of smoking? what could reynolds have ever said? how could they have ever delivered a message that was more powerful than smoking killed your father by causing lung cancer? and it is undisputed that that is what he believed. his mother said that she told him about it and talked to him about it. "you saw what it did to your daddy." his own father said before he died said, "son, you do not need to smoke, look at what it is done to me." his brother walter for years throughout his life kept asking him, "why do you smoke when you saw what happened to our father?" and what was michael's response every time every one of those people asked him about it? it was, "i'm going to smoke until i die. i want to smoke." he understood the risk. he understood the risk in a way no one else could have ever delivered it. he knew it because of his own father. i talked to you about that in opening, and in two and a half weeks, you have never heard a response to that from the plaintiffs. why? there is not one. that is the simple unalterable truth. and as i said, when walter johnson talked to him about his father, he simply told him he liked to smoke. for him, there was nothing better than lighting up a cigarette. confronted with what happened to our father, michael's response: "i'm going to smoke till i die." and what about wanting to quit? his brother described him as, i'd say, he was stubborn about not wanting to stop smoking. and that is critical on this second question. plaintiff did not prove that mr. johnson was addicted and could not quit. number one, it was clear that he did not want to quit. and remember what dr. benowitz told you during that long video, dr. benowitz said if you do not want to quit, you cannot quit. if you do not want to quit, you will not quit. michael johnson could not have been more clear, he was not interested in quitting, he wanted to continue to smoke. and if -- ladies and gentlemen, if there was any doubt in your mind about whether michael johnson could quit smoking -- and remember, the heart of their case is, oh, he could not, he was addicted, he could not quit. and they brought the $40 million man, dr. feingold, in to testify as their addiction expert. and what did their expert tell you? of course michael johnson could have quit smoking. their own expert said he could have quit smoking. they also had to prove to you that mr. johnson died of primary lung cancer caused by smoking. it is one of the elements of the class membership requirement. but they did not prove that either. and here's why. the primary location of mr. johnson's cancer could not be determined, why? because he refused to undergo further testing. his doctor, his oncologist, could never figure out exactly where his cancer started because the test they needed to do to find that out, michael johnson refused to have. and that was his right. it is not a criticism of him saying, no, i do not want the test. but it is an undeniable fact the effect of that decision was you do not have the evidence, just like his doctors did not have the evidence, to decide where did his cancer start. now, you have heard from experts. ours, we brought in three real doctors that actually practice medicine and do not just play doctors in court. and what did they tell you? mr. johnson's cancer was more likely than not metastatic, meaning it started somewhere else and spread. and as for cause, the whole point, ladies and gentlemen, is until you know what kind of cancer it is, you cannot possibly know what caused it. they completely failed to carry their burden of proof on medical causation. the bottom line is they did not prove he died because the information was unknown to him. he did not die because he was addicted and could not quit. and they cannot prove that he died from primary lung cancer because he did not have the test that would have allowed us to finally figure that out. i want you to keep in mind something else that we talked about during opening, and that is that the plaintiff admits that michael johnson's actions related to his effort to quit smoking were a legal cause of his death. given their failure of proof, it is no surprise that they would admit that at least it was partially his fault. but i want you to think about what that really means. he knew before he became a regular smoker that smoking can be deadly and addictive. we know that from his family. we know that from what his mother and father told him and we know that from the effect of his father's lung cancer. he knew that smoking could be dangerous and addictive and he continued to quit. of course they have to admit that. and this is the critical part: mr. johnson could have and should have tried harder to quit smoking. and this is where you have to use your commonsense. why would they admit that he is at fault at all if he could not quit? if it was a completely futile effort, if no matter what he did and what he tried he could not quit, why would they admit fault? it makes no sense. why if he had -- if he did not -- if he did not have the ability to quit soon enough, soon enough to make it unlikely that he would develop lung cancer, why would they ever admit fault? and if he did not know, if he did not know that smoking could cause lung cancer and could be difficult to quit, why would they admit fault? if he did not know, why would they admit fault? but they have. i want to talk about mr. johnson's choices for a minute. right side up would probably make it better. throughout his life he had a lot of choices to make. starting from the very beginning, his choice was do i become a smoker or do i not start smoking to protect my health? his parents -- well, in 1966, there was a surgeon general's warning. he was only six years old, but if he saw it, he had to make a choice. but we know for sure he got warnings from his parents. his mother and father warned him against smoking, and that gave him an opportunity to make a choice: do i become a smoker or do not start? and we know what he did. he started experimenting with his father's roll-your-own cigarettes. he made the choice to become a smoker even though he had been warned not to. he got warnings in school, and we will talk about the textbooks. all of the people that dr. giakas talked about that grew up in the pensacola area said, yes, they did receive education, they heard in school that smoking was dangerous, and michael johnson is no different. so he had -- when he heard that, when he read about that in those books, he had a choice, do i become a smoker or do i not start to protect my health? he chose to experiment and become a smoker. the 1970s surgeon general warning, when he went to decide whether to buy that first pack of cigarettes, he knew about the warning. and when he saw that warning, he had to make a choice, do i ignore the warning and become a smoker and do i heed the warning and protect my health? he chose to start smoking. his father, when his father was diagnosed with lung cancer caused by smoking, michael johnson had to make a choice. do i risk this happening to me? do i risk what is happening to my father happen to me? do i protect my health or do i smoke? he chose to smoke. his father, when his father died he had the same choice again. he not only saw the lung cancer and the suffering his father went through, he saw his father die. and he had to make a choice: do i continue smoking or do i stop so that does not happen to me? he chose to smoke. he did not choose to protect his own health. in 1983, he had a bet with his brother. they are out running on the beach and they made a bet who can quit longest. he had a choice. when that -- when that whole idea came -- was presented by that bet, do i quit or do i continue, he said i'll take the bet, he lasted for a day, day and a half and then he went back to smoking. going back to smoking was a choice. it was a choice between continuing to smoke and risking his health or stopping to protect his health. he chose to continue, not to protect his own health. every time he saw newspaper articles, tv shows, magazines talking about the dangers of smoking, and i showed you that even in the pensacola newspaper it happened throughout his entire life, every time he saw an article like that, he had a choice, do i quit to protect my health or do i continue smoking? and every time he chose to continue smoking. all of his family members, you heard the testimony about his family telling him, "michael, you need to quit." every one of those was a warning. every one was, "michael, you need to protect your health, you have got to stop smoking." every time he chose to continue, every time. he saw public service announcements on tv. he heard about the great american smokeout. his brother said they watched ed asner on the great american smokeout together. he had a choice: do i do what it takes to quit, even if it is difficult, do i do what i need to do to quit to protect my health or do i continue smoking? every time he chose to continue smoking. it was his right. he was allowed to take the risk, but he did take the risk. surgeon general's warnings in 1985 specific, it causes lung cancer. he saw that warning, he had to make a choice. he chose to continue. surgeon general's warning: quitting now greatly reduces your risk. he chose to continue not to reduce his risk. warnings from mrs. robinson and her family. you heard about those. again, every time someone came up to him and said, "michael, you need to quit smoking," it was a warning, it was saying, "protect your health, michael," and every time he chose to continue not to protect his health. all of those choices he made, he rejected concern for his health for the benefits, the enjoyment that he got out of smoking, and that was his right. and none of us are here to second guess that. but what you do need to do is consider that when you decide who was responsible for michael johnson's death: r.j. reynolds or michael johnson. i want to get into class membership. i want to talk about those three things that they have to prove. the final instruction that you are going to get is about the standards for proving that he was a member of the class and there are three things that plaintiff has to prove. michael johnson had lung cancer, meaning he had primary lung cancer caused by smoking. he was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine. and third, that the addiction was a legal cause of his lung cancer and death. and i'm going to go through each one of them. i want -- one thing i wanted you to keep in mind is -- and it could be a little confusing from yesterday because plaintiff bears the burden of proof on all these. mr. chestnut in his comments to you yesterday said, well, reynolds has to prove that the tumors in his chest were not caused by smoking, came from something else. he said that they have to -- mr. chestnut: objection, your honor, that mischaracterizes my closing argument. the court: overruled. mr. baringer: he told you that we have to -- if it is not lung cancer, we have to prove what it is. and, ladies and gentlemen, that is clever but that is not the law. the law is it is their burden of proof. let us talk about medical causation. the first question that you will see on the verdict form is did michael johnson have lung cancer? and again, the question is did he have cancer that started in his lung and was caused by smoking? let us look at the evidence. the plaintiff brought in dr. feingold to talk to you about causation. dr. feingold, the $40 million expert. let us look a little bit about him. number one, there is absolutely no question -- mr. gary: objection, your honor. there is no evidence that dr. feingold was a $40 million expert. the court: this is argument, counsel, you will be able to rebut. mr. baringer: dr. feingold told you during his testimony that over the last 30 years, 31 years, that he has billed out $40 million in fees to be an expert witness. and he made that -- and by the way, fifty percent of that was profit to him. he talked about testifying 15,000 asbestos cases, 250 tobacco cases. he admitted that less than 5 percent of his time is actually spent with patients and 95 percent of his income comes from testifying. the man is the definition of a professional witness. and he is not the kind of doctor that mr. johnson ever saw. he is a pulmonologist. michael johnson never saw a pulmonologist, none of his doctors referred him to a pulmonologist because that was not the specialty that michael johnson needed. now, it is remarkable, i'll have to give him credit, he told you when we talked about are you a radiologist, he said, "well, no, but i read all the -- virtually all the radiology in the hospital. i do it all the time even though i cannot sign a radiology report." i asked him, "well, are you a pathologist?" he said, "well, no, i cannot sign a pathology report, but i read -- i look at cells and i can consult with everybody, i spend all kinds of time reading pathology." i asked him if he was an oncologist, do you treat cancer patients. when someone is diagnosed with cancer, they send them to an oncologist for treatment, not to a pulmonologist. but he said, "oh, no, i can prescribe chemotherapy, i can do all that." i asked him on the addiction side are you a psychiatrist, and believe it or not, he argued with me about whether or not he was a psychiatrist because he treats people with psychiatric disorders. the amazing thing is he does all of that in the 5 percent of his time when he is not off testifying. you have to decide how much weight to give his testimony. but keep this in mind: dr. feingold admitted because dr. boatrite was unsure of mr. johnson's primary, dr. boatrite wanted to do more testing to find out where it started. he wanted an additional biopsy, he wanted more blood work, he wanted more radiology, and dr. feingold agreed that all of those tests were needed to figure out where mr. johnson's cancer started and he agreed that they were never done. even the tests that dr. feingold would have wanted were never done. now, we brought you three doctors in the right disciplines, the disciplines that were involved in this case. dr. cohen, a radiologist, dr. bennett, a pathologist and medical examiner, and dr. harris, an oncologist. these three men all actually practice medicine. these three men actually spend 95 percent or more of their time treating patients or doing their job practicing medicine. i showed you this in opening. this is a timeline of all the issues that you heard about and i'm not going to go back over it. but i want you to keep in mind, this is the chronology. it starts in july 1995 and ends in 1996. and those are all the medical records, that is what we know. i want to go back through some of them, not all. remember that -- in october of 1995, dr. tucker gerhard talked about the july x-ray. and he said, "well, there was cystic changes or there was small blebs. but remember, that has nothing to do with cancer. that was not cancer and they told you that that would not turn into cancer. it was negative for masses in july. now, in october, three months later, all of the sudden when they saw the -- off the ct there were two masses, large masses at the time. now, dr. feingold told you that, well, when this whole issue about whether there was one tumor or two, dr. feingold said, "well, he had the first one, that pancoast tumor, and it just sort of creeped down to the rest of his lung." the problem is the radiology does not support dr. feingold creep-down theory. dr. feingold pretends, really, that there was only one tumor. we never heard him talk about the second tumor. but dr. cohen told you that with the ct scan with those microscopic slices that they can do, if it was actually one tumor that had just -- was in the process of creeping down, the ct scan would have shown that and it did not. there were two separate tumors, and that is what the radiologist who signed the report said. dr. cohen also told you that based on the radiological evidence, the difference from july '95 to october '95 was rapid growth of the two separates tumors is more consistent with metastatic cancer than lung primary. two tumors simultaneously in the same lung is unusual for a lung primary. and keep in mind the radiology was all perfectly consistent with mr. johnson having a germ cell tumor that metastasized. then we talk about pathology. and this was -- this was fascinating because this was a record. remember, dr. feingold said, gee -- on his direct examination, he said, "gee, i just do not have the results of the staining. if we had that, that might say something." he said i never got it. plaintiffs never gave it to him. but remember when i showed it to him on cross, he said, "oh, yeah, i did see that during my deposition." he remembered all the sudden. and then he acted like this is the key to the case, this proves i'm exactly right. remember how excited he got? he would seen that report before. he did not talk about it on direct. if that was the key evidence. if that were the answer to everything, do you really think he would not have remembered seeing it and would not have talked to you about it on direct? it makes zero sense. dr. benefit, the pathologist, he said the characteristics of his lung disease favor metastatic disease for three reasons; his young age, two masses appearing at the same time, and the rapid onset. in other words, going from nothing showing to tumors of that size in just three months. and then dr. boatrite. again, dr. boatrite -- this is in october of 1995. dr. boatrite wants to do compete staging; obtain bone scan, ct of liver, sma 18. those are the things he wanted to do. but the important thing is what did he say about why he wanted to do it? "dr. boatrite, and when you write complete staging in that last record" -- talking about those tests -- "you want to determine the primary site of a person's cancer and determine whether the cancer has spread anywhere, correct? "yes, sir." that is what dr. boatrite was trying to do. he asked for those -- he wanted to do those tests because he wanted to know where mr. johnson's lung cancer or cancer started. he did not know at that point it was primary lung cancer. it was a possibility but he wanted more tests to find out. and those tests were never ever done. then in his next record, this is november of '95, after we saw he wanted to do the complete staging which was not done. and dr. boatrite says, "we are not certain of his primary." and remember, folks, he knew -- dr. boatrite knew that michael johnson was a smoker. he knew that he had a 20-pack-year history at that point, but he still did not know where the primary was. the fact that he was a smoker did not answer that question to dr. boatrite. and dr. boatrite -- remember, this is incredibly important. in november of 1995, he says he wants to do the staging, he wants to do the test because he suspects that mr. johnson might have a very treatable and potentially curable tumor. and what was he worried about? what did not he want to miss? his own testimony: "what potentially curable tumor types were you referring to? "a physician would not want to miss a germ cell tumor." dr. boatrite thought there was a possibility that mr. johnson's cancer could be cured because the evidence to that point was all consistent with germ cell. but mr. johnson did not want the test to find out and he did not want treatment. and that was his right and we are not criticizing that. but it does have an effect on your job here because we do not have the evidence, no one has the evidence that would answer the question. let us talk about germ cell just for a minute. germ cells, remember, they can rise in the testes, the retroperitoneum and the mediastinum. three different areas of the body. they are 95 percent curable. even if they metastasize and spread, they are not caused by smoking. they are most common in men in their 20s and 30s, and they can metastasize to the lung. dr. bennett also told you, and dr. harris, the oncologist, said that germ cell tumors can be very small, much smaller than the metastasis and they can in patients not produce symptoms. the question is not whether they always produce symptoms or never produce symptoms, they do sometimes, sometimes they do not. that is the point about the germ cell medley. let us look at the next issue because dr. feingold told you, he said testicular cancer is a white man's disease, it is virtually unheard of in african americans. but that is not true. we showed you the incidents of testicular cancer -- and this is in black males. i mean, folks, if dr. feingold was right, this chart would not exist. and it shows you that the peak incidents of testicular cancer in african american men is in the 35 to 39 age group. the peek incidents for lung cancer is way down here, 65, 70. only 0.3 percent in michael johnson's age group. let us talk about the notion of the fact that dr. boatrite suggested some chemotherapy, did that mean that that reflects that dr. boatrite had decided it was a lung primary. but dr. boatrite answered that question: the taxol-based chemotherapy that he wanted mr. johnson to have which he refused could be used for any type of epithelial carcinoma. it was not lung cancer specific. the fact that dr. boatrite considered using taxol does not prove that dr. boatrite thought it was a lung primary. then the april 29, 1996, followup of unknown primary epithelial carcinoma. now, what was that? why does it say that? dr. boatrite explained that that was the top of his differential list. what is a differential diagnosis? a differential diagnosis is a list of possibilities. if you have made a definitive diagnosis, it is not differential anymore. you have picked it. it is a list of possibilities. and at that point, unknown primary was at the top. let us see what dr. harris told you about it. again, he says, "all it means are possibilities and that at that moment in april of 1996, unknown primary was on the top of dr. boatrite's list." and remember, it does not mean that even the list, the whatever is at the top of the list is more than fifty percent likely. it does not mean it is that high. you can have a list where you think the odds of best for the top of your differential is thirty percent. it does not prove that it was over fifty percent or that it was more likely than not. let us talk the very last visit. september 4th, 1996. return for followup of unknown primary, most likely lung. the question was: why did dr. boatrite -- why did his differential apparently change from april until september from unknown primary, which he still says, but most likely lung? because the only thing that could have changed it medically were additional tests, additional information. and, ladies and gentlemen, there were none. there were no more tests. there was no more information. it was still uncertain at that point. the issue of whether there was a tumor ever found outside the lung, dr. cohen said, primary tumors can be smaller especially in those areas. dr. harris said, well, you can have tumors in the abdomen but you would not be able to find them on physical examination. dr. bennett, primary tumors can be silent and without symptoms. and remember, the biggest reason no tumor was found outside the lungs is because mr. johnson would not let him do tests to find out. he never had a ct of his abdomen. he never had another biopsy. he did not have -- the reason you could not know for sure whether there was a tumor outside his lung, because the tests to find out were not done. not because there was no tumor outside the lung, they just never had a chance to look. then the issue about the pancoast tumor. remember, even dr. feingold admits pancoast tumor tells you where it is and what the symptoms are. it does not tell you that it is a primary. dr. feingold admitted that you can have a metastasis to the lung that becomes a pancoast tumor. the issue is whether it could possibly be a germ cell. and dr. harris and dr. bennett told you, yes, it can. dr. feingold said, well, i have never seen a case. well, dr. feingold is not an oncologist, dr. harris is. and he said, yes, it is possible. over on the medical issue. the best you can tell with the evidence available is that it is an unknown primary. now, it is more likely that it was metastatic and our doctors told you why. two masses appearing at the same time in the lung is more likely metastatic than primary. the aggressive growth of the tumors is consistent with metastatic. mr. johnson's young age, being very rare to have lung cancer in a 30 to 35-year-old man indicates metastatic. lung is the most commonplace in the body for metastatic tumors to develop. the primary location cannot be determined to a reasonable degree of probably and there are a host of possible tumors that could have metastasized to his lung that were never conclusively ruled out. ladies and gentlemen, we are left with a situation where the answer to whether or not he had primary lung cancer cannot be answered. it cannot be answered because mr. johnson refused the test that would have answered the question. that is not good enough for plaintiffs to carry their burden of proof. and so what i -- i am going to urge you to -- can i have the elmo? the first question: did michael johnson have lung cancer? the answer is no. they did not prove that he did. your honor, i do not know when you want to -- the court: appropriate break time? mr. baringer: yeah. the court: take a ten-minute break. (the jury withdrew from the courtroom and the following further proceedings were held:) (recess.) the bailiff: remain seated. circuit court is reconvened. the court: ready to resume? mr. baringer: yes. the court: call the jurors when they are ready, please. (the jury resumed its seat in the jury box and the following further proceedings were held:) the bailiff: jurors have been seated, your honor. the court: counsel, please continue. mr. baringer: thank you, your honor. where we left off we had just talked about medical causation, the first requirements for class membership, and i want to pick up now with the second requirement of class membership, the second question that will be on the verdict form, and that was, was michael johnson addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine? one of the things about this is that the court is not going to define what addiction means. there is no legal definition to apply here. so you are going to have to decide based on the evidence what you think it means and how to apply that. now, you heard two totally different approaches during the course of the trial. dr. feingold came in and -- who is not actually a psychiatrist. he said -- part of what he says was, well, michael only made one quit attempt on a bet in 1983 so he could not really address whether he was motivated or not, so he ignored that. but he told you his standard. he said anyone who smokes at least one pack a day is addicted. and that is not very helpful because that would mean every regular smoker in the united states is addicted and that does not seem to make a great deal of sense for the addiction idea and that does not make sense. now, dr. feingold applied the fagerstrom test and he admitted that he problems doing it reliably. the most important thing to remember about the fagerstrom test is -- remember dr. benowitz, and they talked about dr. benowitz who is the -- he was the senior scientific editor of the 1988 surgeon general's report. and in the testimony that you saw, dr. benowitz was asked about the fagerstrom test. and the question was: "is that test typically used to determine whether a patient is addicted or not? "answer: no. it is usually used to assess the severity of the addiction." so dr. benowitz, the senior editor for the '88 surgeon general's report on addiction is telling you that the test that dr. feingold used is not used to determine whether someone is addicted, it is to determine how addicted they are. it presumes that they are. but nonetheless, let us talk for a few minutes about how dr. feingold applied the fagerstrom test. remember, he said, "i had trouble coming up with a reliable diagnosis because the lack of information." one of the reasons there was a lack of information is the plaintiffs only gave him three of the 19 depositions to review, but he did the best with what he had. and remember how he scored it. he said, "i'll give him two points for smoking within six to 30 minutes of getting up in the morning." but, remember, the testimony from mrs. robinson was anything but clear about that. she said, "well, i did not know whether he showered first and then took and then smoked." but she said, "really, it was when he had his first cup of coffee. "how long was it before he had his first cup of coffee? "i do not know." and then she said -- and a lot of times remember she said what a fan he was of krispy kreme? he would not even have his first cup of coffee. he would get ready to go, he would go to krispy kreme and he would have his coffee and his cigarette. the point is not the mathematical precision. the point is that dr. feingold took very, very vague testimony and decided he could apply it. if it was -- if it was just a few minutes different than what ms. robinson -- the way her testimony was interpreted, he would have only got one point instead of two. the second one was he gave him three points for smoking more than 30 cigarettes, 31 or more per day. you saw through dr. giakas that there were a long list of people that gave their estimates from their knowledge of mr. johnson about how much he smoked today. mrs. robinson and his brother fitzgerald were the only ones that said on a daily basis they thought he smoked more than 31 cigarettes. the whole list of other people -- his brother mark who worked with him every day for that whole period in the '80s and then into the early '90s said he never smoked more than 15. the point is the evidence, if you look at that chart, if you remember dr. giakas, the overall -- the chart does not suggest that he was smoking more than 31 cigarettes a day. even mr. johnson himself when he told his doctor how much he had smoked, he said one pack per day for 20 years. and i realize that is an average, but that is what you ought to look at what you are looking at how the fagerstrom is applied. it is not a fixed moment in time you are being asked. they want you to conclude he was addicted that entire time. so then take mr. johnson's estimate, he thought he smoked one pack a day. dr. feingold scoring would have been wrong if that was true. then the best: he gave him a point for smoking while he was sick in bed. the only problem was he admitted -- dr. feingold admitted mr. johnson was never sick in bed. he was never unable to get up and go around and do normal things like ride bicycles and things, of course he was sick. but the point was dr. feingold ignored what the test asked, made up his own criteria and said, well, he had lung cancer so that is the same thing. no, it is not the same thing. the point is if someone is so sick they cannot even get out of bed, are they still smoking? not if they are walking around and doing fine even if they have a serious disease. if he would have scored it the way the evidence suggests, it would have been a three. and remember, dr. feingold told you his test, if the answer would have been three instead of six, the test would have indicated he was probably not addicted. consider how he scored it, why he scored it the way, and even his own admission on what that means. then you heard from dr. giakas. dr. giakas is a psychiatrist. dr. giakas treats people for addictions. that is what he does every day, not in the 5 percent of his time that -- you know, like dr. feingold, the 5 percent where he is not being a professional witness. dr. giakas does it every day. dr. giakas went through the criteria from dsm v which he says is the standard. that is what psychiatrists who treat addiction use. and i'm not going to go through all of these again. you saw dr. giakas go through and you understood his reason why. the point was of the specific criteria listed in the dsm v, mr. johnson met one of them. but that is not even really the most important. the most important part of dsm is dsm asks do you have a clinically significant impairment? in other words, is the use of the drug, in this case nicotine, does it cause problems in your life? is it so -- are you so overwhelmed by it that it causes problems with your family life, with work, those sorts of things? that is -- according to dr. giakas, that is the sign that someone has an addiction problem. they have a clinically significant impairment. did mr. johnson have it? no. what was his reaction? he enjoyed it. was he interested in quitting? no. did he make any serious efforts to quit? no. did it cause him distress or problems in his social, his family, his work life? the answer was no. and remember, all of the people that testified that the reason mr. johnson smoked was because he enjoyed it. keep in mind, first and foremost, mr. johnson, michael johnson said that was the reason he smoked, it was because he enjoyed it, not because he was compelled. but then think about it in terms of the profile that dr. giakas painted for you. there are signs of impairment. there are signs of distress that you can see in smokers that are addicted. desperately want to quit, an addicted smoker desperately wants to quit. michael johnson: "i'm going to smoke until i die." did he regret smoking? no. was he influenced by others? it was his choice and his decision. an addicted smoker hates the fact that they smoke. michael johnson enjoyed it. he said there was nothing better than lighting up. complaints about smoking? michael johnson never complained about his smoking. was he tortured? remember, nothing better. was he in control or not in control? he -- he could have made restrictions. he would respect people saying, "do not smoke in the car with me, do not smoke in my house, do not smoke in a restaurant, do not smoke when you are holding kids." he was not so out of control that he violated those kinds of normal limits and restrictions. he was in control. did he smoke against his will? of course not. he told people over and over, he told his brother, "i do not want to quit. i want to smoke." did he make repeated serious attempts? some people, you heard, will try 5, 10, 15, 20 times before they finally quit. but they are determined to do it and they make those attempts. did mr. johnson? we know that out running on a beach once he made a bet and he quit for a day -- or a day and a half. no other evidence that he ever quit another day in those 20 years, even one day in his life did he quit. did he seek assistance? never sought assistance. he never went and he never went to anyone. he never threw out ashtrays. all those things were if you want help to get quit. did he want to quit enough to go to someone and say, "hey, help me out here"? never, never. you have to decide whether mr. johnson meets the profile of an addicted smoker who had a clinically -- a clinical impairment or not. you can balance the fagerstrom that dr. feingold used that is not intended for that purpose or you can use the gold standard, the dsm, which psychiatrists who treat addicts all the time use. i think the fair result -- can i have the elmo, please? the fair report, question number 2, was michael johnson addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine? the fair answer was no, they did not prove that he was. let us talk about the third element of class membership. the third question is was such an addiction -- and this presumes you have decided he was addicted, otherwise you mark no on the form and you are done, the case is over. so this question presumes, not suggests, but presumes that you said yes. so was such an addiction a legal cause of michael johnson's lung cancer and death? and, ladies and gentlemen, keep in mind, these are two completely different questions. it is not asking again was he addicted. as i said, this assumes that you decided he was. so it is a totally different question. was it the legal cause of his death? what does legal cause mean? legal cause means but for that addiction, the death would not have occurred. remember in opening i showed you the dominoes and i said if you take out the addiction, it all stops, he does not continue smoking until he dies. so if you take away the addiction, does it stop? that is the key question here. because if you think about it and if it was not addiction that made him smoke, if it was the fact that he wanted to and he enjoyed it, the addiction could not be the legal cause because you can take away the addiction and he would still smoke because he wanted to because he enjoyed it. let us talk about a framework for looking at this. was mr. johnson so overwhelmingly controlled by addiction to nicotine that he was unable to quit and prevent his death? or did he have the ability to quit and prevent his own death? that is really the essence of what this question about addiction causation really means. and the evidence is pretty obvious. first of all, keep in mind, again, and this is where it is absolutely relevant, plaintiff admits that mr. johnson's actions related to his efforts to quit smoking were a legal cause of his death. ladies and gentlemen, this is the heart of addiction causation. they admit that he should have and could have tried harder and quit. and remember, keep in mind, the mission means that he must have been able or there is no reason to admit anything, that he did have the ability to quit in time to prevent his death. that is what they have admitted. and why? "he simply told me he liked to smoke, there was nothing better than lighting up a cigarette." ladies and gentlemen, when you think about why he did what he did, this tells you what it meant to him. there was nothing better for him than lighting up a cigarette. he did not want to quit. he did not care about the risk he was taking. that is what it meant to him. and as i said, his brother, who talked about smoking for years with michael was -- he was stubborn, he did not want to stop smoking. and walter was not the only one. the other family members all say basically the same thing; james fitzgerald, angie brenson, joyce butler, even mrs. robinson said that he was not interested. he was not interested in quitting. sure, there were times. his mother, for example, said, "every time i told him, 'you saw what it did to your daddy, why do not you stop smoking?' he said, 'mom, i'm trying.'" well, of course he was going to say that. was he going to defy his mother? he knew his mother did not want him smoking so his answer and his excuse was i'm trying, but then his actions did not back that up. and remember, it could not be more clear. he was not interested in quitting. when faced with the choice do you want to die like your father, take a chance of dying like your father, his answer was, "i'm going to smoke until i die." when his uncle winston quit smoking and they were talking about it with michael and walter were talking about it and he said, "why do not you stop too like the uncle did?" and michael's line was, "i'm not going to stop smoking until i'm dead." he was not interested in quitting. and then the actions. even if he said, "momma, i'm trying to quit," or he told cynthia, "i'm trying to quit," the words do not match the actions. he did not throw away his ashtrays. he did not set a quit date. he did not see a doctor. he never expressed any interest in a smoking cessation program. he never asked anyone for help. he never asked his family members who quit how they did it. he never tried smoking cessation aids. remember, mrs. robinson said they never even talked about or considered giving him nicotine gum or anything. then he never asked -- he ignored the loved ones that encouraged him to quit. his bottom line on why do not you do something to try and quit, his answer was, "everybody has got a bad habit, i guess this one is mine." he was not interested. he did not do anything that would have showed he was sincere about wanting to quit. and remember, we talked about dr. benowitz. sometimes people say they want to quit but do not mean it. if someone does not want to quit, they are not going to quit. the two biggest factors in success in quitting; motivation, perseverance. mr. johnson had neither. he was not motivated. he did not want to, and he certainly did not try repeatedly. then there is mark who you saw testify here, mr. johnson, his twin brother. did michael try to stop smoking? only one time in 1983 when they were jogging on the beach. only one time in michael's life did he know of him to try to quit smoking. and it was not because he wanted to protect his health. ladies and gentlemen, he wanted to, to win a bet with his twin brother. the bet was who can quit longest, not who is going to quit to protect their life. and he lost the bet and he -- and mark never saw him try again. and remember, you heard this testimony about verdell salter, and the question was did he -- she said she thought she saw him chewing nicotine gum and he tried three or four times. number one, as dr. giakas told you, nicotine gum was not available back in the early '80s when she said. it would have been impossible. there was no nicotine gum to get. the second thing was mark johnson, his twin brother, the entire time from 1981 to 1987 when mr. johnson was with verdell salter, mark johnson worked with him every day. verdell said he is trying to quit. she does not go to work with him. mark was there every day. he said the only time in his life he ever saw him try to quit was when they were jogging in 1983. michael johnson was not chewing nicotine gum. michael johnson was not trying to quit during that period of time. then there is all the people -- all of these people that you saw on here said they were not aware of him trying to quit. they never saw him put his cigarettes down. they never saw him go 24 hours without smoking. all of those people. then there was mrs. robinson. mrs. robinson said, well, there was this episode with gum and candy. she said he chewed spearmint gum or green gum, doublemint gum, and he ate cinnamon candy. he never said he was doing so in an effort to cut back. she admitted that. she could not remember when he did it or for how long. she did not -- she did recall that he never stopped smoking while he was doing it. and as i said, she never saw him quit for a day. he may have been chewing gum. he may have been eating candy. but he never told anyone he was even trying to cut down, let alone quit, and he never put his cigarettes down while he was doing that to see if he could. never. so the question is: did he want to quit? unequivocally the answer is no. he did not express an interest. he was stubborn about not wanting to. he did not want to. if he could not quit, that is why he could not quit, because he did not want to. the next question is: was he able to quit? and the answer to that is absolutely. all of the experts that testified in this case said he was able to quit, either because everyone can quit, even though for some it is very difficult. some people may need assistance. some people may need to try multiple times. some people may need the support of others to help them. but if they are willing to accept the help, if they are willing to commit to it, they are able to do it. and dr. benowitz, dr. feingold, dr. giakas all said there is not an addiction that cannot be overcome. it is simply untrue that someone cannot stop. they may need help and it may be difficult, but it can be done. now, this issue of choice. the plaintiffs a number of times have read an old document and it was in the '60s, i think, by some lawyer who said, "geez, we cannot continue to defend smoking as a free choice if the person was addicted." and that is what the document said. but just because it was written in a company document does not make it true. remember in opening i said there were documents that were written that were wrong, that were silly, that were stupid. this one was wrong. there is a free choice. you do not have to take my word for it, it is very simple. dr. feingold said of course smokers have a choice. dr. benowitz said of course smokers have a choice. they told you that not only do they have a choice, but even addicted smokers can make that choice and they can successfully quit. the idea that there is no choice is utter nonsense. how did those 60 million people who quit, ninety percent of which were supposedly addicted, how did they do it if they did not have a choice? somebody wave a wand and transform their mind and suddenly they were not addicted and they stopped? no. they made a choice. they had the ability to do it and they did. millions of heavy smokers -- dr. benowitz said millions of heavy smokers quit smoking from the '50s up into the '90s. ninety percent of them without any assistance, 5,000 people a day quit smoking, more than half of everyone that has ever smoked in the united states have quit. 60 million people have quit. they had to have had a choice or that -- none of that that is on that chart could possibly be true. then we heard a lot about brain changes and receptors. dr. benowitz: nicotine addiction does not permanently change the brain receptors, they go back to normal. does not interfere with the smoker's ability to understand the dangers of smoking. it does not make them -- they talk about rationalization or denial, but it does not mean they do not understand the dangers. it does not interfere with their ability to make an informed choice to quit or continue smoking. and it does not prevent smokers from quitting permanently. and that is the scientific editor of the '88 surgeon general's report. that is the expert that they brought here by videotape and had you watch for six hours. that is what he says. then, of course, the ultimate. this case is about michael johnson. it is not about everybody else. but, dr. feingold, his answer when i asked him in cross-examination in front of you could michael johnson have quit, he said of course. michael johnson, if they tell you michael johnson could not quit, think about what their own expert told you. their expert told you of course he could quit. then let us talk about dr. feingold, he gave you a model. and he said this is how addiction causes disease, and he said this is exactly what happened with michael johnson. and he says, well, you are addicted so you smoke and then, remember, you are exposed to all those chemicals over and over and over, and he said that is why addiction causes disease. and he said addiction -- what he said about addiction was addiction means the smoker is likely to smoke the next cigarette, the next cigarette, the next cigarette, and it just keeps rolling, just continues. but there is a problem with that, a big problem with that theory. and that is that presumes that this piece cannot be changed. that presumes that once you start and once you are addicted, you are powerless to stop the train from rolling. but it is not true. and dr. feingold admitted to you it is not true. remember, i asked him, i said, well, the 60 million people that quit were able to break the link, they were able to stop it. and i said is not it true that for those 60 million people, the day before they stopped, you would have said they are likely to continue smoking forever, and he said yes. and i said in those 60 million cases you would have been wrong, would not you? and his answer had to be yes, because that is what happened. it is not an unbreakable chain. it is not the truth that if you are addicted you will inevitably smoke until you develop a disease. that is a lie. smokers have the choice and they have the ability to stop that process. michael johnson, dr. feingold told you michael johnson had the ability to stop. he had the ability to break the chain. but he did not want to. what happens if you do break the chain? quitting smoking reduces the risks compared to if you continue. and remember, this is absolutely critical: no measurable risk of lung cancer until you have a ten-pack-year history. the statistics, the signs says that it takes time. it is not a situation where you smoke one cigarette and you suddenly have an increased risk for developing lung cancer. and dr. feingold admitted that what medical science so far has determined is until you get a ten pack-year history you have not got a measurable increase in risk. and what does that mean when you flip it around? it means that if you stop before you accumulate a ten-year-pack history, you are more likely than not, not going to develop lung cancer because your risk is basically the same as a nonsmoker. now, how does that apply in this case? i asked dr. feingold specifically, if mr. johnson had quit before reaching the ten-pack-year threshold, he more than likely would not have died of lung cancer in 1966, and i asked him specifically about 1977 when his father was diagnosed. and dr. feingold said that is right, if he had quit then, he more likely than not would not have died in 1996 of lung cancer. and remember, there is a question about where does the ten year start. dr. feingold admitted he did not know when michael johnson became a regular smoker. we know this whole thing about smoking at 13 and 14, ladies and gentlemen, what they are talking about is he was stealing some roll-your-own tobacco from his father and smoking occasionally. i doubt seriously he was stealing 20 cigarettes a day worth of roll-your-own from his father. it takes time. he experimented when he was 13 or 14. from walter's testimony we know that the first time he saw him with a manufactured cigarette, the first time that walter thinks he was a regular daily smoker was when he was 18. if you take michael johnson's own testimony that in 1995 he had a 20-pack-year history, it would mean that he -- that he is starting the clock around 1970, somewhere in that vicinity. but the point is this: in 1977, he had not reached ten pack years. in 1979, he had not reached ten pack years. in 1985, it is questionable. somewhere between '85 and '88, he would have reached the ten-year threshold. and i am not going to stand here and tell you that if he would have quit smoking after that, it would have made any difference. we do not know, but scientifically based on the evidence, it is unlikely that it would have made a difference, but it would have made all the difference in the world if he had quit before that. he had within his own hands the power to prevent his own death. and remember what we saw about all those choices, the choice between health and the choice between smoking, he made that choice. and when he made that choice to continue smoking, he was taking away -- he was taking a risk that exactly what did happen would happen. and he did it willingly all along the way. 60 million people quit. were the cigarettes they smoked -- were the cigarettes mr. johnson smoked more addictive than the ones they smoked? of course not. they are all addictive. was mr. johnson's brain affected differently than smokers who quit? no. and remember, this whole thing about whether he started at 13 or 14 and his brain was young, dr. feingold admitted that virtually he said virtually everyone starts around 14 or 15. so all the studies about what the effects are, every one of those people or the vast majority would have started young. mr. johnson's age did not distinguish him from anybody else that was able to successfully quit. did he smoke more than smokers who quit? of course not. they talked about, dr. benowitz said, heavy smokers, two, three packs a day, four packs a day. did mr. johnson smoke longer? no, he smoked 20 years. there are people who quit far later than that. did he try to quit unsuccessfully more than the people who did quit? he tried once and it was not a real attempt. did he choose to continue smoking because he liked it and he did not want to quit? yes. that is the one thing that distinguishes mr. johnson from the 60 million people who quit successfully. can i have the elmo? ladies and gentlemen, the evidence is overwhelming: michael johnson did not want to quit. addiction did not prevent him from quitting. all of the experts said he had a choice. all of the experts said that he had the ability to quit. all of -- or dr. feingold admitted that if he had basically by 1985, he probably would not have died of lung cancer. addiction to nicotine was not the legal cause of his death. his choice to continue smoking when he had the ability to prevent it was the sole legal cause of his death. the answer to question number 3 is no. i want to turn -- we have talked about all three elements of class membership. you only go on with the verdict form if you have answered yes to all three. and i do not think the evidence supports that, but obviously we have to continue through and talk about the rest. the next question you will see on the verdict form is state the percentage of fault, if any, that was a legal cause of michael johnson's death that you charge to michael johnson or r.j. reynolds tobacco company. this is where you apportion fault. and keep in mind, it is the apportionment when we start this whole discussion, all one hundred percent of the fault starts out with michael johnson. why? because the plaintiffs have the burden of proof. and until they satisfy the burden of proof that something reynolds did was a legal cause of his death, one hundred percent of the fault belongs to mr. johnson. let us talk about what the evidence was very briefly. mr. johnson ignored warnings from his parents, ignored warnings he received in school. he ignored the 1970 surgeon general's warning. he did not quit when his father died of -- was diagnosed or died of lung cancer. he ignored warning from his own family. he ignored the 1985 warnings. he ignored warnings from the media and the public health community. he ignored warnings from mrs. robinson family. he was stubborn about not wanting to quit. he never used smoking cessation aids. he never sought information or assistance on quitting. he never made a serious effort to quit. he chose not to quit when other family members died from smoking-related diseases. he was not willing to give up the enjoyment he received to protect his health. and the plaintiff admits that he was at least a partially -- partial cause of his death, and that is absolutely critical. they admit that it was because he did not try long enough and hard enough and did not prevent his death when he had the ability to do that. overwhelmingly, the evidence points to the reason that mr. johnson ultimately died was because he did not take the action that he could have taken to protect his own health. he accepted that risk. and remember what he said: "everybody has got a bad habit, i guess it is mine." and what did mrs. robinson tell you? it was his decision whether or not to continue smoking. what else did she say? after he -- after he was diagnosed with cancer, he never blamed anyone, anyone else. he did not ask to file this lawsuit because he thought it was not his fault. and i want you to remember what dr. benowitz said. dr. benowitz, the addiction expert, said smoking cigarettes does not cause a smoker to lose the ability to be responsible for their own actions. remember that. dr. benowitz, he says -- how could you hold a smoker responsible for their choices if they could not do anything about it? if the smoker did not have the ability to stop, why would dr. benowitz hold them responsible? makes absolutely no sense. but dr. benowitz, the expert knows that they are still responsible because they still understand and they still have the ability and they are still the ones responsible for making the decision and doing whatever it takes to follow up on it no matter what kind of help they need. it is their responsibility. no one else's. as i said, the only way you shift any of the fault to r.j. reynolds is if you decide that they did something wrong that was a legal cause of his death. let me show this instruction. it is important that you understand how this is going to be handled. the verdict form and the instructions explain. if you -- whatever percentage of fault that you assign to mr. johnson will work to reduce the damages that you award by whatever percentage. and the court said -- the court will do it. the court will reduce the damages on the nonintentional claims. you do not have to worry about that. but it does make a difference in what you think about when you are doing this allocation. you cannot allocate fault to reynolds based on plaintiff's concealment claims. those are the intentional claims. they say the -- the concealment was intentional. if you find against reynolds, and i'm certainly not suggesting you should, but if you were to find against reynolds on the concealment claim, the amount of damages will not be reduced. your apportionment of fault here on comparative fault will not reduce those damages. and it is important that you understand that distinction so you are not confused about what is going do happen. if you find against reynolds, if you find that mr. johnson was a member of the class, your allocation of fault will reduce your damages unless you say yes on concealment, then there will be no reduction. so i'm not going to suggest, obviously, a percentage. obviously, it is your sound judgment. but, ladies and gentlemen, the evidence is overwhelming that it was michael johnson's decisions about whether or not to smoke that were the legal cause of his death and he -- the allocation of fault should reflect that simple truth. let me turn to the question of concealment. verdict forms -- the question 7 and 8 -- and if you will forgive me, i'm going to skip over the damages for a little while, we will come back to it. i'm just going to go to the concealment question. the question 7 is: was the concealment a legal cause? question 8 is, essentially: was the agreement to conceal the legal cause? for all intents and purposes, i'm treating them as exactly the same thing because the heart of the question is did mr. johnson die because of information was unknown to him? i do want to talk about what "but for" means. legal cause. this is the explanation you are going to get about what does this legal cause thing mean. the emphasis is on but for the concealment, the loss would not have occurred. in other words, if it had not been for the fact that information was concealed, mr. johnson would have stopped smoking or would never have started smoking and would not have died of lung cancer. that is what it all boils down to. and remember, the idea is if you take away the concealment, and in this case, that means give him whatever information they say was concealed, would it have made a difference? pick any document they want to talk about, the question is this: if you would have taken that document, put it in an envelope and mailed it to michael johnson, would it have made him quit? would any of the information they said was concealed, would any of it have made him quit? and i'm going to suggest to you that the answer is overwhelmingly no. if he did not quit when he thought it killed his father, if he did not quit when he thought if he smoked he took the same risk, is there anything r.j. reynolds could have sent him in the mail or given to him or provided some other way that would have made a difference? i cannot think of a reason that that would make any sense. let us talk about how -- what they had to prove. they talked a lot about things that were not disclosed. what they have to do, as i just talked about, is they have to link that up to his death. it is not enough just to say, well, they did not publish this internal research on nicotine. the question is did the fact that they did not -- did not publish that internal research on nicotine -- if there was any, it is just an example -- would it have made a difference? it is not just that it was not -- whatever it was was not published, it is would it have made a difference? that is the link they have to establish. they cannot just throw things up against the wall and hope that you will speculate and guess about whether it would have made a difference. that is their responsibility to prove to you it would have made a difference. it is not my responsibility to prove it would not have. let us talk about the first part. the dangers and addictiveness of cigarettes were warned about long before mr. johnson was born. remember, the concealment claim is that information about the dangers of smoking and the addictive nature of nicotine were concealed. well, ladies and gentlemen, the fact that smoking could cause lung cancer and the fact that it could be difficult to quit were not a secret long, long, long before michael johnson was born, let alone started smoking. remember, i told you, we did not go all the way back to the '50s -- '40s and '50s about information but we said just think about it in the context. soon after mr. johnson was born, when he was four years old, the surgeon general's report was released. and i'm not telling you that he read the newspaper when he was four, but i'm telling you that the information was out there and that the population in general was exposed to it. it was a fact that was widely recognized. it got massive publicity. it was the biggest story of 1964, and some say the biggest health story of the entire 20th century. it was not a secret that nobody knew about it. dr. benowitz and dr. proctor said on the whole idea of whether or not information had been available. smoking is dangerous and shortens life, hundreds of years. very hard to quit was known for over 100 years. the fact that nicotine was the drug was known for more than a hundred years. and it was reflected that the people knew that too. it was not just scientists. terms "addicted to smoking, coffin nails, cancer sticks," they became slang. what does slang mean? slang means it is so well known when you use a term, everybody knows what you are talking about. there is no slang about things that are secret. it is slang about things that are well known. and both of those facts were very well known. then, of course, the 1970 warning itself: "cigarette smoking is dangerous to your health." and the important thing for you to remember here is michael johnson talked to his brother about that very warning. and what did he say? "that is why i asked him about the cancer sticks. why are you still smoking those cancer sticks?" and he was doing it in reference to the '70 warning. and what did michael say? "well, that is the way i'm going." that was his reaction. the warning was there, that was his reaction to it. i want you to remember this whole question about his father. it was not just his brother walter who talked about it. before michael's father died, before he died he said to his son, he said to michael, "you do not need to smoke, see what it is done to him." his own father said that to him before he died in 1979. his mother said, "you see what cigarettes have done to your daddy?" he responded yes. he knew what cigarettes had done to his father. his mother and his father both talked to him about it specifically. he knew that cigarettes were dangerous. he knew from his father who said that do not pick up the habit, they are hard to quit, he knew they were addictive. the 1985 warnings, walter talked to michael about the '85 warnings, the specific one on lung cancer. so he asked him about -- including the one that says causes lung cancer. "i used to ask him why do you smoke those things? he said he did not want to stop and he was going to continue smoking." why did not he heed the 1985 warning? was it because he did not know that smoking could cause cancer or be hard to quit? no. he did not quit when he saw that warning because he did not care. he wanted to smoke. he ignored the warning. cancer sticks, remember, all -- remember what we talked about slang, things become well known. they were talking about cancer sticks. cancer sticks were -- and michael did not say what is a cancer stick? he knew very well what it was. he was well aware of the link between smoking and cancer. he just said, "i do not want to quit." i want to talk to you about a few specific things that the plaintiffs talked about in concealment. one was this whole idea of the role of nicotine. and this is about the deep dark secrets of nicotine research that supposedly went on at reynolds that no one knew about. mr. acosta went through a bunch of documents, well, they were researching the role of nicotine, they knew it was a drug, they knew it had pharmacological problems -- or powers, they knew that smokers found it difficult to quit, all this internal research. and mr. acosta asked him sort of, "well, was not all this stuff known internally at reynolds?" and dr. proctor said, well, yeah, but. it was essentially the same thing that lenox johnston wrote about in 1942. there was no new theory. this whole idea that nicotine was a drug and a cigarette was like a hypodermic, that you shoot in morphine, that he got all excited about it was in a 1972 document from reynolds was the same -- exact same thing that lenox johnston wrote about 30 years before dr. teague put pen to paper. it was not a secret. it was not something no one else knew, and they never identified anything that there was something specific that reynolds knew, let alone whether michael johnson would have cared, let alone whether if he had known it would have made a difference. they completely failed to carry that burden. let us talk about carcinogens. you have heard a lot about carcinogens. you saw big boards that listed carcinogens. dr. feingold went through all of those complex chemical names. and the whole point was nobody knew about all these carcinogens in smoke. the whole idea was, geez, reynolds knew. they knew that there was -- there were tobacco-specific nitrosamines. they knew there were poly-hydro, bahs, benzoapyrene. they knew all that, but nobody knew. michael johnson could not possibly have known. that is what they said. dr. proctor: "it was widely reported in the lay media that there were carcinogens in cigarette smoke in the 1950s? "there was." let me give you an example. they said nobody knew about these things, only reynolds. reader's digest, 1959: "the carcinogenic cancer-causing factor in cigarette smoke is much less a mystery than it was a few years ago. scientists are convinced that the primary carcinogens are higher polycyclic hydrocarbons formed by the combustion of tobacco at high temperature, about 880 degrees centigrade in the cigarette ember. they have identified eight carcinogens, carcinogenic polycyclics in tobacco smoke." deep dark secret? word got out. reader's digest published the article. i'm not saying that michael johnson read it, but i'm telling you that the idea that people did not know that there were carcinogens in smoke is ridiculous. they may not have known the specific chemical names, but is that what matters? remember, they said -- starting with mouse skin painting. remember the life magazine they showed you where they painted the tar on the back of the mouse and it got tumors? tar was what the public was concerned about. the whole reason for the whole idea of filters was because filters take some of the tar out. why would anyone care about taking some of the tar out if they were not worried that it contained things that could cause lung cancer. of course everyone understood. that is what tar was all about. i want you to think about it this way: they showed you a chart with chemical names on it and they said essentially if people had known that, would it have made a difference? i want you to ask the question to yourself would it have made a difference to michael johnson? michael johnson believed that his father died because he had lung cancer caused by smoking. does anyone seriously believe that if he had seen a list of chemical names on carcinogens, that would have made a difference instead of knowing his father died? i'm serious. think about it. as a pure matter of commonsense, if he believes his father died from smoking, would a list of carcinogens, chemical names have made a difference? and oh, by the way, half the carcinogens, as dr. proctor admitted, half the constituents of smoke that we know about today we know about because of r.j. reynolds. r.j. reynolds is the one that invented the means and found them and published them and told the public. let us talk about ingredients for a minute. you heard and it was the same sort of thing, the big chart with here are our ingredients, here -- particularly, here are ingredients that are used in other horrible sounding dangerous products. what did dr. proctor tell you? federal law has required the disclosure of all the ingredients used since the '80s. congress required notification of any ingredient that should be reviewed, that should not be used. congress has never mandated the removal of any ingredients. the fda now has the power to regulate the use of ingredients. it can ban any that it wants. but it is the same point i just made. think about this logically. they want you to believe that if r.j. reynolds had done something saying, hey, look, there is ammonia in this or, hey, look, there is licorice in this or whatever the list is you want to talk about, that that would have made michael johnson stop smoking and save his life? and it is the same point i made before: if he thought it killed his father, are you seriously telling me that if he had known the ingredients responsible, that would have made a difference? he already believed that smoking cigarettes killed his father. what possible difference could it make if he had the list of ingredients that went into them? that makes no sense, none whatever. i want to talk to you about the 1994 congressional testimony that you heard about. you have heard about it a number of times. i'll bet you hear about it again. it was the whole idea that the tobacco executives went in, in front of congress, raised their hand and they were asked the question do you believe that nicotine is addictive. this was in 1994 and they said no. and i told you in opening that there was more to the story than that. and we asked dr. proctor about it. the question was, they said no, they did not agree with the definition. and you can say it was ridiculous to have a debate about what do you call it. everyone agreed what they were talking about was difficulty in quitting, whether you call it habit or whether you call it addiction. just like in 1964 when the surgeon general called it a habit but acknowledged it was difficult to quit. the issue was a name change. and the tobacco industry, r.j. reynolds said they did not agree with the definition, they did not think cigarettes should be equated with cocaine and heroin. and maybe that was wrong. maybe it was not worth any debate at all because the common ground was it is difficult to quit. and i told you in opening that mr. johnston, the ceo of rjr in that same hearing said it was difficult for smokers to quit. and dr. proctor confirmed exactly what i said. yes, he said no to addictive, but what he said was they do not like the label but it is difficult to quit. they acknowledged what smokers need to know. does it matter what you call it? if the point is if you do it, it might be difficult to quit, what possible difference does it make what name you use to describe the behavior? that is the real story on the '94 congressional testimony. but i told you something else in opening. i said that in this trial they would produce zero documents, zero documents that said r.j. reynolds or any other tobacco company ever disputed that once a smoker starts, it could be difficult to quit. and guess what? how many did you see? zero. what did dr. proctor say? "you cannot identify any specific statement made by anybody from any tobacco company or any of those affiliated organizations that said if you smoke, it might not be hard to quit? "answer: that is right." not one document where rjr or anybody else ever disputed that it was difficult to quit. and that is the issue a smoker needs to be concerned about, not what you call it. your honor, i do not know -- i could keep going but if you would like to stop, i'm happy to. the court: all right. take a five-minute break. (the jury resumed its seat in the jury box and the following further proceedings were held:) the bailiff: jurors have been seated your honor. the court: all right. counsel, please continue. mr. baringer: thank you, your honor. i want to go back just for a second. when we were talking about carcinogens i mentioned filters, and i do want to make a few comments about filters. you heard about in -- starting in the 1950s the market changed from unfiltered to filtered cigarettes. and you heard that they were promoted. although dr. proctor said the biggest reason for the popularity of filters was reader's digest. nonetheless, he suggested that the companies had people try and -- had people switch to filters because supposedly they were safer. and he talked about low tar cigarettes and light cigarettes being believed or thought to be safer. and then only to find out much later on that they really were not. well, let me tell you the real story on filters. the public health community in the 1950s urged all the manufacturers to develop filtered cigarettes. why? because they were concerned about tar. why? because it contained carcinogens, the well known carcinogen problem. the public health community not only encouraged reynolds to develop them, but it encouraged smokers to switch to filtered cigarettes. the public health community, the american cancer society, actively told smokers to switch. the public health community determined they were safer. you remember when mr. beach was talking to dr. proctor, he went through a number of studies. and those studies said the smokers of filtered cigarettes have 18, 20, 30, forty percent less risk of lung cancer than smokers of unfiltered cigarettes. and i want to you keep in this -- keep this in mind when they start talking you to about lies and deception. those studies that were published were designed, conducted, and interpreted by nonindustry scientists. it was not tobacco companies. tobacco companies did not pay for them. tobacco companies did not design or interpret them. independent scientists in the public health community designed those studies and they were the ones that published the results. reynolds never told smokers that they could reduce their risk by 20 or thirty percent if they switched to filters. the public health community, the american cancer society, that is who was telling that story, not reynolds. we do also know that filtered smokers are more likely to quit. and that is the only tie this has to mr. johnson at all. remember, there was no testimony in this case that michael johnson switched from unfiltered to filtered cigarettes because he thought they were safer. we know why he smoked kool filter kings, because his brothers and everybody he hung out with smoked kools. it was not -- they did not say there was some connection to advertising. and the best part is they spent time talking about low tar and light cigarettes. and they said well they really were not safer. what evidence did you hear that michael johnson ever smoked a light or a low tar cigarette? why did you have to sit through evidence about light and low tar cigarettes when everyone knows that michael johnson never smoked one. filters have nothing to do with this case. let us talk -- we had talked about and i showed you information that was available about the hazards of smoking and the addictiveness of nicotine. and i want you to remember, it is not just newspaper articles, it is not just tv shows, smokers get information from all kinds of different sources. the government, public health community, friends, family, schools, mass media, word of mouth, pop culture, slang, cancer sticks, nicotine fix, nicotine feign, pop culture. let us talk about what michael johnson was exposed to. there was an issue about textbooks. mark johnson took the stand, they showed him the cover of a book and mark, 40 years later, said i do not remember seeing the cover of that book. but you heard from dr. giakas that a number of those 19 witnesses that were in the same age group with michael johnson testified that in school here in pensacola, at that time they were taught about the dangers of smoking in school. we showed you the state law that mandates that it be taught. we showed you the book lists that were approved not only for the pensacola public schools, but for the private catholic schools in pensacola as well. and the books we showed you are on that list. and the point is, what were they teaching? in seventh grade, smoking can cause death. a relationship between cigarette smoking and lung cancer. a definite degree of physical and psychological dependency. what does that mean? addiction. hard to quit. seventh graders were being taught. another one, seventh grade, many people who have formerly smoked have stopped the habit even though it is hard to break. another factor is the smoking habits of parents. talks about smoking is likely to be taken up by young people who is parents or older brothers and sisters smoke. think about the johnson family. mr. johnson's father smoked, mr. johnson's older brothers smoked. exactly what they are talking about in this textbook. not advertising. not the flinstones when he is of age. his father, his older brothers. that is the influence. high school -- did not stop in middle school. high school: cigarette smoking is a major cause of lung cancer. risk of ill health and death. surgeon general has determined cigarette smoking is dangerous. ladies and gentlemen, every one of those were warnings that michael johnson received. and you remember that decision tree, in every case he got the warning, and in every case he chose to smoke, in every case he chose against the risk to his own health, every time. 1977, teenagers, michael johnson was 17 years old. what does the evidence tell us about which column he would have fallen in? is there any possible, possible reason to believe that he would have been in the 4 percent that do not know? absolutely not. 1977 was the year his father was diagnosed with lung cancer. is there any question in your mind that michael johnson would have been in the 96 percent? there cannot be. and the publicity that i showed you before leading up to mr. johnson's birth certainly did not stop. and remember, mrs. robinson told you that michael johnson was a daily newspaper reader. and what were the newspapers telling him? and this is pensacola, this is not anywhere else, this is pensacola. those who have quit live longer. 10 million people quit. report says cigarettes causes death. do you want to stop smoking? i quit. do not smoke your life away. cancer, cancer, cancer. that is what he was reading about. every time he picked up a newspaper with one of those articles it was a warning to him to quit to protect his health. and every time he said, no, i will not. i do not want to. i'll smoke until i die. 1980s, '90s, did it stop? did the publicity stop? no. stop smoking in five days. ladies and gentlemen, if you do not know it is hard to quit what could that possibly mean to you? and those were the kinds of articles that were run for decades. what would it possibly have meant? it would have been total confusion. hey, what in the world does this mean? he knew very well what it meant. all the sources, all these sources of information were constantly giving him warnings. the warnings on the cigarette packs, warnings from his parents, do not start, it is a -- do not pick up the habit, it is hard to quit. it is dangerous, it is unhealthy. warnings from school, we just went through that. warnings from mrs. robinson and her family, from the death of his father. his warnings from his own brothers and sisters, warnings from the media, warnings from the public health community. mr. johnson was surrounded by people and sources of information that constantly kept putting in front of him a choice. a choice between protecting his health and minimizing the risk, or taking a risk in exchange for the enjoyment and the pleasure that he got from it. it was his right to make that choice, but do not be dissuaded from the understanding that it was his choice. now, they talked about -- they talked about the companies and the things that they said publically. they talked about people going on tv and saying well, it has not been proven that smoking causes lung cancer. and they say what was the effect of that? they said, oh, my goodness, it created doubt, it kept people smoking, it prevented people from quitting. during the whole period that they say this campaign is going on, what happens to belief about smoking causing lung cancer? all the time these statements are going on, what is happening? belief goes up, up, up, up, up. 1981 -- or 1977 when michael johnson finds out his father is diagnosed with lung cancer, 81 percent believe that smoking caused lung cancer. do you think mr. johnson would have gone in the 81 percent column or the 19 that said no, i'm not sure. there is no question. he would have been in the 81 column. and what happened -- the claim is that the company statements prevented people from quitting. starting in 1955 with all the publicity, what happened to quitting during all of this time when all these statements were being made? 17 million, 30 million, 60 million. massive quitting. all the time that they say it prevented people from quitting. how in heck's name did all those people quit if they could not because of what the company were saying? but more importantly, what impact did that have on michael johnson? every one of the witnesses you heard were asked did he ever dispute that he believed smoking caused lung cancer. never did. did he ever argue about whether it could be hard to quit? did he ever say i do not believe it is proven. did he ever say i do not think -- i do not think that it is bad for your health? did he ever say anything to anyone that reflected the fact that he had any doubt or that he relied on anything that the company said? think about it. he had people talking to him all the time about quitting smoking and you need to quit smoking. and in all of those discussions with all of those people not one person, not one, says that michael johnson ever disputed the fact that smoking could cause lung cancer and it was risk to his health or that it was difficult to quit. not one in over 20 years of discussions about whether or not he should be smoking. what did mrs. robinson say? he never indicated that he paid any attention to anything a tobacco company had ever said, right? no, he did not. never did. and again, no evidence that he ever debated or disputed the fact that smoking is dangerous or addictive. and gentlemen, you will see on the verdict form that they have to prove that he relied on what the companies did. if he had relied, the answer to that would be totally different. but the answer was he never relied on anything. were any of his smoking choices impacted by reynolds? his decision to start, no. we know why he started, because he saw his father smoking and he wanted to do the same thing. brand selection, no. he smoked kool because his older brothers and everybody he hung out with smoked kool. decision to continue, no. he decided to continue because he enjoyed it and he wanted to and he did not want to quit. decision not to quit, same thing. the reason he did not quit and he never tried to quit was because he did not want to because he enjoyed it. nothing reynolds did had any affect. and this is on the same thing we just talked about, did he ever refer to tobacco statements? did he ever dispute it was hard? did he ever refer to the tobacco industry research committee tirc, ctr, ti, no. did he ever dispute the validity of the warnings, no. did he ever blame anyone else for his smoking? even after he was diagnosed with cancer did he blame anyone else for his smoking? no. he was a man that made a choice and he lived by that choice. and he did not complain when the choice turned out not to have been in his best interest. he did not complain. he recognized it. he took the risk and he accepted that. he accepted it so strongly that he refused to remember even to see if he a treatable curable type cancer or to have any treatment. that is how strongly he felt about the decisions that he made because they were his decisions. nobody influenced those. can i have the elmo, please. ladies and gentlemen, the evidence is overwhelming. michael johnson did not smoke because he did not know the dangers, he knew all too well and all too personally. he did not quit because he was influenced by something reynolds or anyone else said. he did not quit because he did not want to. he was fully informed, he made the choice. concealment was not the legal cause of his death and i would say you should mark no on questions seven and eight. now, i said i was going to skip damages and come back to them because i wanted to talk about all the areas that were related to the liability determination first. but i do want to talk to you for a while about damages. and on the verdict form questions five and six, you are going to be asked how much you believe should be awarded for compensatory damages for mrs. robinson and for michael johnson, mr. johnson's son. now, when you consider this you are going to be told in the jury instruction any damages you award must be fair and just in light of the evidence. now, you heard from -- during the first part of closing from plaintiff's counsel that they are going to ask you to award $10 million to mrs. robinson and to mr. johnson. $10 million each. ladies and gentlemen, that is so far out of touch with reality that it is hard to know how to explain. and i want you to keep in mind the way mr. gary kept talked about. he kept saying ten million might not be enough. he was talking about youth marketing. he was talking about things the company had done and he kept saying 10 million might not be enough. compensatory damages are designed to make a person whole for their loss. compensatory damages are not punitive damages. we will talk about punitives. but mr. gary, for whatever reason, totally confused the two together and made it sound like the amount of compensatory damages that you award has something to do with what you think of reynolds conduct in general. and that is nonsense, that is not the law. the law is, you think about what the relationship was that was lost, and you put a fair and just amount on that. and folks $10 million is absurd. let us talk about the evidence. the one thing -- ladies and gentlemen, it is inevitable, everyone has sympathy for someone who suffers a loss. all of us in our lives at some time suffer a loss. and when you know someone -- even if you do not know someone and you know they suffered a loss it is natural to feel sympathy. it is what makes you a human being to have empathy and sympathy, that is natural. but the law says the amount that you award in damages cannot be based on that sympathy. it cannot be: i feel bad for what happened and here, let me try and make you feel better. that is not what it is about. it is about how do you put -- and frankly it is tough, but how do you put a dollar amount on the loss of relationship they had? and it is not abstract. it is not relationships in general, it is this relationship. i told you during jury selection that it is a difficult thing to do and it is a difficult thing to talk about. because some of the things that come up are not the kinds of things that are discussed in public or outside your family or your friends. and it is not by choice that we have to talk about it. mrs. robinson is asking you to give her $10 million. and it is fair to talk about the nature of the relationship that she had and whether that makes any sense at all. and unfortunately, that is what we have to do. and again, what they are seeking, the damages they are seeking are loss of companionship and protection and mental pain and suffering for mrs. robinson, and the same thing for michael johnson. that is the nature of the damages they want you to award. i want you to think about whether or not this $10 million request makes any sense in the context of the nature of their relationship. dr. giakas told you that there were problems within that relationship before mr. johnson died. remember mark johnson was on the stand and he was asked were there problems, and he said i heard rumors that there was discord. and then you saw the evidence of that, that there were significant problems in that relationship. walter johnson testified to you, he said that michael asked his mother to get their wedding rings back and not to give them back to mrs. robinson after he died. that is a sign that there is a problem. she did not go with him to watch the final -- he wanted this very important -- his last statement, his legacy in a way, to make this speech that was going to be on tv. and he asked her to go and she said no, even though he invited her. that is a problem. when she knew he was dying and he asked her to go do this one act and she would not do it. she did not receive counseling after his death, we do not know what happened there. we do know that a month after mr. johnson died she met mr. robinson and eventually they got married. and fortunately for everyone they have been married for over 14 years, have a strong and happy marriage. and you can consider that in terms of what effect did it have on her life and what effect is it having on her life going forward? now, i want to talk about -- because one of the things you have to do as jurors is, you have to consider the testimony on a lot of these issues from a lot of different witnesses. and one of the ways you do it, even though sometimes you do it subconsciously, is you weigh how strongly you believe in the credibility of the testimony you have heard. whether there are any doubts or whether you can take it verbatim and believe it or think about well, what is influencing this. you do it with experts and you do it with fact witnesses. and the instruction you are going to get tells you that you ought to consider the frankness or lack of frankness from the witness, any interest the witness may have in the outcome of the case, and the reasonableness of the testimony. and i'm going to tell you right now that i think that there are things that you saw in this courtroom that ought to give you pause about how you evaluate the request for $10 million from mrs. robinson. remember on direct when she testified, mr. gary was asking her questions and he asked her did you have to move -- did you lose your house because michael could not work anymore, is that why you lost your house? and she said yes. it was because he was sick and could not work anymore and that is why we lost the house. remember on cross-examination, the house was foreclosed on in may of 1995. mr. johnson was not diagnosed as having cancer until october of 1995, five months afterward. mr. johnson was still working at the time. and the document also said that there had not been payments made on that house for two years by that point. but she wanted you to believe it was all because he was sick and could not work. that is what they told you on direct. and it turned out to be absolutely untrue. i asked about whether they were living together in july of 1995. remember there was a medical record and the medical record said he does not have a phone so we have to call his ex-wife? so i said were you guys living together at the time? oh, yeah. this was -- the social security record where she was completing the form to get assistance because of the three kids and she filled it out. that is her signature and that is her writing on top. and in july of 1995 she was not living on poppy street with michael, she was living in silver creek. is it possible she just got mixed up and forgot? the last year of her husband's life you do not remember whether you are living with him or not? then let us talk about the last couple of months of his life. mrs. robinson on direct said, did you see each other every single day? every day. did you see each other every night? every night. walter johnson was brought back from korea. he was in the united states army and he was serving in korea. and he was brought back for the last basically two months, month and a half, two months of michael's life to be with him. and walter johnson came back for that purpose and he was there every day. he said he was there and you can decide -- maybe you do not believe him. i cannot imagine what interest he would have in not being completely forthright about this. but he said he came home from korea to be with his brother and he was with his brother every day, and what did he say? i may have seen her once or twice. you have the testimony from two witnesses, you have to decide how to evaluate it. then, same issue, you see him every day, every day, every night. michael johnson, mr. johnson's son said, while he was visiting his father those last few months, the only time that he saw -- and that was a number of weeks that this went on. the only time she -- he saw mrs. johnson was when he was dropping his half brother terence off. and when she did do that, she just dropped terence off and did not even come in. that was michael johnson's testimony. then we heard this story of this wonderful last day that they spent together. she went by, they had lunch, they watched tv, they laughed. now, walter johnson said, she was not there that day. he was there, mark, john fitzgerald were there until michael died and they called and mrs. robinson came. you have to decide who you believe. but they both cannot be true. it cannot be that walter said she was not there and she says she was. you have to decide and think about who has the interest in the case. who stands to benefit and get -- try and get $10 million. then we have the issue of how they had a great marriage. and we talked about the discord. walter said that michael said he had moved out. michael said he had asked for the rings back and do not give them back. dr. giakas told you about some of the other comments that were made. and we do not need to review those, but those comments that came from these other witnesses certainly reflect anything than the idyllic marriage that was described to you on direct. now, there is been a big deal made about oh, my goodness those were witnesses that were deposed by the defense. we got the name list of the family members from mrs. robinson. she said that they had information related to michael's smoking history and the issues in this case. so, yes, we did take their deposition. and guess what, plaintiffs were at every single one of those depositions. we asked questions, the witnesses gave answers. we did not make it up. we did not say hey is not it true? they told us, we did not know going in. but they were there and they said well, you did not ask direct questions, they could have asked any question that we did or anything that they wanted to. so this nonsense that it is all because they are our witnesses, they are family members, they are michael johnson's family members or they are mrs. robinson's family members. they are the ones that said these things. we did not make them up. but we are not the one asking for $10 million, they are. i cannot tell you what number, if you get that far on the verdict form, i cannot tell you what number to put in. that is up to your sense of justice, that is up to your sense of commonsense, frankly. but, ladies and gentlemen, $10 million makes no sense whatsoever. and do not buy into this appeal to passion and anger and say $10 million is not enough. what you are supposed to do is make them whole for their loss, we will talk about the other stuff. but all that is is generating is trying to distract you and trying to make you angry to get you to write as big a number on a piece of paper as you can. do not let that happen. now, let us talk about the issue of punitive damages. question 9, under the circumstances of this case state whether punitive damages are warranted by clear and convincing evidence against r.j. reynolds. i want you to -- i want you just for a minute to think about this phrase, the circumstances of this case. everything -- virtually everything you heard yesterday when they were talking about punitive damages and getting all worked up was they talked about the world. how many people in the world would die in this century. they talked about the whole country, they talked about all kinds of things except michael johnson. ladies and gentlemen, you answer this question based on the circumstances of this case. and remember you are not trying the engle class action again. you only award punitive damages if you find that some conduct that was a legal cause of mr. johnson's death rises to the level that the instruction tells you. it is not an abstract, is there something about tobacco companies that you do not like? this is not the standard. you are not legally allowed to award punitive damages because you do not like something if the evidence is not that it was a legal cause of mr. johnson's death. and i might add -- mr. acosta: misstates the law. i have an objection to that. the court: jurors step out for a moment. (the jury withdrew from the courtroom and the following further proceedings were held:). the court: jury is out. mr. acosta: your honor, counsel is arguing in phase one what is reserved for phase two. and he is arguing that they can only award punitive damages for damage done to michael johnson, that is not for this phase. and i think that that was a total mischaracterization of the law. it needs to be rectified. the court: mr. baringer. mr. baringer: first of all, it is almost amazing to hear them say that i was arguing phase two compared to what they did yesterday. but number two, all i was saying is to consider entitlement to punitive damages, it must be the same conduct that injured mr. johnson. it has to be related. that is constitutional law, that is very simple. i did not say anything beyond that. and i acknowledge that they could consider others if it is the same conduct. but they cannot -- you cannot in abstract say hey, i do not like x. it had nothing to with mr. johnson but i'm allowed to award punitive damages on it. there is a causal nexus that is required and the -- it is either williams or state farm make it absolutely clear, there must be a causal nexus between the conduct that injures the party and other people that may have been affected by it as well. and i think -- the court: then make that point and let us move this along with that clarification. objection overruled. call in the jurors when they are ready. (the jury resumed its seat in the jury box and the following further proceedings were held:). the court: counsel, you may continue with clarification. mr. baringer: thank you, your honor. i was explaining that there must be a connection between the conduct that injured -- that you believe injured michael johnson and the conduct that you believe perhaps would warrant -- awarding punitive damages is. in other words, if you find that there is some conduct that you do not like but it had nothing to do with michael johnson, that cannot be the basis for awarding punitive damages. if you find there is conduct that injured michael johnson you can consider that same conduct's effect on other people. but the point is: you cannot take things that were not the legal cause of mr. johnson's death and say i think they should be punished and i'm going to award punitive damages on that basis. let me give you a quick example. low tar or light cigarettes, let us say that for whatever reason you really did not like that they put cigarettes out and called them low tar or lights. well, mr. johnson never smoked one. so you could not award punitive damages on that basis because there is no connection. if there was conduct, if there was something that you believe did harm him, and it affected others you can consider that. but when -- when they are talking about all these things, when they are talking about running ads in the 1930s, when they are talking about low tar, when they are talking about things that never had any impact on mr. johnson. no matter how mad they may make you when they are talking about it, that cannot be the basis. the law says you cannot do that. and i'm absolutely confident that you will follow your oath and follow the law, no matter how much they try and make you angry. let us talk about clear and convincing evidence. remember on regular -- on all the other areas the standard -- the burden of proof for the plaintiff is more likely than not. you know, the 51/50 sort of balance. clear and convincing evidence has to be more compelling and persuasive than the more likely that the not scenario. clear and convincing evidence is evidence that is precise, explicit, lacking in confusion and of such weight that it produces a firm belief or conviction without any hesitation about the matter in issue. so when you get to this question, when you get to the question of whether or not we should have a punitive damages stage, whether they are entitled to a possible award of punitive damages, think back to the underlying conduct that you may have found wrongful. and it is -- you have look at the evidence again. you have to say well, maybe it was a very, very tough decision for you and you were leaning back and forth. and you finally said okay i think maybe that was a legal cause of his death. that kind of -- that kind of certainty is not good enough. that would not -- that would not satisfy the clear and convincing standard. it is a much higher standard of proof. it is the highest in civil law. and remember, punitive damages can only be awarded to the estate of mr. johnson. those damages are in addition to damages that fully compensate mrs. robinson or michael johnson for their loss, so it is on top of that. and punitive damages can be awarded only for concealment or agreement to conceal, if that was a legal cause of mr. johnson's death. and remember that goes back to this distinction between unintentional authorities where if you do comparative fault and you assign a percentage of fault to mr. johnson, that will reduce your damages award. unless you get -- unless you say "yes" on concealment and agreement to conceal. the other impact, if you are saying "yes" on concealment and agreement to conceal is, that is the only way you get to the punitive damages question. in other words, if you say "no", if your answer on the question on concealment was "no", if your answer on the agreement to conceal is "no", you do not get to the punitive damages question at all. it is only for intentional conduct. there is one other thing i want to you keep in mind. the engle findings do not establish that the plaintiff is entitled to punitive damages. you heard all about the findings yesterday. i suspect you will hear all about the findings again. and the suggestion is that the mere fact that there is a finding that says, for example, they concealed information, that warrants punishment. this is not true. the finding itself does not mean that you have to answer "yes" on question number nine. you have to decide whether or not that concealment affected michael johnson and you have to consider whether it rises to that clear and convincing level. the point is: do not buy into the notion that the finding answers the question. just because there is a finding means you must answer "yes" on that last question. that is not what it means at all. you have to evaluate the evidence. you consider the finding, it is a fact just like any other facts that you decide no more no less. but it does not answer the question of whether there should be punitive damages. and i want you to think about this in the overall context, they are going to talk about things that they said that they believe reynolds did wrong. and they are going to -- and you heard it yesterday. they kept saying, you have the power to stop it, you have the power to prevent it. what you have the power to do is decide if the conduct that harmed michael johnson, if you decide that was a legal cause of his death, you have the power to decide whether to consider punitive damages. but you do not consider it in a vacuum. you do not only consider the things that may have bothered you that you may have thought were a legal cause. you have to consider the totality of the evidence that you heard. and i'd suggest that you need to consider some of the other evidence about the conduct in this case not just the things that they want to yell about. for example, you heard about larsen, haag and silvette. remember part of their pitch here is that reynolds knew all kinds of stuff and did not share it or the -- the work done by the tobacco industry research committee was not any good and so they were not sharing the information, they were not doing what they promised. but remember larson, haag and silvette, it was an encyclopedia of all the smoking and health research as of 1961, all of it, all the of the published research. it was cited in the 1964 surgeon general. it was funded by a grant from tirc. it had an entire chapter devoted to nicotine and its effects on the body, talking about pharmacological effects and addictive properties. so tirc funded it, they gave it to the surgeon general. and remember they said they never wanted to acknowledge the roll of nicotine. they never wanted anyone to know. they provided it to the surgeon general's committee. then, you heard a lot about design. you heard -- you heard about ingredients, you heard about filters and things. but here's what -- here's what you also heard, and this is from dr. benowitz and dr. proctor. reynolds spent over a billion dollars on research to make cigarettes less hazardous. and folks that includes the nicotine research they did on trying to see if they could alter ph so that they can make a cigarette that satisfied smokers but lowered exposure to the dangerous components. they reduced polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, carcinogens, they lowered them. they significantly reduced nitrosamines, remember the big board they had with all the carcinogens and they talked about tobacco specific nitrosamines with dr. feingold. reynolds significantly reduce them. they were not completely oblivious, they were not sitting there doing nothing about trying to deal with the risk, the way they were suggested that all they cared about was money. they spent billions of dollars on research trying to do this. and remember about the carcinogens. one of the big topics they talked about r.j. reynolds discovered over fifty percent of the chemicals in cigarette smoke and identified them for the world to know. if they want to complain about reynolds you need to consider the positive things that reynolds did along the way. let us talk about ctr. they told you it was all a front, it was all a sham. dr. proctor admitted awarding more than $500 million independent scientific research projects. the scientists decided what to research and what to write. they funded projects that resulted in more than 7,000 published scientific or medical reports. more than 600 of those articles were cited in the surgeon general's report. dr. proctor said well a lot of it was not directly related to smoking and health. how does -- how do they get 600 entries in the surgeon general's reports on smoking and health if it has nothing to do with smoking and health? does not make sense. they funded over -- they funded ten noble prize winners. the point of that was not that they got the noble prize for their work here, but that was the kind of quality of scientists that they were funding. and they funded research in universities nationwide. ladies and gentlemen, when you consider the evidence, when you think about this whole question of punitive damages, think about what conduct you think it is that harmed -- that caused mr. johnson's cancer and death. overwhelmingly the conduct that did it was his choices. his choice to ignore warnings from every source that he encountered. his choice not to quit smoking when he had the ability to do that, as they admit. overwhelmingly it was his choices that were responsible. now i ask you to consider the conduct. and when they talk about conduct i want you to think if they have proven if there is a link between that conduct and mr. johnson's choices, his decisions, they have to provide the link. i think, in fairness, when you take a look at all of that and the context of the efforts that reynolds made to reduce the hazards of cigarettes over the years, money that they spent on research, the money that they spent on publication or advancement of science means you should answer "no" to question number nine. you have been incredibly patient. and it is always virtually impossible to sit and appear interested, let alone be interested, when someone is talking to you for three hours. and i very much appreciate how hard you have worked and the attention that you have paid. and i want to leave you thinking about this: they did not prove that mr. johnson died because the dangerous and addictive nature of cigarettes were unknown to him. he knew it, he knew personally. he knew it, if nothing else, than what happened with his father and when it happened. he knew that it could cause cancer. he knew that it could be difficult to quit. their concealment claim utterly fails. they did not prove he was addicted and could not quit. remember all of the testimony, he had the ability to quit. their own expert told you he had the ability to quit. and virtually everyone that knew him told you he did not want to quit. and dr. feingold's model of addiction causation, it all continues unless you choose to break the chain. and then it does -- addiction does not have to cause disease, it is not inevitable. michael johnson had the power and the ability to stop that chain. he chose not to do it. that was the legal cause of his death, was the fact that he chose not to protect his health and that was his right and i'm not criticizing it. finally, they did not prove that he had primary lung cancer caused by smoking. what was the biggest reason? we do not know the answer to that. michael johnson, exercising his absolute right, chose not to have tests that would have answered the question. he did not have the additional biopsy, he did not have the additional radiological work on his abdomen and he did not have the blood tests. all of the information that could have answered that question we do not have. so you have to make the best with what you do. and the plaintiffs cannot meet their burden of proof that he had primary lung cancer. and you have heard all of the evidence and all of the doctors online. ladies and gentlemen, this is about justice, this is about doing the right thing. it is a just and fair result when you return a verdict in favor of the defendant when the plaintiff fails to meet their burden of proof. and no matter how much you may sympathize with them for their loss that does not make up for proof that r.j. reynolds did anything that was the legal cause of mr. johnson's death in 1996. and i'm going ask you to bring back a verdict in favor of r.j. reynolds. thank you all very much.