mr. kaiser: may it please the court. the court: yes, sir. mr. kaiser: counsel, miss ruffo, ladies and gentlemen of the jury, good morning. what i'm going to do in my closing argument is discuss with you basically the verdict form, and we are going to start with the engle class membership. i'll discuss the facts relating to that. we are going to go and we are going to talk about the statute of limitations defense that has been raised by the defense in this case. we are going to talk about the engle findings. that is why this case is about lorillard tobacco. it is about philip morris. and that is why we talk about them. number 1, as i track the verdict form, engle class membership, and the judge is going to instruct you. class membership, was mrs. ruffo addicted to the nicotine in the cigarettes she smoked and did the addiction cause her disease? that is class membership. let us talk about addiction. in this case, we brought you dr. barry reed, who was the treating physician for mrs. ruffo for many, many years and continues to be her treating physician today. he diagnosed her with copd in 1990, and he has seen her as recently as january of this year. now, there was a brief period of time where she saw someone else, but, by and large, he has been her treating physician for years. dr. barry reed is a specialist in pulmonology, lung diseases. barry reed deals with patients on a daily basis that smoke. barry reed deals with people on a daily basis that have copd. dr. reed deals with patients on a daily basis that have addiction based on we are going to talk about the legal causation in this case. we are going to talk about reliance in this case. we are going to talk about comparative fault in this case. and then, most importantly, we are going to talk about damages. now, at the outset, if you recall during counsel for philip morris' opening statement, he noted that i spent 11 minutes talking about dorothy ruffo. if you remember during the opening statements by counsel for both defendants, they spent zero talking about themselves. now, this case is, indeed, about philip morris and lorillard tobacco company. mrs. ruffo brought this case against the defendants here. it is our obligation to prove that the defendants in this case caused the injuries for mrs. ruffo's smoking. we have to prove that to you by a greater weight of the evidence, and i will show you. it is our obligation to show that the defendants in this case must pay damages to mrs. ruffo for the injuries that they caused. their smoking and their disease. barry reed, as you will see in his medical records, spoke hours upon hours upon hours with mrs. ruffo, as you could look in the medical records and see, because his medical records, after each note, talks about the amount of face time he had with dorothy ruffo. and if you go through those medical records, you can see, from 1990 up until 2013, there have been hours that dr. reed has had the ability to talk with his patient about her smoking, about her health, about everything of her condition. and what did he do? on numerous occasions in his medical records, he made a medical diagnosis, nicotine addiction. now, this is a person who has had the chance for 15 years or so to talk to dorothy ruffo, to examine dorothy ruffo, to listen to dorothy ruffo, and to understand her condition about her smoking. and if you want to, you can go through the medical records and you can see instance after instance after instance of dr. reed's medical diagnosis of cigarette addiction. so that is one witness we brought you to prove to you, by a greater weight of the evidence, that mrs. ruffo was addicted to the nicotine in the cigarettes she smoked, the benson & hedges and the kents manufactured by philip morris and lorillard. greater weight of the evidence. are we more likely right than wrong? simple. now, dr. goldman testified. dr. goldman never met mrs. ruffo. dr. goldman is an expert witness. he is an associate dean at the university of south florida, been practicing for over 40 years. he is board-certified in pulmonology and internal medicine. ran a smoking cessation clinic for a number of years, has trained others to be able to recognize and treat addiction. and dr. goldman said he relied on the deposition testimony of mrs. ruffo and the medical records, and what he did tell you? she was, indeed, addicted, and he had many reasons to support that. number 1, dr. goldman told you, just generally, generally, people like mrs. ruffo that are chronic, heavy smokers that smoke anywhere from a pack a day and more for 30 or and dr. goldman said that is addiction. that is addiction, especially when the first thing you do in the morning, because you have not smoked in a long time, is to grab a cigarette. and when you smoke when you are sick and you are going to die, that is an indicator of addiction. and dr. goldman also was aware of certain statements that dorothy ruffo made, i like smoking. i enjoy smoking. i'm not ready to quit. i do not want to quit. and what did he tell you? that is denial. that is what an addict says. that is the way addicts talk. mrs. ruffo, herself, said, when i would say, i do not want to quit, i'm not ready to quit, the reason she said that was because, on the times that she did try, she knew what it felt like and did not want to go through that feeling. that is why she was saying that. that is addiction. and that is what dr. goldman said. dr. goldman also said that he was aware of quit attempts. that was very important. that was very important when he had the facts about an individual. and what he said was that there 40 years, just knowing that fact alone means what? addiction. just on that. just a general observation on chronic, heavy smokers can lead dr. goldman to testify to a degree of medical probability that dorothy ruffo was addicted. now, he had the medical records. he had the deposition testimony, so he was able to understand the smoking routine of dorothy ruffo. and so he relied on those facts. for example, he relied on the fact that mrs. ruffo, when she was a regular smoker, the first thing she would do when she got up out of bed in the morning was to get that cigarette. before she got dressed, before she brushed her teeth, before she went in and cooked a meal, she had already smoked a cigarette. she would then go in and fix breakfast for her son marshall at the time, and she would already have smoked a cigarette. and, according to mrs. ruffo, by the time she left the house to go to work, she had smoked two or three cigarettes and continued to smoke throughout the day. smoked at nighttime. smoked in bed. and smoked while she was dying. were numerous instances when she tried to quit, cold turkey, unsuccessful. nicoderm, unsuccessful. the patch, unsuccessful. finally, sometime in 2010, she tried chantix, after resisting it because of the side effects, and she was fortunately successful. she tried. she was unsuccessful until 2010. dr. goldman told you based upon all of those facts, on the basis of the facts he knew about mrs. ruffo, she was addicted to the nicotine in the cigarettes she smoked. that is two witnesses. number 3, we had dorothy ruffo herself, the smoker, on the stand testifying about her addiction, and she said she was addicted to the nicotine in the cigarettes. she explained that she had to have a cigarette. she told you that when she -- that she could not go long periods of time without a cigarette, maybe a couple of hours. she explained the feeling that she got when she tried to quit and, indeed, mrs. ruffo said she was addicted. so we brought you three separate witnesses who all said the same thing, mrs. ruffo was addicted to the nicotine in the cigarettes, and, if you are not convinced, let us do the math. now, mrs. ruffo said she got her money's worth smoking cigarettes. she smoked them until the end. how many puffs do you think that was? do you think one puff, that is enough, you take that cigarette and you stamp it out? no. common sense says it is more than one puff. how about two? do you think two puffs and that cigarette is down to the end? of course not. you think three, puff, puff, puff, that cigarette is done? of course not. maybe eight to ten. let us be conservative and take five. let us take five puffs. we know when miss ruffo was smoking kent cigarettes for a period of seven years, that she smoked from a half a pack to a pack. let us be conservative and say a half a pack, ten cigarettes. if she is taking five puffs on ten cigarette, that is 50 puffs in a day. 50 puffs in a day times 365 is going to give us a yearly rate times seven years is going to give us the number of doses of was addicted to the cigarettes she smoked. the next step, did that addiction cause her disease? you bet it did. the addiction caused mrs. ruffo's disease because, as dr. goldman said, she had the inability to quit and that is why she got sick. now, there is no dispute. mrs. ruffo got sick because of cigarettes. cigarettes caused her copd. nobody disputes that. the fact that we have proven to you that mrs. ruffo was addicted and that her illness was a result of smoking, it follows that that was a legal cause, her addiction caused her disease. now, once we prove addiction and once we prove that she was sick because of her cigarettes, we have proven what we need to do. there is no instruction that is going to tell you, if you prove addiction, despite addiction, it might be other reasons why mrs. ruffo became ill. maybe she enjoyed cigarettes. no, you are not going to see that in the instructions. the only time that addiction would not cause someone to be ill, the only time that would be would be in the case where, no, nicotine she got. and if you put that on the screen, we will see 127,750 doses of nicotine just on kent cigarettes alone over seven years. when she switched to benson & hedges, that she smoked for 40 more years, she is now up to two to three packs a day, let us be conservative and go to two packs. if we are conservative with five puffs for each cigarette she smoked with 40 cigarettes, which represents two packs a day, we are talking about 200 doses of nicotine per year {sic} times 365 times 44 years is 3,212,000 doses of nicotine every time she took a puff, conservatively based on five puffs on a cigarette. so if you add it up, you got about 3.4 million doses of nicotine mrs. ruffo ingested over the course of her smoking history. we know that the nicotine in cigarettes is addictive. does it take 3.5 to make someone addicted? based on the math and the three witnesses that we presented to you, we have proven, by a greater weight of the evidence, that mrs. ruffo mrs. ruffo did not get sick from the cigarettes she smoked. she got sick from something else. that is why she got the disease. the evidence we put on in this case, by a greater weight of the evidence, has demonstrated mrs. ruffo's addiction and that she has become ill because of her addiction and nothing else. so that when you get the verdict form, number 1, you are going to ask, was dorothy ruffo a member of the engle class? now, the answer is yes. now, number 2, the issue of statute of limitations. that, ladies and gentlemen, is the burden -- the burden is on the defense. we do not have to do anything. that is a matter of proof that the defendant has to show you. same burden of proof that we have to prove our case, by a greater weight of the evidence. it is the obligation of the defendants, by a greater weight of the evidence, to demonstrate that on or before may 5th of 1990, mrs. ruffo knew or had reason to know that she had copd and there was a causal connection between the copd and her smoking. now, let us talk about that. we know in 1988, mrs. ruffo, according to her testimony, developed shortness of breath. that was gradual and that came on, but mrs. ruffo never gave it a second thought and never attributed it to smoking and never even believed it was a breathing problem. this was not a situation where mrs. ruffo woke up one morning and, all of a sudden, could not walk a few steps without getting short of breath. this is not shortness of breath that occurred the first time mrs. ruffo woke up and all of a sudden realized she could not make a bed. this is a disease that progressed to the point that finally, two years later, mrs. ruffo realized she had some problems, did not know what they were, but when she got the pain -and she pointed, when she got that pain along with the shortness of breath, that is the time she decided she better go see a doctor. and she did. and she went to her treating physician, dr. rice. and dr. rice is a man who is a professional. he has a medical degree. he is mrs. ruffo's internist. he was her ruffo on may 21, 1990, in his note, dorothy ruffo tells him -- not honestly, but tells him she is cut down from two packs a day to five cigarettes. well, if you remember the date in that note -- can we put that up, 381. according to mrs. ruffo's testimony, it was on may 14, 1990 that dr. rice told her that because that is when she went a week later and saw dr. reed, on the 21st, 1990, and that is why she recalls. that is when she said she cut down because it was on that date that dr. rice said, you have got to go see dr. reed, a lung doctor, that she realized, this might be a problem with my lungs. and so she went to dr. reed. she had never been to dr. reed. dr. reed did all sorts of tests. took a history, did the lung tests where she blows into the tube, and made his diagnosis, emphysema, and told her what that was. she had copd with emphysema being the primary component of that. so she found out and she was diagnosed on may 21st of 1990 that she had copd. mrs. ruffo treating physician. and dr. rice's observation, after talking to mrs. ruffo, was to send her to baptist hospital for an upper gi to rule out any digestive tract illness. now, we know mrs. ruffo left high school at the age of 16 after her junior year. we know mrs. ruffo is not a professional. we know mrs. ruffo does not have a medical degree. we know dr. rice did. now, if dr. rice, the medical doctor, the treating physician, after hearing about the symptoms, sent mrs. ruffo for a gastrointestinal test, does it follow that mrs. ruffo would have known she had copd? that is silly. of course not. her own doctor did not know at the time. and he sent her for an upper gi and it came back negative, and at that point, dr. rice said, i'm sending you to dr. reed, he is a lung expert. and it was at that point that dorothy ruffo finally realized, i might have something wrong with my lungs. and that is why, if you remember from the note, dr. reed's first meeting with dorothy said prior to 1990, she had no idea what copd was. she had no idea what chronic bronchitis was. she had no idea what emphysema was. and the only reason she knew what those terms meant was after she was diagnosed by dr. reed. so what has the defense done? well, they have shown you some forms that were filled out by mrs. ruffo. those are red herrings. those forms somehow suggest that she knew in 1988 or before that she had copd. of course not. of course not. so if we pick, for example, the disability report that you have seen several times where mrs. ruffo, in 2004, november, almost 15 years -- we see the disability form -- almost 15 years after she is been diagnosed, she is asked questions. one of which is, when did you first develop the symptoms. well, that is what the defense has shown her. that is what the defense has shown mrs. ruffo on the next page, when is the date your symptoms first bothered you? no, another page. and she wrote down a specific date 14 or 15 years after the fact, after she had been diagnosed with copd, she wrote march 15th of 1989. that is the only page they wanted to show mrs. ruffo. that date. we know that date is wrong. now, if we look on the preceding page, it asks, when did you first see a doctor? and we know her doctor was dr. reed. and her date that she said she saw dr. reed was march of 1989. we know that is wrong. we have verifiable proof that that date is wrong, that mrs. ruffo, 14 years later, made a mistake and did not remember the year she saw dr. reed. dr. reed remembers the year. the medical record bears out the year, and we have those for your perusal, and we know the date is may 21st of 1990. that is when she saw dr. reed, may 21st of 1990. now, you see there she put march, and in the preceding page she put march. and you see there she put '89, and on the preceding page she put '89. and on the other page, she put the 15th. remember we looked at that record from dr. reed on may 21st. let us look at that of them from 15 years and see if you come across a word "rattle." there ain't such a word for wheezing and bronchitis. check it. and so they rely on the ex-daughter-in-law as their professional, as their diagnostician to say that mrs. ruffo had chronic bronchitis and she was going to doctors, and she could not even talk because she was wheezing so bad. and yet marshall ruffo, when he was talking about his mother in the '80s, said we were very active, she was taking me places when i was a kid. she did not have any problem, not a cough. and mrs. ruffo said, no, i was very active in the '80s. i was working at the toll booth, i was not coughing, i was not having problems. and dr. reed, his medical records, you can see, any diagnosis he made always said copd, emphysema. you will not see copd, chronic bronchitis. and finally, dr. bernstein, via deposition that we read, what did he say? when he reviewed the records in 1990, there was no evidence of chronic bronchitis, none. and he said that did not develop until again. on the second page where she told dr. reed the date, 14 years earlier, it is pretty close, is not it, it is not march, it is may. it is not the 15th, it is the 14th, and it is 1990. do you think maybe she was trying to remember 14 years later that date? and so what did the defense do? the defense, in their case, called one witness to support their defense on the statute of limitations, one, connie cooper, the ex-daughter-in-law of dorothy ruffo, by way of deposition. and so what did the ex-daughter-in-law say? the ex-daughter-in-law said that dorothy ruffo at one point, she thought she said she had chronic bronchitis, was not sure. at another portion, she said dorothy told her she had chronic bronchitis. at another point, she said that she really did not see her much, but used to talk to her over the phone and was able to diagnose her over the phone as wheezing with a rattle sound. i ask you, i implore you, i urge you, look at barry reed's records. go through every one later, like 2010, 2011, and, to that extent, he agreed with dr. reed. so the professionals say, no, there is no chronic bronchitis, at least beginning in 1990. so if there is no chronic bronchitis beginning in 1990, there certainly was not chronic bronchitis in '89, '88, '87, that magically got better and she was healed. so the professionals tell you there is no chronic bronchitis. that comes later. the ex-daughter-in-law says otherwise. who do you believe, the ex-daughter-in-law or professionals? remember, the ex-daughter-in-law at some point said, i rarely saw her, and all the times that i saw her in perry, florida, when she was visiting her mother, i do not remember a cough. when i stayed at her house in miami, i do not remember a cough. when she was asked, is your memory good 25 years later? well, not really. just think about it. how would a person 25 years after the fact relate back and remember specific days where a specific person was coughing? you think that is really possible? so that is their evidence of statute of limitations. that is their one witness via deposition, the ex-daughter-in-law. they cannot meet their burden that miss ruffo knew, on or before may 5th of 1990, that she had copd. she did not know what copd was. and remember, when the defense played their public service announcement, and the person on the public service announcement is saying how people do not know what chronic bronchitis is. that was in the '80s. remember the newsletter that we showed you that were sent out by the hundreds of thousands? if we can get the poster. this was the newsletter that the tobacco industry was sending out by the hundreds of thousands, and what were they saying? they were denying that smoking was causing copd, and this is in the '80s. this is february of 1984, and they are saying, no, there is no cause of copd related to smoking. so ladies and gentlemen, there is no question that mrs. ruffo at the time of her diagnosis by dr. reed had no clue what copd was, had no chronic bronchitis. follow them. number 1, that smoking cigarettes causes certain named diseases including copd. that is a given, that is a fact that has been established. that nicotine in cigarettes is addictive. that is a fact that has been established. that defendants placed cigarettes on the market that were defective and unreasonably dangerous. that is a fact. that is what they did. that defendants concealed or omitted material information not otherwise known or available knowing that the material was false and misleading or failed to disclose a material fact concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes or both. so on those occasions when the defense tells you, mrs. ruffo knew smoking was bad and she saw the warnings, the findings says they knew more than mrs. ruffo did and did not tell her about material facts. that defendants agreed with other engle defendants to conceal or omit information regarding the health effects of cigarettes or the only experience mrs. ruffo had with coughing prior to that was bronchitis that dr. reed told you that is just a term from a common cold that develops into a cough and you get what is called bronchitis. and that is the only incidence of cough that mrs. ruffo told you about and that you will see in any records, bronchitis. that is it. so when you are asked, ladies and gentlemen, on the verdict form, number 2, "did dorothy ruffo's copd manifest itself such that she knew or in the exercise of reasonable care should have known, on or before may 5, 1990, both that she had copd and that there was a causal connection between her smoking and her copd," the answer is no. no proof. causation. simple. simple. after we prove to you class membership, you are going to have the benefit of the engle findings. and if we can put the engle findings up, please. and you are going to be told, you know these findings are binding on you. you know you need no more proof to establish these findings. it is as if they have already been proven. you have no obligation other than to their addictive nature with the intention that the smokers and the public would rely on this information to their detriment. and finally, that defendants were negligent. that defendants were negligent. so what do we need to show you? we need to show you that mrs. ruffo's smoking the cigarettes by lorillard and philip morris caused her disease. well, there was nothing else it did. there is no dispute that her disease was caused by cigarettes, and it was the cigarettes that they produced, the defendants, that caused her disease. we have proven legal causation. that is simple. so when it says, "was smoking cigarettes manufactured by one or more of the defendants a legal cause of the injuries of dorothy ruffo," the answer is a resounding yes. "was smoking cigarettes manufactured by defendants philip morris a legal cause of mrs. ruffo's injuries?" of course, yes. "was smoking cigarettes manufactured by lorillard a legal cause of injuries?" of course, yes. because those are the only cigarettes on which she relied her smoking. now, let us talk about reliance. reliance, ladies and gentlemen, does not entail mrs. ruffo having to remember 50 years ago hearing a statement made by any of these tobacco companies, a statement made about advertising, about anything about their products and remembering it and relying on it and doing something because of a statement that she heard that she has to remember 50 years ago. that would be impossible to ask anyone to remember 50 years ago, what was the statement that we said on which you relied to act? you cannot do it. what reliance means and what you are going to be told is this. it is the climate that was created by the defendants. it was the climate by which they created this glamorization of the cigarettes. it is the climate that they created through their advertising. it is the climate that they created through mass media. what did i tell you in opening statement? the sky writing, the billboards, the media, the television, the radio, the buses, the human this courtroom and smoke. you could go to a bank and smoke. you could go to a prison and smoke. you could go to college and smoke. you could go on an elevator and smoke. you could go to a maternity ward and smoke. mrs. ruffo, in '77, was smoking in her room after she gave birth. you could go to a doctor's office and smoke, and likely your doctor would be smoking, too. you could go on an airplane and smoke. you get it. you could go anywhere during that time and smoke because that is the climate they created. so if the cigarette companies had been truthful with the material information, if they had disclosed what they knew in the '50s about the material information of which dorothy did not know, the question then becomes, if maybe the climate was such that people realized how bad smoking was because the tobacco companies were forthright and they shared the information, and instead of the millions and millions of millions of messages going to consumers that smoking is glamorous, try our product, they would say, it is going to kill trademarks; everything that we talked about. examples of mass media to get their message out to millions and millions and millions of people. people go into movie theaters seeing actors and actresses smoke cigarettes because it was the cigarette companies that had them put these cigarettes in as props. it was the cigarette companies sitting here who made sure when you went into a store, you saw their products. it was the cigarette companies who made sure that when you watched a television program, you saw cigarette ads. and it is the '67 federal trade commission report that you can look at that says, so pervasive was this advertising that you could not help but see ad after ad after ad. and so it was because of what they did to glamorize cigarette smoking to a point so that when mrs. ruffo was offered that first cigarette back in 1959, she knew exactly what to do. because at that point in time, due to the cigarette companies, you could go virtually anywhere and smoke. you could be sitting in you, perhaps if the climate was such that everybody knew instead of the glamorization of cigarettes, that it is really bad, that when mrs. ruffo, in 1959, was offered that first cigarette, she would have said, no. and that is for you to decide. based on the evidence in this case, all it is, is if the climate changed and philip morris and lorillard and everybody else was honest and forthright about material information of which they were aware, and she was not, would it have been different? would mrs. ruffo have acted differently and not be sitting here with oxygen? that is simple. that is reliance, and that is up to you based on the evidence in this case. let us talk about comparative fault, because we demonstrated that the tobacco companies here, philip morris and lorillard, are responsible for causing the injuries to mrs. ruffo. let us talk about fault, because that is what we are here to do. it is a comparative fault situation. who is to blame more? and i told you in the opening statement, the evidence was going to show that philip morris and lorillard are far more responsible than dorothy ruffo. and by way of illustration, let me show you how. if you can put up the comparative fault chart. number one, lorillard and philip morris knew privately, in the '50s, that cigarettes caused disease, but publicly denied the health hazards of smoking. when defense counsel speaks to you, you need to ask questions. you need to think in your mind, well, why, if you knew privately, in the '50s, how bad cigarettes were, why did not you tell people? they need to answer that question. they will not, but they need to address it. and you know what, they will not. you know why? because if they are going to be honest with you, they are going to tell you. and to be honest, why do you think, if they knew privately how bad cigarettes were, why do you think they did not tell dorothy ruffo? you think it might be because they took money over health? do you think that might be plain and simple, because they knew it would addict people. you need to ask, why on earth were you not honest back then and we are sitting here today? despite knowledge of the health risks and addiction, what did they do? they did not tell folks about what they knew. they created this controversy, and they continued with their perversive advertising, with their pervasive advertising, despite knowing -- we know privately this stuff is bad, but we are going to continue to advertise our product and continue to sell cigarettes and not tell people. you need to know why they were doing that back then. you need answers. you are not going to get one, but you need it. they concealed material information, not ordinary information, they concealed material information about addiction and health not known or available to dorothy ruffo, knowing the information was false. they concealed false and misleading information from this woman. they knew more than mrs. ruffo did. mrs. ruffo might have known at some point smoking is bad. they knew a consideration, they were more interested in profit over health, and that is why they will not be able to respond to the question that you are going to wait for them to answer? why on earth, if you knew, in the '50s, it was bad, you did not tell it? they knew privately, in the '50s, that nicotine in cigarettes was addictive, but publicly denied the addictive nature of nicotine. you need to ask them, when they speak to you, hey, fellows, why, if your clients knew, in the '50s, that nicotine was bad and addictive, you did not tell someone like dorothy ruffo? you think it might be that they considered money over health? do you think they are going to tell you they did? and we know why they sold cigarettes. we know that cigarettes were not sold because they tasted wonderfully. we know that people were not interested in the great smoke going down into their lungs and that wonderful taste. we knew that the cigarette companies, back in the '50s, were well aware their cigarettes were being sold as a nicotine delivery device, more. mrs. ruffo might have known smoking might be dangerous. they knew more. it was their obligation, was it not, for them to tell her what they knew, and they did not. they concealed. they mislead. and the question has to be, why did not you all tell her? why did not you tell her, when you knew in the '50s, and maybe she would not have started. they agreed with others, lorillard, philip morris and others, to conceal or omit information regarding health effects of cigarettes or their addictive nature with the intention that dorothy ruffo would rely on the information to her detriment. and what did she do? she relied on the information to her detriment. you know, it is not just relying on the controversy. it is not just relying on the climate. we have actual evidence that mrs. ruffo relied on advertising, because when she switched from kents to benson & hedges, remember, she went into a store and she was enamored with that nice, pretty package. and from that day forward, boom, she stopped those kents and bought that pretty package of cigarettes that was displayed in the store. and from the lorillard, from their own expert witness, in her deposition, she admitted, yes, that is advertising, that is marketing. the packaging is marketing. the point of sale is advertising. mrs. ruffo told you that is why she switched. yet, they agreed with others to conceal this information. they agreed. why? you think maybe it is putting profit over health to her detriment on which she relied? they had the ability, folks, and you heard this from dr. proctor, they had the ability, the defendants, to take nicotine out of cigarettes so as not to sustain addiction, and they chose not to. why did they make that choice? you should have an answer to that. after all, this is apportioning fault. is mrs. ruffo at fault because she smoked cigarettes and they did not tell her it was addictive, and they did not tell her, we can sell you a product that does not have nicotine, but you will not get addicted and we will not make money because you will not continue to smoke. why did not they tell her? that. it took 50 years for lorillard and philip morris to say to the public, yes, our products are dangerous. it took 50 years for them to say, yes, our products, the nicotine, is addictive. do you think maybe if they had not waited 50 years, mrs. ruffo might not be in this position today? why did it take them 50 years to do that? maybe they will answer that question. that is something you need to know. after all, you are apportioning fault. and what is mrs. ruffo's fault in this case? what did she do? how did she mislead people? how did she lie to people? how did she conceal from people? how did she create controversy that did not exist? no, we accept some measure of fault, and we told you that from day one. they do not. we accept some fault. and i'm going to tell you what fault you should put on mrs. ruffo. when they finally -- when the defendants finally admitted fault sometime in 2000, then it is on mrs. ruffo. then she has no excuse. do you think maybe because they were interested in smokers being addicted so they would continue to buy their products? well, maybe they will tell you. what they did, when it became known by the scientific community, in the '50s, when it became known, when there was a consensus that, you know what, cigarettes, according to science, are dangerous, that cigarettes are addictive, that is the first time the cigarette companies publicly responded to the public. and what did they say? they said that we are not sure. we are going to do some research, you all. we are going to form these companies. and we are going to do this tobacco research. and we are going to fund research. and it was a front. so what they did, for the next 50 years, what they did is created a controversy that did not exist so that smokers, like mrs. ruffo, would not quit. that is what they did. you should ask, why did you do that? why did you create a controversy that did not exist? is mrs. ruffo at fault for that? surely not. they are. they have to take the blame for they have told the public, our products are dangerous, our products cause illness. she is still smoking. that is her problem, then. put it on her. from 2000 until she stopped in 2010, that is her fault. that is ten percent. put the 90 as any way you want to put it on them, but that is how it should be distributed. because you cannot find fault with mrs. ruffo during the time period that they are still concealing, misleading, lying. that does not make sense. mrs. ruffo should have known it was bad, but we are telling you all it is not. mrs. ruffo should have known it is addictive, but we are telling you all it is not. so she cannot be at fault for that, because each time they are telling people information, they know more than her. that is how you should attribute fault, ten percent to her, and 90 to them, however you want to divvy it up. most importantly, i want to talk about damages. and in this particular case, you have heard about the progression from this disease. you have heard about copd and what it can do. she is not going to recover from it. she is going to die. and we showed you, by way of, if we can, a chart. what i've done here, you can see there is been ten-year periods, a second ten-year period, and now from 2010 -- no, no, let us take that down. there is a whole list here of symptoms. and you can see when mrs. ruffo was first diagnosed in 1990, for the first ten-year period, yeah, she was sick. she had symptoms. she was short of breath on exertion, but there were times where her short of breath became more difficult on minimal exertion. and there were times, during that first period, where mrs. ruffo was unable to work because she was sick with her illness. she took days off. and, finally, it got to the point where she had to take the entire summers off from her employment so that, in 1999, she was no longer able to work, because she thought, i'm missing too much work from being sick, i cannot do it. so she retired. so during that time frame, you can see the right now has a 14-year life expectancy. we know she does not now. we know that life expectancy has been deprived because of the cigarettes she smoked that were manufactured and sold by the defendants. that is a consideration to determine whether or not she is going through some mental anguish. as you can see now, the decline from 2010, we know, in 2010, in october, she had pneumonia that lasted for several months, and we know that it is very dangerous for a person with copd, especially at the stage mrs. ruffo is in, to get pneumonia. we know that she has shortness of breath even at times when she is sitting down. we know that she is now on oxygen for 24 hours a day, and sometimes that does not help, and she has exacerbations. she has times when she cannot breathe. she has times when she wakes up at night and she is gasping for air. she now says she cannot walk from room to room without holding onto something, without getting very short of breath to where she has gradual decline in mrs. ruffo's health. that is for the first ten years. the second ten-year period, from 2000 to 2009, you see it is getting a little bit worse. she now has instances of respiratory distress, and you can check the medical records and verify that. she has more chronic coughing. she is now unable to do routine household chores. she cannot walk only but short distances before getting shortness of breath. she now needs oxygen when getting around the house during the daytime, and she has a power scooter and a wheelchair to help her ambulate around either outside or inside. so you can see, during this period of time, she has gotten far worse. and finally, from 2010 until we do not know when mrs. ruffo is going to die and succumb to this disease. dr. reed said it could be two years, it could be longer. we hope it is longer. but, you know, the outside chance, we have said maybe six years, maybe five years. the mortality tables say a lady of mrs. ruffo's age to sit down and rest before she can take any steps. we know now she needs naps from 2:00 to 4:00 every day, or else she is going to be sick. we also know that, at some point, recently dr. reed broached the subject of end of life. he wanted to talk to her and see if she was ready to talk about her end of life, and she said, i'm not ready to do it. she said, i really have other things i want to do with my family. she was not ready to give up yet. we know, at this point, she finally got on prednisone, despite the side effects, because that is the last thing they can do for her, is give her prednisone. there is nothing left. she is at end stage copd with 24 hours of oxygen, who can hardly move around, and is aware that if she gets a cold now, or if she gets the flu now, it could be dire. so she has lived with this disease not for a year or two. this is 23 years that she has had this disease. so you see these symptoms, and the question is: how do you assign a value to her progression, her decline, how do you quantify it? and you know what? it is not hard. it is not hard. and you know why? we deal with increments of time every day of the week. that is all we deal with is time increments. for example, you wake up in the morning. you have slept eight hours. you go to work and come home, you have worked ten hours. you eat lunch and dinner, an hour apiece. you have an appointment during the day at a certain time. airports all over the country, planes take off at 12:16 and land at 1:13. time is very important. you can look at everybody wearing watches and see that everyone is beholding to time. in the workplace, everyone is beholding to time. people are paid hourly. take a nurse. a nurse might make $50 an hour, work ten hours, make $500 in a day. they have earned that money. a plumber comes to your house to fix a leak, might cost you $125 an hour, but that plumber, while expensive, has done his job and has earned his money. you might have a corporate lawyer that charges a client $750 an hour to do work, ten now, who, in their right mind, would want a job that mrs. ruffo was given? it did not take training. it did not take education. it did not take skill. no one, in their right mind, working now, making whatever they are making, would trade places in a million years with mrs. ruffo for what they are making, whether it is the athlete making $30 million a year or a nurse making $50 an hour. no one would want that job to die. yet, that is her lot in life. and it has not been for a year. it has not been for ten. it is been for 23 years. and, hopefully, at least, hopefully, she will be here a little longer. and so it is not difficult to assign a wage, an hourly rate for mrs. ruffo's suffering. just like any other person who gladly has a job and gets paid, mrs. ruffo has a job she does not want, but, nevertheless, should get paid. and so what i've done for you is to assign different rates per hour based on a 24-hour-a-day for the damages that mrs. ruffo should be entitled to from these defenses over hours of work. that is $7,500 earned. and then you get really over-the-top money. there is professional athletes in sports making 25 to $30 million a year for something they enjoy. and then you have got these outliers, like howard stern, and shock radio and sirius radio, makes a hundred million a year. and the thing about it is that these people in the workforce, oftentimes, they are educated and trained for their job. they are professionals and have specific jobs for their training and people want jobs. people enjoy their jobs. people get time off from their job, and they get vacation from their jobs. and the problem here is that dorothy ruffo is in a similar situation. she had a job. she got a job from the tobacco company, from philip morris and lorillard, and her job is to die. now, she did not want that job. she did not ask for that job. she did not train for that job. she does not get time off from that job. that is an everyday, 24-hour-a-day, seven-day-a-week job that she gets no time to take off. a 26-year period. so, for example, i'm going to show you a chart, and we are going to start off with an income of $25 an hour on the low side. $25 an hour, times 24 hours in a day, times 365 days a year, times ten years, and that is for the first phase of her decline from 1990 to 1999. and the medium level is $50 an hour, same rate, $50 an hour, times 24 hours a day, times 365, times ten years. and the high level is $75 an hour, times 24 hours a day, times 365 days in a year, times ten years. and so if you can see the chart, this is what we end up with for her first year of decline at the age of 46, when she got this disease. based on low rate of $25 an hour, you see that is $2,190,000 for ten years with this disease. and you see the middle rate at $50 an hour amounts to $4,380,000 for ten years of suffering. and you see the $75 an hour for $6,570,000. that represents the middle, the high and the low rates for mrs. ruffo's suffering for the first decade after she got her disease. now, you are free to do whatever you want with the numbers. you might make them higher. you might make them lower. you can change anything you want, but that is a guidepost for you to consider. that is the first ten years, and you have already seen the decline in that first ten years. the second ten-year period, you see a further decline where she has the wheelchair, the scooter, the oxygen, and now the rate goes from a low of a $100 an hour to a middle range of $200 to a high range of $300, and you can see, by the same calculations, based on 24 hours a day that this woman suffers, 365 days a year for that ten-year period that she has suffered to the age of 56, the low rate is $8,760,000, the middle range of $200 an hour is $17,520,00 for her suffering, and the higher rate is $26,280,000. that is for the second ten-year decline from the progression with copd. mr. fasi: your honor, i need to object at each period of decline, the total is $26,718,000. that is for 26 years of suffering with this disease. not one year, $25 million a year like some athletes make. this is for 26 years. if you take the medium range, it is a total of $42,924,000. if you take the high range, it is a total of $59,130,000. you are free to do what you want with the numbers. you can go higher. you can go lower. you can go less than 24 hours. you are free to do that, but that is just a guidepost based on our importance of time that everyone attributes. now, we know what mrs. ruffo can do. you have heard. mrs. ruffo can walk very slowly from one room to another holding onto things and resting until she gets to her couch, and sit on her couch and watch television. we know she can do that. we know mrs. ruffo can get into a bed because she takes a nap from 2:00 to 4:00. so we know she can do that. we know she can get in bed at night and this point. this is in violation of samuels versus torres, damage-related issues improperly set forth. the court: i'll note your objection for the record. it is overruled. mr. kaiser: finally, we have the last period of decline, and we have assigned a six-year period. you might assign a two-year period or a longer period, but it is going to be -- she is 69 right now. this is for the time period from 2010, and we have taken it for six years, and now the rate is higher, because mrs. ruffo could barely do anything. and so the low rate here is $300 an hour for a total of $15,768,000. the middle rate is $400 an hour for a total of $21,024,000. the high rate is $500 an hour for a total of $26,280,000. so, by way of summary, we can show you, for the ten-year period, for the ten-year period, and for the six-year period, from the low to the medium to the high, it totals, for the very low, if you take the low numbers for sleep, sometimes gasping, but we know she can get to bed. we know mrs. ruffo can see. we know she can hear. we know she can taste. we know she can feel. but that is about all she can do. and there are a lot of things she cannot do because of this disease. what cannot she do that you have heard? we know she cannot do gardening, which she loved to do. cannot do it anymore. we know she cannot clean the house. cannot do it anymore. we know she cannot do laundry. cannot do in anymore. we know she cannot do dishes. we know that she cannot walk a dog around the block. we know she cannot walk outside with her husband. we know she cannot do any of those things. we know she cannot cook a meal for her family like she used to do. and what bothers her the most is not being able to do that at christmas and at thanksgiving, when it was mrs. ruffo that was cooking all the time, and now all she can is watch as her son, marshall, tries to do it. and mrs. ruffo feels she is outside this family just watching them, because she just cannot do it. she just cannot. i want you to indulge me for just 30 seconds as i stand here. that is 30 seconds. seems like an inordinate amount of time that i stood up here and not said a word. in those 30 seconds, how many times do you think she takes a breath? who knows, but she is breathing during that time. it is not just a 30-second increment in which she is breathing. this goes on for a day, 24 hours a day. it might go on for a year. it might go on for two years. and we know the amount of suffering that she is going through every time she takes a breath. dr. reed said, with her illness, it is almost like taking a straw and that straw gets narrower and narrower to where it is hard to breathe out, and you cannot expel all your air, and then you have to breathe in, and you cannot do that either. it gets to the point where it is almost like a cocktail straw. the time i just stood here seemed inordinate, and that was only 30 seconds. we do not know how much time mrs. ruffo has, but that seems like an eternity, knowing what she is going through as she takes her breaths. what that case says, your honor, the fifth dca case concluded that a request in a closing argument to award the plaintiff $1,000 per year for the rest of her 34-year life expectancy was improper because, in quotes, "there is absolutely no evidentiary support for such an award." they also cite werneck versus worral at 918 so.2d 383 cited at page 388, fifth dca case. werneck stated that -- stating the fact that counsel should have suggested -- it stated that the fact that counsel could have suggested a wholly-arbitrary number to the jury does not give counsel carte blanche to mislead the jury by knowingly urging it to imply methodology. that is right from that case. that is exactly what mr. kaiser did. mr. bideau: that is why we objected right away. lorillard joins in the request. mr. kaiser: mine was based totally on the evidence and what her rate of decline showed. it was totally proper. the court: let me reserve on it. let me read the case law, and i'll let you know. in the meantime, mr. fasi. and there is something else i left out that we know she can do, and that is to feel the pain and the suffering from the cigarettes she smoked that they sold her. thank you. mr. kaiser: what i want to do is just respond to the arguments that you heard by defense counsel. i will be more brief than i was in my initial argument to you. we will start with the verdict form. number one, legal cause, engle class. now, what you did not hear from defense counsel, other than ms. ruffo smoked because she enjoyed it, it was her choice, and they do not comment on something that is very important. all they want to say for the engle class is, it was her choice, but they forget something very important, addiction. they forgot about that. addiction. that is what you need to show, whether she was addicted. they do not comment on that because they know it was beyond any doubt that she was addicted. remember, i do not want to go with choices that she made, it is whether or not her addiction caused her disease. do they dispute addiction? no. it is not a question as: well, we say she is addicted; they said she is not. they have never said that. they agree, she was addicted. they know they cannot argue choice, but they have done it, so we can resolve this in short shrift. she was addicted, her disease was a result of her addiction, and so it is class membership, the answer is, of course she was. secondly, the statute of limitations argument. now, let us dispense real quickly with the exhibits they wanted to show you, the after-the-fact exhibits where dorothy ruffo filled out this information. it is really sophomoric to have to discuss it with you because we know, after 1990, dorothy ruffo knew what she had. dr. reed told her: you have got copd, you have got emphysema. prior to that time she would never heard of it. she would never heard of copd. now, 15 years later, when she is filling out these through it again, dr. reed, dr. goldman, the medical records. they know that dr. reed is a caring, competent physician. they do not dispute that. that is an issue that is already decided. it is simple. it is addiction; not choice, it is addiction. they did not say one word about it because they know they cannot argue it. something interesting, you remember dr. proctor's testimony, there was a question: dr. proctor, why did not the defendants, the tobacco industry, why did not they argue addiction? they said they could not for many reasons. they explained the reasons, one of which, if they admit addiction, they will have a difficult time during litigation because you cannot argue choice. if they admit choice, they cannot argue choice. that is exactly what they did here, despite knowing full well you cannot. that is why they do not say anything about addiction. we have proven addiction. the question is: did the addiction cause her illness? absolutely it did. it has nothing to do forms, she knows what her disease is. dr. reed's told her. she is seen dr. reed countless times. she can fill out a piece of paper and indicate she has copd. she can, without any problems, put on a form that she is had symptoms for x number of years. why? because after 1990 she knew. that is not to say, in 1988, she knew. after the fact, it is a no-brainer, of course she knew. how difficult is it for her to realize that: you know what, my short of breath in '88, when i learned i had copd in '90, i could put two and two together and realize my problem was copd. did not know it then, but knows it in 2004, knows it in 1997. so those documents are really meaningless. all it shows is that dorothy ruffo, after she knew of her diagnosis, can sit and write on a piece of paper: had these symptoms for a long time, but i now know what they are. here's the other question: did dorothy ruffo -- and mr. bideau conveniently forgot. he wants you to believe that all she has to do is realize that there is a connection to her smoking. there is more to it than that. what you have to find, what they have to prove to you, that they have not done, is that prior to may 5, 1990, dorothy ruffo had reason to believe or knew, not that she had a cough, not that she had a bronchitis, but she had copd. you had to know it. who knew what copd was at the time? mr. fasi: your honor, i object to misstatement of the law by counsel. the court: overruled. thank you. mr. kaiser: who knew at that time? did she know or have reason to believe, before may 5 of 1990, that she had copd, and, and, that the copd was -- there was a causal connection between that and smoking? now, the fact that she might have attributed a cough to a smoker's cough, that is not a qualifying disease that gets you in court here, a smoker's cough. remember, her symptoms was not a cough. the symptoms that caused her to go see a doctor was shortness of breath and a pain in her midchest. now, what you have heard from the read it and you will see, on or before may 5 of 1990, knew or should have known that she had copd, reasonable belief, and that there was a causal connection between the copd and the smoking. now, not only does she have to know that, "i've got copd," or should know "i've got copd," but it comes from smoking, and dorothy ruffo told you: i did not get short of breath from smoking cigarettes. i did not get the pain in my chest from smoking cigarettes. so how on earth was she to know that this shortness of breath, yep, it is got to be from cigarettes. now, counsel from philip morris made a very good point, great point. if she had seen -- if she had gone to the doctors in the '80s, she would have been told. it would have been a no-brainer. we know she did go to the doctors in the '80s. that is what they said also. what are we going to believe? on the one hand, on one side of her mouth, they are saying that she went to doctor, what you have heard from the experts, is shortness of breath can be a symptom in a whole bunch of other cases, in a whole bunch of other diseases, unrelated to the lungs. so what they are suggesting to you with their proof is that on or before may 5 of 1990, when dorothy ruffo had short of breath, dorothy ruffo at that point should have realized: you know, this short of breath is copd, i better get to a doctor. this is a woman who left high school after her junior year, who was an elevator operator, a bartender, and worked for the state of florida as a toll operator, and they want you to believe that dorothy ruffo knew, before may 5th of 1990, that the short-of-breath symptom, which could be symptoms for a whole host of diseases, she knew she had copd. mr. fasi: your honor, i object, continued mischaracterization of the law, misstatement of the law. the court: all right. i will note your objection. overruled. mr. kaiser: you will get the law and doctors in the '80s. and then they are saying: well, had she gone, she would have known. well, she did go. they put up that slide. she had told dr. rice of her full history. dr. rice did not say anything in the '80s, did he? that is because she was not exhibiting symptoms for which anyone would have been able to say: you have got a breathing disease. otherwise, as they said, when she was going to these doctors in the '80s, they would have told her, but they did not because no one knew. and then when she did go to dr. rice because she had the symptoms, he knew her history, he knew about her smoking, what did he do? with his training, his expertise, his medical degree: i need you to get an upper gi. well, certainly, if he did not have the wherewithal to know that she had a smoking-related disease, copd, that dorothy ruffo did not know. they have not met their burden to prove to you that she was untimely in bringing her lawsuit. they have failed miserably in that regard. they keep telling you that she had these stop signs, that she knew all of this information. that is a great argument under one condition: if pm and lorillard do not exist, that is when that is a good argument. because again, they did not comment on their own behavior. they did not mention their clients. they did not talk about the engle findings. they could not answer the questions i suggested on the comparative fault issue. they did not tell you why, when they knew about the information in the '50s about the health risks, they did not tell anybody. they did not address that question. why, when they knew it was addictive, they did not tell people? they did not address it. why? because an honest response would be: because we put money over health. that is why they could not get up here and news, no doubt about it. you saw their last clip, where the newspeople broke into programming, and they talked about what had been found. and this was big news. and yet from that, important information, we get the first warnings on the packs, and the first warnings are not endorsed by the surgeon general, they do not tell you that smoking will cause disease or lung cancer, and they do not tell you there is a definitive risk. what do they tell you? smoking may be hazardous. what does that mean? smoking may not be hazardous. now, that is the warning that people look at and they are going to say: this is really bad. the surgeon general report comes out with this unbelievable information in the packs of cigarettes, and two years it is merely caution that says nothing. and we know from the 1967 ftc report, nobody paid attention to those warnings, they were terribly ineffective. that was the honestly tell you why they did not do that. but instead, what did they do? they created this controversy. they created this controversy. now, they want to take you through this field, dorothy ruffo, every step of the way, knew about this information. she was warned. remember one thing: every time they tell you that dorothy ruffo knew about the information, they knew more. because they concealed material information from her. they wanted her to detrimentally rely on the information. so every time dorothy ruffo, it is suggested that she knew about information, she knew about something about smoking, they knew more and did not tell it. but alas, they talk about the warnings on the packs of cigarettes; in 1966, the first warnings. remember, the surgeon general's report came out, they want you to believe she read the report, although i showed it to her and she said, "i did not read this." and the surgeon general's report was big conclusion reached by the ftc report in 1967. when the defendant showed you a slide of the public service announcement where the lady's taking out the cigarette, she did not look at the warnings on the pack. people did not look do that. people every day when they smoke, they do not look at the warnings on the cigarette pack. dorothy ruffo, on occasion, might have known about the warnings on the cigarette pack, but do you think she took that with her for 50 years, "oh, i remember this warning every time i smoke this cigarette," of course not. when she is receiving any type of information like this, the blast by the tobacco industry is so much, it is significantly more informative. they are blasting information to people like dorothy ruffo and the consumers. they are responding. they do exist. they are the ones who originally created this climate. and remember when defense counsel said: dorothy ruffo made the choice to smoke. well, the problem was, it was an ill-informed choice to smoke. you could make a choice to smoke, and you could be held responsible for smoking, if it is the product of a well-informed choice. but the deposition of kristy leung of lorillard, what did she tell you: yes, we agree that adolescents cannot make those decisions to start smoking. they agreed, they admitted. that is their own admission. they knew that smoking initiation by people mrs. ruffo's age could not make those decisions. so her initial decision to start smoking was an ill-informed decision, it was an ill-informed choice, and it was ill informed because of the information that had been put out there in the public by the tobacco industry. now, let us talk about reliance. and again, there does not have to be any one statement made by lorillard or any one statement made by philip morris. it is this climate. and of course, defense counsel cannot talk about that. it is the climate that the tobacco industry created. and i do not need to go through every step. but it was the court: all right. i will reserve it at this time. mr. kaiser, go ahead. mr. kaiser: one thing that the defendants all did together was, they agreed to conceal or omit information regarding the health effects of cigarettes or their addictive nature with the intention that smokers and the public would rely on this information to their detriment. so they all got together, and they wanted this plan to work together. and so it is not so much that mrs. ruffo did not see a kent ad, the fact remains that kents were being advertised, and benson & hedges were being advertised, and all sorts of cigarette brands were being advertised. and all sorts of information was being given to the public so that that is how the climate was created. it does not matter if mrs. ruffo did not see a kent ad. what mrs. ruffo did tell you was, "i saw ads on television." so the message did get to her. she saw plenty of messages on television. now, she such a climate that was created by kent, by benson & hedges, by all of the tobacco industry, such that when dorothy ruffo picked up that first cigarette that was given to her, regardless of whether she had ever thought about it, she knew that she wanted to do it because everybody was smoking. and everybody was smoking because of the information that was being put out there by the defendants and others. and when mr. bideau says, "well, lorillard, ms. ruffo never relied on a kent ad," it does not matter. she smoked kents. it does not matter if she relied on their ad or anyone else's ad. what does matter is that they all agreed. and you will see on one of the findings, they all agreed. the one thing that i cannot find -mr. bideau: objection. can we go sidebar for a second? the court: let mr. kaiser finish, all right. i'll preserve your objection for the record. mr. bideau: then the objection is he is misusing the findings. could remember marlboro and camel, and she could not remember the specific other brands. but what she could say was: yeah, i saw the ads on television, i saw the billboards, i saw the buses, i saw the movies, i saw people smoking to where it was such a normal behavior, everybody was doing it. when the defense counsel talk about the warnings like that is the end-all here because now mrs. ruffo is on notice, that was in 1966. okay? we know that philip morris and lorillard knew about the health risks of smoking in the '50s. we know they knew about the addictive nature of nicotine in the '50s, all right? well, then, prior to mrs. ruffo smoking, when she picked up that cigarette, had they ever warned her then, on a cigarette pack or on anything, that this was going to cause danger and you are going to get addicted; no. after she started smoking in 1960, did they tell her: this is going to cause you harm, you are going to get addicted; no. in '61, did they tell mrs. ruffo: this is going to cause you harm, you are going to get addicted; no. in '62 did they tell her: this is going to cause you harm, you are going to get addicted; no. same in '63, same in '64, and same in '65. the only reason '66 it changed is because they had to. and kristy leung from lorillard told you in the deposition, that is the only reason they started advertising, because the -- the warnings on the packs, because the government told them: you have to do it. and despite all this knowledge that came out about the health risks of cigarettes, despite all this knowledge about the addictive nature of the nicotine in cigarettes, mrs. leung was asked: did you continue to advertise the same pervasive way that you have advertised in the past? her answer was: yes, yes we did. why did they continue to advertise in that way, knowing full well about the disease that could be caused and the addiction from the nicotine in the cigarettes? that was their choice. see, choices go in 2007: this causes disease, this causes addiction. the only reason they came clean is because they had absolutely zero credibility because nobody believed the controversy at that point. here's something else. they want you to believe that dorothy ruffo should have known about the dangers of smoking because of the cautions that came out and because of all of this information, and yet remember dr. proctor, there was a scientific community, a consensus in the '50s, in the mid-'50s, the scientific community was aware. he said the medical community, the consensus was not until maybe the '70s or the '80s. that is how long it took. that is the last time before the medical community was in agreement about the dangers of health risks of smoking. remember, according to dr. proctor, in the 1960s, fifty percent of all doctors in the united states were smoking cigarettes. and then dr. proctor said: the lag time is even further before the public recognizes both ways. it was the tobacco defendants here, it was philip morris and lorillard's choice not to tell mrs. ruffo and others about how bad smoking could be before she started. it was their choice not to tell mrs. ruffo that if you smoke, you might get addicted. it was their choice that they decided they did not want to take out that nicotine in the cigarettes because they could not get people to be addicted. that was their choice, not mrs. ruffo's, it was their choice to conceal the information, material information about the health risks of smoking and the addiction in nicotine. that was their choice, not mrs. ruffo's choice. it was their choice to agree with each other, to conceal information, so that dorothy ruffo would rely on that information to her detriment. it was their choice to create this controversy when they knew full well that one did not exist. they prolonged this controversy by creating doubt for 50 years. that was their choice. it was their choice that they did not tell anyone until 50 years, and they finally came clean the dangers and the addictive nature in smoking. so if it is doctors that do not know until the '70s, what about the public and people like mrs. ruffo? when did mrs. ruffo know that smoking caused copd; when did she know that smoking was addictive? all they have been able to say: well, at some point she knew it was bad. what was bad; it was going to stunt her growth? they knew it and did not tell her. that is their choice, not mrs. ruffo's. so as far as the statute of limitations argument, that fails miserably. as far as legal cause in this case, we know the addiction caused the injury, and we know that the cigarettes that mrs. ruffo smoked, whether they were lorillard or philip morris, caused her injury because she did not smoke any other cigarettes. and you do not take it in isolation, as mr. bideau would want you to believe. there is not a question of: there is only five pack years of lorillard, so it cannot possibly be that we are liable. let me explain what i mean by that. you have heard dr. goldman testify about dose response. and we know, from the chart that you saw here, there is about 124,000 doses of nicotine, 127,750 doses of nicotine in that seven-year period that dorothy ruffo inhaled. do not you think that might contribute substantially to her disease in the seven years that she was smoking a half a pack of those kent cigarettes? you cannot erase the 127,750 of nicotine doses of nicotine. you have to consider that those doses contributed to her disease. no doctor can tell you at what point the disease was caused. no doctor can pinpoint what number of cigarettes caused her disease. no doctor can pinpoint how many years it took before her disease manifested. but what they can tell you is, it is the combination of the cigarettes that she smoked that caused damage. so it is not a matter that one did not and the other one did. if mr. bideau is saying: if our sick person would not be able to file a lawsuit because, individually, none of those cigarette companies would be liable because they did not get up to that threshold of ten pack years. well, they did. because you consider five pack years for one, five pack years for another, five pack years for another, that is 15 years. in combination, they all contributed to disease. and that is what we have here. this is not a single-defendant case, where lorillard were the only cigarettes that dorothy ruffo smoked. no. so that is why it is in combination. it is not an individual finding. it is in combination with each other, so that the 127,000 doses, combined with the 3,212,000 doses, all contributed to mrs. ruffo's illness. one little thing real quick, i forgot to mention about statute of limitations. and that is the argument that, well, these doctors all agree that mrs. ruffo's illness, her emphysema must have occurred in at least 1985. i mean, the doctors will tell you, the cigarettes did not cause damage, it must have been philip morris. but here it is, they are both liable for the injuries. here's why. if you take mr. bideau's logic, that it is a five pack-year cigarette, five pack years, five pack years of cigarettes, and we know and we can accept the figure that it takes at least ten before you can get disease. so if there is a five pack year of smoking, you quit, you do not get disease. we accept that. so if you have three brands of cigarettes with five pack years per cigarette, that is 15 years. so we know someone who smokes a brand for five pack years, a second brand for five pack years, a third brand for five pack years, there is a chance that person can get sick. what happens if someone does get sick, three cigarette brands, five pack years, five pack years, five pack years, under mr. bideau's logic, none of those cigarette companies would be liable because there is not enough pack years to cause disease. so a doctors, especially dr. reed, after he made a diagnosis based on x-rays, based on pulmonary function study, based on history, based on blood tests, with his skilled knowledge, he was able to make a diagnosis of copd. and because of that diagnosis, and because of chest films, he could look and he could say: this is severe enough that i could go back and i could figure out, she must have had this disease by 1985 or 1988. doctors can do that. professionals can do that. and so what does that mean? it means nothing other than doctors knew that mrs. ruffo, when she got diagnosed, must have had the condition prior to 1990. interestingly, though, you did not hear one word from any them who said, "and, of course, dorothy ruffo would have known at that same time that she had copd," because that is silly, because no one can say that. mr. fasi: objection, your honor, misstatement of the law. the court: it is overruled. mr. kaiser: no one could say that, no one opined on that, no one testified that. of course, mrs. ruffo would have been familiar with those) symptoms in '85. so the fact that doctors would have known that mrs. ruffo, after they knew of her illness, go backwards and say it must have been in 1985 that she had it. that means nothing as to whether mrs. ruffo knew or should have known that she had copd prior to may 5th of 1990. now, i want to just talk for a minute about comparative fault. and in this case, what defense counsel has failed to do is to really discuss comparative fault. they want to say willy nilly, it is all on mrs. ruffo a hundred percent, because they do not want you to believe that it exists. that is why they cannot answer the questions that i posed that you have a right to have answers. that is why you should not consider it, in the least, their argument about what percentage of fault mrs. ruffo has. because they did not compare their own. they did not compare their own. and i submit to you, you cannot put any blame on mrs. ruffo at the same time when the seriousness with which we met the report, we must in the near future provide some answers which will give smokers a psychological crutch and a self-rationale to continue smoking. now, that was their choice, not mrs. ruffo's choice, so that you cannot put blame on mrs. ruffo for not quitting smoking when the tobacco companies are trying to give her a psychological crutch to continue. like i said before, put blame on mrs. ruffo where blame is due. put blame in mrs. ruffo after 2000, when the tobacco companies were honest and said: we believe it does cause disease, and we agree that the nicotine is addictive. then it was on mrs. ruffo, from 2000 until she quit in 2010. and i just want to get into one more area and i will sit down. and that is, you heard all about these statements. and mrs. ruffo, at one time or another, had said she was not interested in quitting, she did not want to quit, she did not want help quitting. remember her testimony. she did not take cigarette companies are still putting out information that is untrue. cannot put blame on her for that. you cannot put blame on her when the tobacco companies are still denying that cigarettes are dangerous. you cannot put blame on her when they are still denying that it is not addictive. you cannot put blame on her when they are trying to give her a psychological crutch so that she will not stop smoking. remember, in 1972, almost 20 years after their controversy that they created, in 1972, it is called the roper proposal, and that came out -- and the roper proposal was in 1972, and they talked about their strategy here. and they said it was brilliantly conceived and executed. so they knew their controversy that they created was well executed and successful. they knew after the surgeon general's report in 1964, one of their concerns after the surgeon general's report was: we have got to put out some information to give a psychological crutch to the smoker, like mrs. ruffo. at some point, reflecting the same dr. reed up on his invitation to quit smoking because, she said, "i wanted to do it on my own." and she also said she was not interested in quitting smoking because she knew what it felt like when she had tried in the past, and contrary to what defense counsel said to you, she had tried in the past. her son said she had quit more than a day. on many occasions she had tried to quit. as dr. goldman told you, the people that make these statements, it is not surprising, that is the addiction talking. they do not want to talk about addiction here because they argue choice, but that is what is talked about here, that is the addicted person saying, rationalizing with that crutch, that they cannot quit smoking, they do not want to quit smoking. if mrs. ruffo really liked smoking, if she really enjoyed smoking, number one, do you think she would have still smoked when her disease hit her? do you think she really wanted to smoke at that point? do you think she could say, "i really wanted to smoke because i enjoyed it once i knew from dr. reed that i was going to die from this disease"? who in their right mind would do that? if she really enjoyed smoking, if she really wanted to smoke -- and dr. goldman said, "it is not that they enjoy smoking, what they enjoy is not getting the withdrawal symptoms if they do not go without smoking." what they are doing is smoking to get the feeling back, to get rid of the edginess, the nerves. mrs. ruffo described it as the stress that it relieves. it relieves her withdrawal symptoms. when she gets up from sleeping for eight hours and she has these symptoms, she gets that cigarette, and ah. if she really enjoyed smoking, why would she have a need to lie to her friends, and dr. reed, and anyone else about smoking? if she really enjoyed smoking she could say to the doctor: pound sand, i enjoy my smoking, i am going to smoke until i die, and i do not care what you say, or you say, or anybody says, because it is my choice. put on her is ten percent. because from 2000 to 2010, she did quit. and when she was on that chantix, mrs. ruffo testified, it was at least a week that she took it, but it upset her stomach and she stopped, and she was still able to quit. she did not have side effects because that is what the medicine is for. chantix was a relatively new drug that was only given by prescription. before that time, there were not real successful techniques to stop smoking. and so she told you, she used it. she was supposed to smoke that first week with it, and she did, and she used it, and after the first week stopped. and she was able to be successful without the withdrawal symptoms because of the medicine. certainly in the past, when she had tried to quit, she had not been successful. that was her frame of reference as to why she did not want to quit any more. and it was the pneumonia that triggered her finally quitting. something powerful triggered her: i have to try harder. this idea that, at one point, mrs. ruffo and she could say the same thing to her friends: if i like smoking, i have no hesitation in telling my friends and family, leave me alone, it is my choice. but the reason she lied to those people, the reason she lied to her doctors about her smoking, the reason she lied to her friends about her smoking, is because she knew she had to quit, she knew she wanted to quit, she knew she could not quit because she had tried. she knew she was embarrassed, and that is why she lied, because she knew what they were going to tell her. and that is the distinction. the fact that she would lie to her doctors who wanted her to quit, to her friends and family who wanted her to quit, indicates one thing: she knew she had to quit, she had tried and could not do it. and hold her at fault for that, hold her at fault for not trying hard enough. blame her for that, blame her after 2000: you did not try hard enough, you should have tried ten times instead of nine. put that on her. but i submit to you that what you could early on said something about 15 percent, that the tobacco industry was 15 percent, what you did not hear was: who has the other percent? you see, it is all irrelevant. because as she sat in the courtroom, she goes: no, i would not say that now, i know much more now than i did then. she did not have to have the information about the tobacco companies' lies and misstatements and concealment. that is what lawyers are for, when they filed this lawsuit. the lawyers have the knowledge, the client does not have to. and so when she is learned along the way what is happened when she has a chance to listen in this courtroom what is happened, now she says: of course it would not be 15 percent. but you know what, if she had said anything, if she had said 75 percent on them, eighty percent on them, you can bet they would be up here saying: can you believe the gall of that woman to say that? that is a self-serving statement. the most powerful statement she said was: i just do not know, it is a tough question. you know why; because it is irrelevant what she thinks. what is relevant is what you think. what you think is relevant to the evidence and the testimony. she is leaving it in your hands. and i'm going to sit down now, ladies and gentlemen, i'm going to ask, recall the testimony, recall the questions that were never answered in this case about their fault, not our fault. and recall the damages to compensate mrs. ruffo for her mental pain, for her physical pain and suffering based on her progression of her copd over the years. thank you.