mr. persons: yes, your honor. thank you. may it please this honorable court, counsel, mr. ryan, mrs. ryan, ladies of the jury. good morning. the panel: good morning. mr. persons: i want to begin by thanking you, just as mr. alvarez did. this process would not work without you. and you have been most, most attentive throughout this process and we greatly, greatly appreciate it, having you. it is an inconvenience having to put your other matters aside, your work aside and other obligations to do this, and we greatly appreciate it. when i started this case, it seems like it is been longer than about a week or so ago, but it was about a week ago we started with opening statements. i told you then and i'll say it again now, this case is about thomas j. ryan and what happened in his life and the decisions that he made and the basis for those decisions. i also told you at that time that all the questions on the verdict form relate to thomas j. ryan. and that is still true. i told you during opening statement that there were some key facts that would help you answer every question on that verdict form, and that is still true. mr. ryan did not start smoking because of anything a tobacco company said or did. that is just not true. he lived with his father at his grandparents' house. he is living in the same -- he is sharing a room with his father. his father leaves his camel cigarettes on his dresser, the cigarettes are accessible, he gets them and he starts smoking. he wants to emulate 18- and 19-year-old boys. those were peers. and dr. henningfield told you in no uncertain terms, he said advertising -- in the scale of things, advertising is down here, parents and peers are up here in a separate major category of influence. and we saw that during the course of this trial. mr. ryan was influenced by parent/father, peers. mrs. ryan, smoked her first cigarette when she had gone away to college, influenced by peers. when she took up smoking at the age of 38 in 1972, she was influenced by peers. the other teachers were smoking in the teachers' lounge. it was not advertising that made her do it. it was not james dean that made her do it. it was not john wayne that made her do it. it was parents and peers. mr. ryan did not reasonably rely on anything the tobacco companies said or did. reasonably. reasonably, and that is the key word. was it reasonable? we are going to explore that, why it was not even reasonable to do such a thing. despite knowing that smoking was dangerous, he continued to smoke. he wants to say now he did not know about it, but the warning was on the pack and there were other warnings that he had in his life about the dangers of smoking. he quit smoking permanently in 1997, the first time he got serious about it. he was diagnosed with copd in 1995, but it was not until 1997 that he got serious about quitting. obviously at that time when he was diagnosed, he knew about the dangers, he is lost his father to the disease. but he did not make any effort to try to quit until he got serious about it. when he got serious about it, he quit and stayed quit. mr. ryan admits he is partially responsible, partially at fault for causing his own copd. and we are going to explore that. what does that mean? it means that he could have done -- taken steps to quit sooner. he could have done some things that would have prevented him from getting copd and being in the condition that he finds himself in today. despite the advertising, despite the statements, anne browder and other people from the tobacco institute, he could have done things that would have prevented him from being in the condition he finds himself in this very day. now, we talked about the rest of the story and i told you about paul harvey when we had opening statement. during cross-examination of the plaintiffs' experts, that is when the other side of the story was told. look at dr. proctor. on direct examination, dr. proctor said to you that the industry withheld knowledge that selective filtration was not possible. you saw one of those documents during plaintiffs' closing just now. but on cross-examination he said the public health community knew that selective filtration was not possible. they knew that a filter could not remove all of the cancer-causing effects. nobody ever said that a filtered cigarette was safe. they said it was less dangerous than a nonfiltered cigarette. that is just common sense. that will be one of the things in the jury instructions, using common sense. nobody ever said it took everything out of -- all the dangerous chemicals out of the cigarette. it reduced the amount of tar that was reaching you, but not all of the tar that was reaching the smoker. the ftc robot measurements were confusing and misleading, that is what dr. proctor told you on direct examination. on cross-examination, he had to admit that the industry, the tobacco companies told the ftc that using this robot would not mimic the way people smoked. a smoker does not even smoke the same cigarette the same way. might take a deeper draw this time, a lesser draw the next time. the 1964 surgeon general's report, according to dr. proctor, was a minor blip. but on cross-examination he said years immediately following that report was one of the highest periods of quitting. 30 million people, 8,000 a day, quit in the ten years following that report. and they did so despite everything that the industry was saying, despite the campaign of deceit and denial, they took this to heart. people who were serious about it, did something about it. actions speak much louder than words. people took steps to do something about it. now, in 1964, how old was mr. ryan? you see he is 24 years old. he is not a youth smoker at that point. he is 22 years old. '53 teague report that they brought out where dr. teague went across the street to the library at wake forest university medical school and did research, research that was publicly available to anybody who is trained in science and medicine, and put together a memo that said that, yes, smoking causes cancer. and guess what, nothing that he cited was secret or based upon any research the tobacco companies had done. it was based upon publicly available scientific research. dr. proctor said on direct examination, the industry did not warn the public that if you switched to a filter, you may smoke more. did not have to. that is -- that concept is called compensation. the concept of compensation is common sense. you can see that message going back for decades. if you have got something that you are drawing air through, obviously you are going to pull on it harder. you do not need a scientist to tell that you. "industry research, ammonia to provide a nicotine kick. that was what he said on direct. on cross-examination, he had to admit that there was no evidence that ammonia makes cigarettes more dangerous or addictive. in fact, adding ammonia to it is a way to reduce the amount of nicotine in the tobacco plant. using ammonia or another solvent, including water, he said, would remove nicotine from the tobacco leaf. and he had to admit on cross-examination that when you burn tobacco, ammonia is one of the things that is released. would knowing that have stopped mr. ryan from continuing to smoke cigarettes? absolutely not. plaintiffs spent days reproving engle findings, talking about company conduct and the bad things in those documents and misguided opinions expressed in those documents, the campaign of deceit and denial. that was all part of the engle trial. brought you some generic witnesses. here's three of them. witnesses who did not know anything about mr. ryan. dr. henningfield said, i do not know what has happened with any of the individual plaintiffs. dr. burns said, i'm not aware of the names of the cases where they might plan to use this videotape. dr. proctor said, i do not know anything about his biography except the brands of cigarettes that he smoked. their testimony is generic, does not answer the questions on the verdict form as they relate to mr. ryan. dr. proctor, last two years testifying against tobacco companies, he is made a million dollars. he is made over $3 million testifying in his career against tobacco companies. seventy percent of his income comes from testifying. he spent -- $34,000 he charged to review the documents in this case, but nothing about mr. ryan. the evidence from the generic witnesses took several forms. they talked about youth marketing evidence, advertising evidence, addiction evidence, filter and low-tar evidence, and design evidence. we are going to go through some of those. youth marketing. here's their youth marketing case. mr. ryan started smoking because his father smoked and he wanted to be like 18- and 19-year-olds in town. plaintiffs' evidence on youth marketing occurred after mr. ryan was an adult. the earliest document they showed you was from 1973. in 1973, the man is 31 years old. plaintiffs' evidence on youth marketing involved brands that mr. ryan never smoked. they are talking about marlboro and things that mr. ryan -- he never smoked those type of cigarettes. so the evidence on youth marketing, that did not have any impact on mr. ryan. he was already grown at the time that they were doing all these youth marketing studies. dr. henningfield told you in no uncertain terms that parents and peers are so powerful that you basically had to put them in their own category. way above advertising, way above anything else that would influence somebody to smoke, the greatest predictor of whether somebody is going to smoke is whether they have a parent who smokes or they have got friends who smoke. that was one of the bases for this public service announcement that came out back in the ' 60s . can we play that, mr. smith. (thereupon, the video clip was played and transcribed as follows:) like father, like son. like father, like son? think about it. for information on smoking and heart disease, ask your heart association. (thereupon, the video ended.) mr. persons: that is where the influence came from. that is where the influence came from. advertising of cigarettes is a legal activity, just as it is for advertising other products. there is no evidence that mr. ryan continued to smoke or refused to quit because of advertising. plaintiffs presented evidence of advertising that mr. ryan never saw and for brands of cigarettes that he never smoked. remember, whatever else you do, over 60 million smokers, they were exposed to the same kind of advertising, but they managed to quit. there is a jury instruction on this. and the instruction says, and this is the law, that the manufacture, advertisement and sale of cigarettes are lawful activities. reynolds cannot be held liable merely for manufacturing, selling or advertising cigarettes. so using mickey mantle to advertise cigarettes or john wayne to advertise cigarettes is legal. there was nothing illegal about them. dr. henningfield told you that nicotine addiction does not interfere with a smoker's ability to make an effort to quit. you can be addicted to nicotine; does not mean you cannot call a smoking cessation clinic or you cannot take steps to try to quit. nicotine addiction does not prevent smokers from permanently quitting. nicotine addiction does not prevent heavy smokers or highly addicted smokers from quitting, in fact, any smoker can quit. that was his testimony. nicotine did not prevent 60 million smokers or mr. ryan from quitting and quitting for good. let us talk about filter and low-tar evidence. mr. ryan switched to filtered cigarettes after the vast majority of smokers had switched to filtered cigarettes. so if he was buying into the filter story, then he would have switched back in the '50s and early '60s when other people were switching to filters instead of switching to filters into the '80s. mr. ryan switched to filtered cigarettes more than 25 years after the public health community had been telling smokers that filtered and lower-tar cigarettes were safer, they were telling them, either you quit or you switch. and by the way, that was based not only tobacco company research, that was based on research that the american cancer society did, the american lung association did, the national cancer institute did. it was independent scientific research. and there is no evidence that mr. ryan would have quit smoking instead of switching to a filtered cigarette. you may recall dr. proctor said, well, having people switch to filtered delayed their quitting. it caused them to delay trying to quit. that is not the case with mr. ryan. it did not delay him trying to quit. he made no efforts to quit in the '50s, '60s, '70s or into the '80s at the time that he switched to filtered cigarettes, he had not made any attempt to quit. he did not make an attempt to quit until six years after he had switched. so obviously it did not delay him trying to quit smoking. plaintiffs' evidence on filters and low tar have nothing to do with this case. the design evidence. we know that since the 1800s, it was reported that cigarettes were inhalable and, therefore, uniquely dangerous. we covered that with dr. proctor. dr. proctor said on direct examination it was flue curing that made it inhalable, but on cross, he had to admit back in the 1830s in turkey, using turkish tobacco, and the turks did not use flue curing, they used sun curing or air drying. juror jolie: can you move the easel, please? mr. persons: sure. that they used air curing. but he had to admit that the cigarettes were still inhalable. and when you inhale something like that and you get it down into your lungs, it is going to be dangerous. he told you that natural tobacco is just as dangerous and addictive. it contains thousands of chemicals, carcinogens and nicotine, just like the tobacco that has additives in it. dr. proctor said roll-your-own cigarettes are just as dangerous as manufactured and just as addictive as manufactured cigarettes. he told you that additive-free cigarettes are not any safer or less addictive than cigarettes that have additives. bottom line is there is no such thing as a safe cigarette. there simply is not. they are dangerous and they are addictive by definition, by nature. again, the manufacture, advertisement, sale of cigarettes are lawful activities. reynolds cannot be held liable merely for manufacturing, selling or advertising cigarettes. the plaintiffs have failed to prove their case. i'm going to tell you why. failed to prove mr. ryan was a class member. they failed to prove that the health effects or the addictive nature of cigarettes were unknown or unavailable to mr. ryan. and they failed to prove mr. ryan reasonably relied on anything reynolds said or did regarding the health effects of smoking or their addictive nature. and failed to prove they are entitled to any money damages. i want to talk a little bit about believability of witnesses, and this goes to credibility whether somebody is, in fact, believable or are they testifying inconsistently. do you have to take the deposition from prior testimony and bring it to them and contradict them with it? do they testify consistently? i can remember a long time ago i was told that -mr. alvarez: objection, judge. mr. persons: there is an old saying that you do not have to try to remember the truth, because the truth does not change. and so if it does not change, and it is a constant, you do not have any trouble remembering it. but when you have conflicting stories, when you tell one story in january of 2014, and then you tell another story here in the courtroom, and they are inconsistent, then somebody's got to confront you with your prior testimony. we are going to talk about some of those inconsistencies. when people testify inconsistently and it erodes their credibility, you can choose to accept what they say or you can reject it outright, you can disregard it entirely. you can also take into account whether somebody has an interest in the outcome of the case. people say a lot of things and lay fault and blame other people for millions of dollars memory gets better for certain things if it is going to affect the outcome of the case. so keep that in mind. with respect to experts, the judge will instruct you -- did instruct you -- these are the instructions you will take with you. you may accept such opinion testimony, you can reject it, or you can give it the weight you think it deserves. it is up to you. now, let us see, do we have the elmo? the class membership question on the verdict form. number 1: was thomas ryan addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine; and, if so, was such addiction a legal cause, a legal cause of his copd/emphysema? i submit to you the answer is no, and i'm going to tell you why. we talked about the three hurdles in opening statement: medical causation, addiction, addiction causation. there is no dispute that he has copd. there is no dispute that his copd was caused by smoking. smoking lucky strikes and smoking vantage cigarettes. there is no dispute about that. he is over that hurdle. there is a dispute about addiction. they have got to prove that mr. ryan was addicted to nicotine. but even more than that, they have got to prove that the addiction was a legal cause of his copd; that but for the addiction, would he have developed copd, a legal cause. now, not everyone who smokes becomes addicted. that was their own evidence. some smokers enjoy smoking. dr. henningfield told us that. some smokers want to keep smoking and do not want to quit. they make no effort to quit. dr. henningfield testified about the dsm-iv, which he said the psychiatrists use, sponsored by the american psychiatric association, but no one applied it to mr. ryan to diagnose him with addiction. what mr. alvarez did was ask mr. ryan yesterday when he was on the stand those questions that are in the fagerstrom test. well, you can get a zero on the fagerstrom test and be considered addicted. there is no legal instruction on what constitutes addiction. you will have to use your judgment and your common sense about whether or not mr. ryan was, in fact, addicted. but even if he was addicted, they still have to prove that the addiction was a legal cause of his copd. now, what does that mean? it means that but for the addiction to cigarettes containing -- containing nicotine, the copd would not have occurred. in other words, did mr. ryan have the ability to quit, but chose to continue to smoke, or was mr. ryan compelled to smoke, leaving him no choice, no matter how hard he tried, but to continue smoking until he developed copd? mr. alvarez: objection, judge, that is not the legal standard. the court: thank you. ladies, you rely on the instructions i give. this is counsel's argument to try to persuade you based upon the evidence and instructions. proceed. mr. persons: thank you, your honor. plaintiff admits that mr. ryan is partially responsible for his copd. there is no dispute about that whatsoever. what does that mean? mr. ryan knew that smoking was dangerous while he continued to smoke. because if he did not know it was dangerous, how can he be at fault for continuing to smoke? number 2, mr. ryan was not confused about the dangers of and addictiveness of smoking because if he was confused about it, how can he be partially at fault for it? mr. ryan had the ability to quit smoking earlier. had he quit smoking earlier, he could have avoided getting copd. mr. ryan could have tried harder to quit smoking. this is what the partial fault admission means. he could have tried harder. but he did not. making five attempts to quit in a 41-year period is not trying hard at all. in fact, that is not trying at all for several decades. mr. ryan had the ability to quit smoking in time to prevent his copd. and we know he could have done it. millions and millions of addicted smokers were quitting, when mr. ryan made no effort whatsoever to quit. we know that between 1950 and 1965, 17.6 million people quit smoking. and that was during the time when that early information came out about the mouse-painting studies where they put the tar from cigarette smoke on the backs of the mice and they developed tumors. '64 surgeon general's report, after 15 years following that, 30 million quit; and then by 2014, 60 million. but quitting takes motivation and persistence. dr. henningfield: "question: i think we just talked about it, but among the things you need, it takes motivation, does it not? "answer: yes. "question: takes persistence? "answer: yes. "question: it takes willpower? "answer: well, they go hand in hand. "question: you would agree that if someones does not want to quit smoking, it is unlikely that they are going to quit smoking? "answer: correct." he also talked about this pamphlet put out by the american cancer society called "smart move." it is a little pamphlet and it is just a little handy thing. and in the pamphlet, they said, "do you have what it takes to quit smoking?" and there is nothing about nicotine gum or nicotine patch or zyban or prozac or anything else. it says, "do you want to stop smoking," first of all. yes or no. "are you willing to make some changes in your daily routine?" yes or no. "are you willing to put up with some uneasy moments?" yes or no. "if you can answer yes to all three questions, you can stop smoking." if you are willing to put up with some uneasy moments. they compared nicotine to heroin and cocaine, but the withdrawal effects from those drugs are not what you have with nicotine. with nicotine withdrawal, people become irritable. they get headaches. but they do not have dts like they do when they are withdrawing from alcohol or have to be hospitalized, like they do when withdrawing from heroin. so it is a big difference. there was information in the newspapers throughout the '60s, '70s, '80s, '90s about stop smoking. and mr. ryan was living in auburn, new york at the time and this is from the auburn advertiser and it says, "all it takes is willpower." that is all it takes to quit. mr. ryan was not motivated to quit smoking prior to 1997. we know that. because he never tried to quit in the 1950s, '60s or '70s. he did not smoke in 1987 by going to sleep for five hours. he said, all right, i'm not going to smoke, and then he went to sleep and then he woke up and he had a cigarette. so he quit for five hours. in 1988 he quit for 15 to 20 hours. he did not smoke in 1990 that was less than 24 hours. he tried in 1996 with nicotine gum, but he smoked while he was using it. tried in '96 with the patch, but he smoked while he was wearing the patch. he was not motivated to quit because he did not throw away his lighters or cigarettes. he smoked while he was using the patch and gum. he did not ask for help to quit. he rejected his doctors' advice to quit. he delayed in trying to quit after he was diagnosed with copd. and he did not discuss quitting with dr. bratt until 1997, although he had been seeing dr. bratt since 1976. so he was not motivated to quit. but in order to quit, you have got to be motivated to do so. addiction did not drive mr. ryan's smoking. what drove it was he did not want to quit smoking. he simply did not want to quit. mr. ryan was motivated when he was told that if he continued to smoke, he would become a respiratory cripple. dr. singer told him, i'm not going to continue to treat you if you keep smoking. yet it was four to five months later mr. ryan made an appointment with dr. singer because he was serious about quitting and then he quit a month later. those are the facts. that is what happened. when he was told that, he said -- after he got the zyban and made up his mind he was going to quit, he said, it must be working, so i thought i'm going to use a little willpower. i cannot just depend on the pill, i've got to use willpower. and he says he started the willpower. and he said, i depended on zyban at first, but then the willpower kicked in, i made up my mind that this has got to be it. and once he did that, he was able to stop. we talked about the fluctuation of his weight. and that had more to do with the impact it had on his breathing as anything else, but also to illustrate that once he made up his mind, once he got motivated to lose weight and improve his breathing, he was able to do it, just like he was able to quit smoking. even though at one point in time, he was -- let us see, in '98 and '99, he is up to 273 pounds he started losing and losing and then he gets down to 230 some pounds in '09 and by 2010, '11, he is down to 2 07 pounds and he is been able to keep his weight down, but that is using willpower to do it. so when mr. ryan is motivated to do something, he does it. i asked this question: "question: mr. ryan, just a few more questions, please, sir. losing weight was something you wanted to achieve, was not it? "answer: yes, sir. "question: and you have been able to keep the weight off through today, correct? "answer: yes. in the last couple of years, yes. "question: just like you have been able to refrain from smoking through today? "answer: yes, sir." so it is willpower. and all this talk about relapsing does apply to mr. ryan. dr. henningfield said relapse is commonly defined as going back to smoking after a week or more of cessation. well, mr. ryan never relapsed. he also said some definitions of relapse looks at whether you go back to smoking after one day of quitting. mr. ryan never relapsed. relapse occurs in a great majority of smokers who intend to quit smoking. it does not apply to mr. ryan because he did not relapse. mr. ryan, is he any different than the 60 million smokers who quit? were the cigarettes he was smoking more addictive than the other cigarettes? no. was his brain affected any differently than the smokers who quit? no. was he exposed to advertising different from the smokers that quit? no. was he exposed to tobacco statements different than the smokers who quit? no. did he smoke more or longer than the smokers who quit? no, he did not. did he make his own decisions and choose not to be serious about quitting before 1997? yes. and he said several things. we do not know for sure what it is that he felt about smoking or why smoked. we just know that he had no desire to quit until 1997. because he said some contradictory things. in his deposition he said, "i did not enjoy the taste of them." at trial he said, "i must have enjoyed the taste." in his deposition he said, "i did not enjoy the smell. it makes your eyes burn and your nose run." and at trial in front of you he said, "i enjoyed the smell of it." in his deposition he said it did not stimulate him. yet, yesterday in trial before you he comes to court and says it stimulated him and that is why he smoked. one thing is uncontradicted, one thing he is consistent about, and that is he quit in 1997 when he got serious about quitting and had not had another cigarette. he is been consistent there. mr. ryan failed to prove that his addiction was caused -- that addiction caused his copd. so i submit to you question 1, was thomas ryan addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine; and if so, was such addiction a legal cause of his copd/emphysema, the answer is no. if your answer to question number 1 is no, that is the end of your deliberations and the end of this process. now let us talk about concealment. verdict questions 5 and 6. number 5, did thomas ryan reasonably rely to his detriment on r.j. reynolds' concealment or omission of material information not otherwise known or available concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes; and if so, was such reliance a legal cause of thomas ryan's copd? did thomas ryan reasonably rely to his detriment on any act or omission in furtherance of r.j. reynolds' agreement with other tobacco companies and organizations to conceal or omit material information not otherwise known or available concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes; and if so, was such reliance a legal cause of mr. ryan's copd? i suggest the answer to both of those questions is no, that is if you get there. and they failed to prove concealment because in order to prove concealment, you have got to show a link, a causal link between the concealment or the agreement to conceal and mr. ryan's copd. and they have got to prove that there is something that mr. ryan reasonably relied upon that was concealed from him that had he known it, he would have avoided getting copd. let us look at the instruction. the instruction says: on this claim, the issue for your determination is whether thomas ryan reasonably relied to his detriment on reynolds' concealment of material information not otherwise known or available -- we are going to talk about what is material information -- not otherwise known or available concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes; and if so, whether such reliance was a legal cause of mr. ryan's copd. mr. ryan did not develop copd because the information about the dangers of smoking were unknown or unavailable to him. here's dr. proctor. he said that in the 1950s, people did not know about the risks of smoking, but on cross-examination. "question: and you would agree there were hundreds of articles on smoking and health in the new york times back in the 1940s and 1950s? "answer: that is right, it was big news. "question: and from the 1920s to the 1950s, you would not be surprised if the new york times published thousands of articles on smoking and health, would you? "answer: i would not at all be surprised. "question: the historical records show that there were other newspapers in the new york area reporting on this topic, correct? "answer: that is right." we know that for hundreds of years -- and this is dr. proctor admitted these things. for hundreds of years, people have been writing and talking about smoking being bad for your health. for over 2 00 years, it is known that tobacco use can be hard to quit. for hundreds of years, schools were teaching about the dangers and addictive nature of cigarettes. we brought you some schoolbooks that were approved by the catholic diocese where mr. ryan went to school, both at alfonso elementary school and the mount carmel high school, those books. and those books talk about the dangers of smoking. in the early 1800s, people referred to tobacco use and smoking as addictive. for a hundred years, it is been known that nicotine is in tobacco. they did not need the tobacco companies to tell them nicotine was there. people knew that. a hundred years ago it was no secret that nicotine was the substance that caused people to get addicted to cigarettes, that people smoked for nicotine. slang terms for cigarettes have been around for a hundred years, and dr. proctor admits that. he -- and mr. ryan remembered hearing terms like coffin nails, cancer sticks and nicotine fit. dr. proctor said, well, they were kind of joking about it. well, there was no joke in this ad showing a coffin with a bunch of cigarettes in it and the cover story there on the headline is about the surgeon general's report. but warnings throughout the '50s in mr. ryan's own community -- and we know he read the paper because that is how he looked at the want ads for jobs and so forth -- talk about the dangers of smoking and how it can kill you and how it cuts your life short. 1964 surgeon general's report comes out and says in no uncertain terms, they said it was established beyond a reasonable doubt that smoking causes lung cancer and smoking is associated with an increased risk of emphysema. there was no secret. and then here's all the newspaper coverage in the 1960s, and this is just a small fraction of them. but they are big and bold above the fold, telling you about the dangers of smoking. priests urging people in the catholic church to quit. public health officials urging people to quit smoking. radio shows on stopping smoking. how congress wanted to put a label on cigarettes, that made news. 197 0s, again, more coverage of the link between smoking and disease. copd/emphysema was not a secret. it was out there too in the news about the link between emphysema and smoking. more coverage. emphysema and smoking link. do you want to live or do you want to smoke? it is a choice. summary and conclusions of u.s. report: cigarette smoking one of the most important causes of chronic bronchitis in the united states. smoking cigarettes is associated with increased risk of dying from pulmonary emphysema. again, more coverage, bronchitis, emphysema, swelling of the lungs due to presence of air in the connective tissues. you did not need dr. burns to tell you that; it is in the front page of the new york times in 1964 for everybody to see. so was the information known or available? yes. yes, it was available. all you had to do was read it. it was no secret. here's another story, cigarettes a factor in chronic bronchitis. that is in 1962. 1978, here's the research that was done, funded in part by the tobacco companies and the american medical association, the same medical association that dr. proctor took the stand and said they were bought and paid for. but here's what they said about smoking. they came out with this study, and this is in 1978, they said, "a $15 million, 14-year research project sponsored by the ama committee for research on tobacco and health and funded by the nation's top tobacco companies strengthens scientific arguments that cigarette smoking is to blame for a plethora" -- that means a lot -- "of health woes. the committee believes that the bulk of research sponsored by this project supports the contention that cigarette smoking plays an important role in the development of chronic obstructive pulmonary diseases." that is tobacco funded research, 1978. that ain't from -- that is not from somebody's file somewhere or secret document. it is out there in the public realm. it is in the literature. in fact, this is from the fort lauderdale news. "research bolsters the old idea that cigarette polonium is cancerous." they are talking about chemicals in smoke. it is right there in the newspaper. that is may 28, 1975, fort lauderdale news, talking about a chemical component in cigarette smoke that can kill you, that can cause cancer. it is no secret. in 1954, dr. levin, a major health official, he warned -- he issued a statement concluding there was more than enough evidence about the dangers of cigarette smoking, to advise the public to quit smoking in order to lower the incidence of lung cancer. that question was asked of dr. proctor and he said, yes, that is true and dr. levin's statement was picked up and reported in the new york times. again, here's the head of the commission -- commissioner of health in new york, new york state, and that is where mr. ryan was living at the time, back in 1958. he said, "those who deny that tobacco is a causal factor in lung cancer just will not face facts." dr. leroy burney, this is 1957, and dr. john heller, who are on the ground, they were there, they are in real-time in 1957, they say the public was informed. now, dr. proctor comes in in 2014 and says, well, they were not informed. well, who is in a better position to know, the people who were there whose job it was to inform the public about the dangers of smoking, or somebody who was about three or four years old at the time, in the case of dr. proctor, who was not around? who is in a better position to know? and so we are looking at what the people who were on the ground who were on the front lines fighting this battle, what they had to say in real-time. daniel horn said in 1968, "you could stand on a rooftop and shout 'smoking is dangerous' at the top of your lungs and you would not be telling anyone anything they do not already know." he is saying this in 1960. dr. burns said in 1975, more americans know -- know that cigarette smoking is dangerous than know the name of the president of the united states. and in 1981 he said 95 percent of people are thoroughly aware of the health dangers of smoking and ninety percent of them realize their own health could be affected by it. that is despite all of the stuff that the tobacco institute was putting out and anne browder and all that, people knew. they knew. 1985 -- i mean, i'm sorry, 1966, the first warning goes on, says "cigarette smoking may be hazardous to your health." now, mr. ryan testified that he was aware of this. when the warnings went on in '66, he was aware of those warnings. he testified to that. and, of course, they strengthened it in 1970. it said, "the surgeon general has determined that cigarette smoking is dangerous to your health." it is very important, 1966, when this warning went on the package of cigarettes. because if not the first, it was one of the first consumer products that you could obtain without a prescription that had a warning on it. everything else was something -- medicine that you needed a prescription for that had a warning on it, but no other consumer product had a warning on it. there are warnings on alcohol now, we have got warnings everywhere now. you even have warnings on a cup of coffee that the coffee is hot. but back in those days when this warning went on, it was new. it was revolutionary and that is why it made news and that is why it got people's attention and that is why a lot of people quit smoking. i do not care what they were saying in the advertising, the warning was on the pack that this was dangerous. it did not say it may be. "the surgeon general has determined that cigarette smoking is dangerous to your health." and then they had the rotating warnings beginning in 1985, one of which said, "cigarette smoking causes lung cancer, heart disease, emphysema." now, mr. ryan did not need this warning to know that it could cause emphysema, because his father had been diagnosed with emphysema in 1983. so he did not need this, but it is there. the information is available. it is available. it is not unknown. it is known. million people quit -- smokers quit between 1966 when this warning went on and 1970. they heeded the warning. they took heed of the warning. they did not ignore it. those who did ignore it, they did so at their own peril. but 13 million people heeded the warning. and dr. henningfield said the first label was a massive educational campaign that through the media makes a difference. because the media covered this fact that they had to put this warning on cigarette packs. millions and millions of people were quitting for health concerns since the '50s. 17.6 million by 1965, 9 million between '60 and '65. 30 million between '64 and '79. and a substantial number of these smokers who quit were heavily addicted smokers and ninety percent of them quit cold turkey. so let us take a moment and let us look at this, the public information campaign and how well it worked to convince millions of people to quit smoking. we talked about dr. levin's statement about lung cancer and the association between lung cancer and smoking in 1954 . and you look at between 1955, following dr. levin's statement on smoking and cancer, and then in 1957, the surgeon general said the public was informed, through excellent coverage, about the dangers of smoking. surgeon general's report comes out in 1964. and then that other line is '65. between '55 and '65, you have got 17.6 million people quitting. the warning label goes on in 1966. in 1968, that is when daniel horn said, "you could stand on a rooftop and shout 'smoking is dangerous' at the top of your lungs and you would not be telling anyone anything they did not already know. the warning label was strengthened in 1970. in 1972, the warning goes on all advertising. so even if you are looking at a vantage ad in the newspaper or magazines, it is got the warning in there. and then in 1975, we know from dr. burns that from that poll data that more americans knew smoking was dangerous than knew the name of the president. between '64 and '79, you have got millions and millions of people quitting. 30 million people quit smoking. and i asked dr. proctor this on cross-examination. "question: regardless of the campaign of doubt that you talked about, we had in this country the highest quitting rate between '64 and '75, did not we? "answer: yes, the quitting rate was high at that point." so despite the campaign of doubt, people quit smoking and they did it for their own health. now, we know that the risks of smoking were not unknown or unavailable to mr. ryan. his father punished him for smoking his cigarettes. he remembers warnings that were on the cigarette packs. mr. ryan watched "see it now," he watched harry reasoner, he read the newspaper, he read the reader's digest, all sources of information about the dangers and addictive nature of cigarettes. he switched to vantage in 1981, even though he said he did not have any serious doubts about whether smoking was dangerous until the late 1980s. his stepmother died of lung cancer in 1985, and she was a smoker of filtered cigarettes. and his father died in 1987 . so these are messages, that is information, information being available about how dangerous smoking is, how deadly it is and how addictive it is. the dangers and addictiveness of smoking were not unknown or unavailable to mr. ryan. that information was known by mr. ryan, and it was available to mr. ryan. reasonable reliance on the concealment of a material fact is a legal cause of his copd if it directly, and in natural and continuous sequence, produces or contributes substantially to producing his copd so that it can reasonably be said that but for the reasonable reliance on the concealment, his copd would not have occurred. so now, what -- and just using common sense, what is going to be more impactful in terms of what information you are going to rely on? are you going to rely on somebody coming on tv and saying, well, no, it had not been proven. mr. alvarez: objection, judge, golden rule. the court: sustained. rephrase. mr. persons: i'll rephrase it, your honor. what would a reasonable person rely on? father's diagnosed with copd in 1983. father says to son, my doctor says that my copd was caused by smoking. are you going to believe that or believe something that somebody on television -- and by the way, when i had him on cross-examination, he said he did not remember any of these things that were on tv -- or what is happening before your very eyes? it is the same thing with the advertising. are you going to believe what your parents are doing, is that going to influence on you, or something you see on a movie screen? what is going to be a bigger influence on you? an activity that one of your parents engages in, whether it is drinking beer, whether it is smoking cigarettes or some other endeavor, or something you see an actor or movie star or sports figure do on tv? mr. alvarez: objection, judge, golden rule violation. the court: sustained. mr. persons: what is going to be a bigger influence on someone, especially a young person, a teenager? what is happening to your father and your stepmother? mr. alvarez: objection, judge, golden rule violation. the court: overruled. mr. persons: or what is happening -- and when i say your, i'm talking about mr. ryan, your stepmother, vera ryan, in 1985 died of lung cancer caused by smoking. going to believe that, or are you going to believe what anne browder is saying about, well, it may or may not cause it? are you going to rely on what you are seeing that is happening with your loved ones, happening to your family members, or what anne broward is saying may or may not happen or what has not been proven and you see it with your very eyes? so is it reasonable, does it make sense, common sense, to rely on something like that when you have got contradictory evidence right in your own family with people suffering from disease associated with smoking? that is what reasonable reliance comes down to. that is an unreasonable reliance. let us look at what -- a material fact. it is not just any fact. a material fact -- and you will have these in your instructions. this is instruction number 13 on page 14 of the instructions the judge gave you. it says a material fact is one that is of such importance that thomas ryan would not have acted as he did but for the concealment or omission of that fact. now, would he have quit smoking if he saw a document from r.j. reynolds that said, well, filters really do not work? would that have stopped him from smoking? remember, now, he was diagnosed with copd in 1995. he goes to the doctor in '96, and the doctor says, you really need to -- you need to quit smoking. he told him -- he had told him before, but he is telling him, you really need to quit smoking with your condition. he does not quit. he goes to see him in '97. and the doctor says -- notices that he has a pack of cigarettes in his pocket. he says, mr. ryan, if you do not quit, i'm not going to treat you anymore. does he quit? no. he still does not quit. so would a memo from r.j. reynolds have caused him to quit smoking? when he is diagnosed with a disease that killed his father, and that does not cause him to quit, not even for a day, would reynolds have been able to tell him anything that would have made a difference? would that old man heimann that you saw in the videotape, who was going on and on like this, would something that he had told mr. ryan, would that have changed his behavior and caused him to do something about his health? no. would having a list of all the ingredients in cigarette smoke have changed his behavior? no. so, if it would not, it is not a material fact. because all these other things that he saw with his own eyes and he understood with his own eyes, that those did not change his behavior. knowing a list of ingredients, i submit to you, it would not have changed his behavior. why is it necessary to even know all the ingredients if you know something is dangerous? you do not need to know all the ingredients in clorox to know that it is dangerous. you do not need to know all the chemical formulas of everything in it to know it is dangerous. read the warning label, it tells you it is dangerous. you read the warning label on a pack of cigarettes, it tells you it is dangerous. all you have to do is read the warning. so why would a memo from r.j. reynolds have made a difference? and when has it become necessary to get a memo from somebody or information from a manufacturer in order for you to do something to protect yourself? someone can look at an advertisement for a product, let us say alcohol, liquor, you do not see anything in there about drunk driving. you do not see anything in there about cirrhosis of the liver. is it glamorous? yes. you see puffy combs or somebody advertising ciroc vodka, and it looks glamorous. but just because it looks glamorous, does that mean you are going to overlook the fact that there are adverse health consequences associated with using that product? no. mr. ryan had never heard of these folks anyway. he would never heard of the frank statement that they heard all that time talking about whether the tobacco companies said about public health, he never saw that. never saw that until he got to his courtroom. but it ran in all the newspapers in 1954. it is been around all this time, but he never saw it. he never saw any -- any statements from the ctr. he never saw any statements from the tirc. he never saw any tobacco institute statement, never saw any press releases. all those press releases that they put out there for the newspaper to pick up, he never saw any of that. he never saw any of these white papers. he never saw any tobacco industry interviews or statements. he never saw tobacco company statements about smoking and health. he never saw any tobacco company statements about smoking and addiction. never saw it. if he did not see it, how can you rely on it, much less reasonably rely on it? this was yesterday: "question: you do not remember any ads from the tobacco companies where they said smoking was not dangerous, do you? "answer: that smoking was not dangerous? "question: yes. "answer: i do not exactly know when they said that, no, i do not. "question: is not it true that you have no recollection of seeing a person for a tobacco company on television talking about whether smoking was dangerous? "answer: i cannot recall." in the 1960s, '70s and '80s the public health community's common messages were smokers of unfiltered cigarettes should quit or switch to filter or low-tar cigarettes. and low-tar and nicotine cigarettes were deemed to be less hazardous. not safe, but less dangerous. lower-tar and nicotine cigarettes may be easier to quit. those were findings that they made. and these findings were based on studies that they conducted. over 40 years of research done by the public health community, not the tobacco companies. this was not a tobacco company position. in fact, the public health community is what urged the tobacco companies to develop filtered cigarettes. dr. proctor told you that on cross-examination. that is how they developed. that is how they came into developing the filtered cigarettes. because the research showed, the epidemiological studies showed that people who used those filtered cigarettes had less incidence of lung cancer. not that it eliminated lung cancer; they just got less of it. not that the cigarette's safe, but just less dangerous. in the 1960s, reynolds told the ftc that the tar and nicotine machines would not mimic actual smokers. in the '60s, '70s and '80s, reynolds scientists generally believed that low-tar filtered cigarettes were better than unfiltered cigarettes. that is in the internal documents. a genuine belief. not something we are going to fool the public. no. they genuinely believed it. because their research showed the same thing that the national cancer institute's research and the american cancer society's research showed, which was that there was a lower incidence of lung cancer among people who smoked filtered. and there was no agreement among the tobacco companies to conceal anything about filters or low tar. none. the agreement to conceal was about just denying that it is dangerous. not about filters. so filter or low-tar cigarettes cannot be the basis of plaintiffs' concealment or conspiracy claims because it is something they firmly believe, and dr. proctor told you there was no conspiracy to produce filtered cigarettes. in fact, they competed with each other, trying to see who could make a better filtered cigarette. smoking vantage cigarettes is not evidence of reasonable reliance. mr. ryan's father, stepmother and his wife smoked filtered cigarettes for years before mr. ryan switched to filtered cigarettes. when he met his wife in 1974, she was smoking a filtered cigarette. when he came to florida to move down here from new york to stay with his daddy, his daddy and stepmother were both smoking filtered cigarettes. that was back in 1973 . yet it was 15 years later, almost 15 years later that he switched to filters. not vantage. no vantage ads say that smoking is safe or healthier. no vantage ad says that. the vantage ads were aimed at female -- by the way, the tv ads were off the air ten years before he switched. that was the first question i asked him yesterday when i had chance to cross-examine him. they had shown that tv commercial for vantage, and he claimed that that is what made him switch. well, that ad was produced -- the tv advertising for cigarettes ceased in 1971. he switched in 1981. use common sense. an ad that you saw in 1970, at the latest, because that is when they took them off tv, so '70 -'71 is when they were banned -- influenced you to switch to vantage in 1981? makes no sense. vantage ads were aimed at female white-collar smokers. he does not fit that category. vantage ads backfired. and dr. proctor admits that, because the implications of tar and nicotine and cancer, that overpowered the reference to taste. that is what the revolutionary filter was about, that it could be a low-tar cigarette that would taste good. well, mr. ryan said in his deposition that taste did not matter to him, that he did not like the taste. so he was not smoking for taste, but that is what vantage was advertised for, taste. and then when he started with vantage, he ripped the filters off anyway and smoked the cigarette, just like he had smoked all those years the unfiltered lucky strikes. no evidence mr. ryan reasonably relied on anything the tobacco companies concealed or omitted. mr. ryan's father developed copd in 1983 and told him it was caused by smoking. by 1983, he definitely believed that smoking could cause him to get copd. his stepmother died of lung cancer in '85. he lost his father to copd in 1987. yet he never tried quitting before his father died. not one time. even after his father was diagnosed with the disease. same one that he has now. he did not try. did not make one single effort to quit. full knowledge. if you do not know by that time, there is nothing r.j. reynolds can do or say that would tell you or convince you that this is a dangerous activity. the knowledge was available. it was not unavailable. he had the knowledge. no evidence that he would have quit instead of switching to vantage. he did not try to quit when he believed the risks of smoking in the early '80s. he did not try to quit after he definitely knew the risks after his father's diagnosis. he did not try to quit when his stepmother died, and he did not try to quit at any time his father had copd between '83 and '87. the whole time his father was suffering with copd, he did not make one single solitary attempt to quit smoking. and what did make a difference for him? here's what he had to say. "question: what made a difference for you in your attitude about smoking was when you started feeling ill effects of smoking, when you started feeling badly? "answer: it was after my father passed away, and shortly after that, i was feeling the effects." that was the only message that he would understand. not something from reynolds. could have disclosed all kinds of things to him. that was not going to make a difference. it was not anything that the doctor asked him to do. no. it was not anything that happened to his father or his stepmother. it was, when i started feeling the ill effects. when his own body started warning him, that is when he got serious. but not serious enough to quit. not serious enough to quit. he did not rely on any concealment to his detriment. none. none. technician smith: robert, could you turn on the elmo, please. technician philipson: sure. mr. persons: all right. let us look at question number 5 and question number 6. he did not reasonably rely on anything to his detriment, so to copd, the answer should be no and no. was i supposed to stay up here with this? technician smith: no. mr. persons: gotcha. technician philipson: sorry. are we good? mr. persons: we are good. we are back up to question number 2: "state the percentage of fault that was the legal cause of thomas ryan's copd." i submit to you it is a hundred percent. and i'll tell you why. the assignment of fault relates only to the actions that were a legal cause of mr. ryan's copd. a legal cause. reynolds cannot be assigned fault for actions that were not a legal cause of mr. ryan's copd. let us look at what was the legal cause. let us look at 41 years of smoking. let us look at starting in 1955 and coming all the way forward to 1997. you look at all these years in between, surgeon general's reports coming out, warnings on the cigarette pack, strengthened warnings on the cigarette pack, rotating warnings on the cigarette pack. millions and millions of people are quitting smoking, and yet there is not even an attempt to quit. that shows there is no desire to quit. do not want to quit. made no attempt to quit throughout this whole period of time throughout the '6 0s and into the '70s, throughout the '70s into the '80s. and then in 1987, there is a quit attempt that consists of going to bed and sleeping for five hours and then waking up and going into the ashtray and getting a butt. that was, in his own words, a serious quit attempt. i submit to you it was not a serious quit attempt. and then quitting for a few hours in 1988, and this is after his father passed away, by the way, and then a quit attempt in 1990 that lasted less than a day. and then using the patch and using the gum in 1996 and continuing to smoke while he is using those things. of course, in his deposition, he said he had tried the patch and the gum in '92, '93 and then when told that, well, they were were not available without a prescription until '96, he said, well, it must have been 1996, then. let us talk about quitting and declining risk. what this means is that the sooner you quit, the sooner your body starts restoring itself and the -- lessens the likelihood that you will develop a serious disease from smoking cigarettes. and dr. burns talked to us about that. this was on cross-examination. "question: now, if you look at the chart and you see the curve downward of the triangle for all-cause, is it true that after ten years, more than half of the excess risk of death from smoking is gone, correct? "answer: approximately half, yes. "question: and after 15 years, what, more than eighty percent of the excess risk of death from smoking is gone, correct? "answer: that is correct. "question: and by 20 years, the triangle is almost down to 0.0, so most -- you know, almost all of the excess risk of dying is gone, correct? "answer: about 5 percent remains." so you are almost in the position of somebody who never smoked after you have been quit -- after you have quit for 20 years. but after quitting for just ten years, more than half of the excess risk is gone. more than half of the excess risk is gone. so i submit to you that had mr. ryan quit when his father quit in 1983, he most likely would not have developed copd. he had all of the information he needed to quit at that time. and he could have avoided it, but he did not. let us look at some of the information he had available to him. make sure everybody can see it. then i'll move it once we get through talking about it. can everybody see that all right? mr. ryan was warned throughout his life that smoking was dangerous and addictive. father forbids him from smoking. when a choice: become a regular smoker, or do not start. but he became a regular smoker. we know that there were warnings on tv and in the newspapers and magazines about you need to quit for your health. he continued to smoke. he could have quit for his health, but he continued to smoke. we had warnings from the surgeon general. he continued to smoke. he could have made the choice for his health. warnings on the cigarette packs starting in 1966. yet he continued to smoke. the great american smokeout started in 1976. he knew about it. he said, i knew about it. but i said, you did not participate, did you? he said no. he continued to smoke. father diagnosed with copd, and his father quit smoking cold turkey. that would have been an ideal time, if you are serious about it, to quit. but yet he continued to smoke. stepmother dies of lung cancer two years later. that would have been an opportunity to quit. he continues to smoke. father dies of copd. he continues to smoke. warnings from his own body, coughing and shortness of breath. he continues to smoke. millions and millions of other people are quitting, and that is making the news. he continues to smoke. doctors warn him, you into need to quit smoking. he ignores their warnings. he continues to smoke. when the doctor says, i'm not going to treat you for your copd unless you quit smoking, get serious about it, he got serious about it and quit. that is when he quit smoking. but all this other information that he had, all these other warnings that he had, he did not heed. he did not do anything in response to it. he continued to smoke. he continued in that activity because that is what he wanted to do. that is what he wanted to do. he did not want to quit. i submit to you mr. ryan's actions are the only legal cause of his copd. there is nothing that r.j. reynolds could have done that would have prevented him from continuing to smoke. nothing. if you see what is happening to your daddy and you see what is happening to your stepmother, and you do not quit, there is nothing r.j. reynolds could have done or said that would have made a difference. and only mr. ryan had the ability anyhow to prevent his copd. nobody could do it for him. nobody could do it for him. nobody else could put the cigarettes down for him. that is something he had to make up his mind he wanted to do, that it was worth doing, and get serious about it and do it. and he did not. mr. ryan's a hundred percent responsible for the choices he made. he is a hundred percent. he cannot lay that off on somebody else. cannot lay it off on somebody else. if you know that something's bad for you, as a consumer, and you continue to indulge in it, you cannot blame somebody else. if you know you can have some adverse consequences from consuming alcohol, and you continue to do it, you cannot blame somebody else. because in this country, they said, well, you have got free choice. it is a legal product. you can choose to do it, or can you choose not to do it. you are grown. yeah, he started as a teenager, but he was a grown man when all these documents were coming out about youth marketing, youth marketing. they were not marketing to him. he was a grown man. somebody's daddy. he was no teenager. thirty some years old. that is grown. when you are grown, you can make some choices. and nothing about an addiction, nothing, even if he is addicted -- let us -just for the sake of argument, let us say he is addicted. would that have kept him from picking up the telephone and calling a smoking cessation clinic if he wanted to quit? there is no evidence of it. mrs. ryan testified yesterday she never saw him do anything to try to quit except when she saw him with a patch, and she saw that one time. one time. in 40-some years, nothing. not one time. this is somebody who is living in the same house with you. no conversation about wanting to quit. no conversation about trying to quit in all of that time, but yet you want to blame r.j. reynolds because they make a dangerous product. the court: fifteen minutes, counsel. mr. persons: thank you, your honor. when you had a choice and you exercise it -- you were not robbed of your choice. you were not robbed of your choice because you could pick up the phone and call the smoking cessation clinic. you could pick up the phone and call the american lung association. you could pick up the phone and call the american cancer society. in the newspaper, they talk about these different clinics and groups that meet to try to quit smoking. did you ever go to one of them? no. before nicotine gum, you could have got chewing gum and tried to do that, but he did not even do that because he did not want to quit. he did not. technician smith: the elmo? technician philipson: the what? technician smith: the elmo. mr. persons: all right. one hundred percent. one hundred percent. one hundred percent. because, see, you could have quit in '83 when your father was diagnosed, but you did not. and had you done so, you would not have copd now. but you did not. you cannot lay that off on r.j. reynolds. i'm going to talk about damages, not because they are warranted, certainly not, certainly not some $20 million, paying somebody for abusing their body. mr. alvarez: objection, judge, it is inappropriate, "paying somebody." the court: thank you. ladies, again, this is counsel's opportunity to persuade you to reach a verdict. it is comment on what he believes is the evidence. objection is noted. it is overruled. proceed. mr. persons: any damages have to be fair and just in light of the evidence, and all of the evidence, including the evidence about how you did not try to quit smoking after your father got diagnosed. all of that evidence weighs in on it. not just something -- a memo from the internal documents of r.j. reynolds from back in 1973 or 1978. oh, no. why did you keep on doing it and take no steps to try do anything about it after you saw what happened to your father? and it was not until you got a message from your own body that you thought about doing something about it. even after you were diagnosed with copd, you did not do anything about it. yet you want to blame somebody else. they have the burden to prove every dollar of damages, and they failed to do it because mr. ryan chose to smoke, despite knowing the dangers of it. he chose to do it anyway. they are not seeking damages for lost wages, loss of support and services, and that would be like cleaning the swimming pool and mowing the lawn. they are not claiming anything for that. not claiming anything for his medical expenses or any other economic damages. mr. alvarez: objection, judge, inappropriate. the court: sustained. mr. persons: mr. ryan's lung function is stable. mr. ryan normally leaves the house without his oxygen. he goes to bars for hours without his oxygen. in fact, he was at his deposition in january of 2014 for two days without his oxygen. mr. ryan was not using his oxygen at his deposition. mr. ryan's medical records note that he did not have shortness of breath in 2015. his condition is essentially stabilized. he is been stable for decades. this is based on the medical records and the lung function tests, how well his lungs are functioning. you go back to 1996. you see there, that is where he was. and then now -- this is normal decline. see average decline for a non-smoker and the average -- here's the decline for mr. ryan. you see that. he is essentially stable compared to people who are nonsmokers. i submit to you no damages should be awarded. thank you, robert. all right. let us talk about punitive damages. under the circumstances of this case, state whether you find by clear and convincing evidence that punitive damages are warranted against r.j. reynolds tobacco company. the answer is no. punitive damages can be only be awarded for concealment that was a legal cause of mr. ryan's copd. remember what i said: but for. something that was concealed for him that, had he known, it would have changed his behavior. they do not have that. you cannot punish reynolds for any harm that was suffered by anyone other than mr. ryan. they keep throwing out all these people who suffer from smoking-related illness every year. and that is unfortunate, do not get me wrong. but you cannot punish reynolds for something that happened to someone other than mr. ryan. punitive damages are in addition to damages to fully compensate. they can only be awarded to mr. and mrs. ryan, not to the cancer society or the lung association. and the burden is on the plaintiff to prove by clear and convincing evidence. let us talk about what that is. i've got it highlighted here. in contrast to greater weight of the evidence, clear and convincing evidence is evidence that is precise, explicit, lacking in confusion, and of such weight that it produces a firm belief or conviction, without hesitation, about the matter at issue. so if there is any hesitation whatsoever about whether punitive damages should be awarded, then they should not be awarded, because it has to be without hesitation. without hesitation whatsoever. mr. alvarez: objection, judge, that is not the standard. it is clear and convincing. the court: ladies, i gave you instructions you are to rely on. proceed. mr. persons: the engle findings do not establish that plaintiffs are entitled to punitive damages. you cannot take into account the engle findings in answering that question regarding entitlement. here's why reynolds should not be punished. here's this research that they funded. awarded more than $350 million in grants to fund independent scientific research projects. funded projects resulted in 7,000 published scientific or medical articles and reports. more than 600 of these scientific articles were cited by the surgeon general on smoking and health. funded ten nobel prize winners and funded research at virtually every major university in the country. to hear dr. proctor tell it, all these universities, including stanford, university of florida, university of miami, they were in some grand conspiracy with the tobacco companies to do research. just use your own common sense whether that even makes sense. here's from the american journal of psychiatry, and this is research funded by the tobacco companies. "heavy cigarette smokers thus appear to be true addicts." this is in 1963. surgeon general came around to saying that in 1988. but here in 1963, they are saying this. this is in the journal of psychiatry. you can go in the library and get the book. it is no secret. then they say, this work was sponsored in part by grants from the american cancer society and the tobacco industry research committee. what did reynolds do? reynolds tried to reduce the levels of carcinogens in smoke going back to the 1950s. going back to the 1950s, trying to remove the cancer-causing agents in tobacco smoke. but you cannot remove them. started developing heat-not-burn technology, because when you burn tobacco, you release those harmful chemicals, cancer-causing chemicals. thought that by heating it, you would avoid that. so they spent a billion dollars in research to develop the premier and the eclipse cigarettes. and they were less harmful than conventional cigarettes. there is no dispute about that. dr. proctor admits that. cigarettes -- they failed in the marketplace. people did not want to buy them. if they do not want to buy them, you cannot make them buy it. you cannot force people to buy things they do not want. and so they failed. cigarettes have carried warning labels since 1966. reynolds has not disputed the dangers of tobacco for almost two decades. and even after they did that, people continued to quit and start at the same rates they did before that. it did not make any difference. reynolds has displayed ingredients on its websites for years. punitive damages are not needed to prevent reynolds from concealing the dangers of smoking, because everybody knows about it, number one. and, number two, everything is on the website. it is disclosed. you would not be telling anybody anything they did not already know. smoking has declined for decades among youth. a lot of focus by the plaintiffs on youth smoking. well, let us look at the data. smoking among junior high and high school students has declined by 66 percent since 1996. in the past four years alone, smoking among junior high and high school students has declined by 25 percent. teen smoking is continuously undergoing a process of what he called demobilization. in other words, stigmatized associated with smoking. you are stigmatized, you are outcast if you are smoking. it is frowned upon. it is not socially acceptable, and so fewer and fewer young people are taking up the habit of smoking, the practice of smoking. plaintiffs' experts agree that any smoker, even an addicted smoker, can quit. and any smoker can quit if they are willing to put up with some uneasy movements after stopping. that is what that book that i had out here talks about, this "smart move." says that: "are you willing to put up with some uneasy moments?" and had mr. ryan been willing to put up with some uneasy moments after his father was diagnosed with copd, we would not be in here today. would not be in here. but he was not willing to do it. so are a few uneasy moments worth millions of dollars? that is what you ask yourself. ask yourself that. he knew the dangers, but was not motivated to quit, so he did not quit until he got motivated. number 7. "under the circumstances of the case, state whether by clear and convincing evidence punitive damages are warranted against r.j. reynolds." the answer is no. what have we got now, mr. smith? technician smith: last couple. mr. persons: we are almost through. technician smith: we are. mr. persons: i'll move through these very quickly. here's what dr. c. everett koop -they like to quote the surgeon general, so we have got some quotes from the surgeon general. here's what he had to say: "the cigarette is not going to light itself and jump into your mouth, nor are you going to go into a brain-induced hypnotic trance and light the cigarette. no matter how much you have smoked or how much you smoke, the choice to light up is always yours. "48 million of us have" -- at that time, 48 million people had quit -- "have successfully quit. when you engage in an internal warfare with yourself about whether or not to light up a cigarette, you can fortify yourself by remembering this important fact. ultimately, you are the one who has control over your behavior." that is nothing new. that is dr. cuyler hammond. he was saying this back in 1954. (thereupon, the video clip was played and transcribed as follows:) cuyler hammond: it is now established, in my opinion, beyond a reasonable doubt that cigarette smoking greatly increases the probability of developing lung cancer. in my opinion, people should be warned of the dangers, and they are being warned. what they then want to do, whether they wish to smoke or not, is their own business." (thereupon, the video ended.) mr. persons: that is what they were telling the public back in the 1950s in the united states of america. warned, should be warned, are being warned. what you want to do, it is your own business. it is your own business. and then let us play harry reasoner, what he had to say after the surgeon general's report came out. (thereupon, the video clip was played and transcribed as follows:) harry reasoner: in this kind of a country, it comes down to you, whether you like it or not. no one is going to forbid an adult to smoke, and it is now quite clear that no one is going to tell him it is good for him either. the decision is his, the decision and the health that may depend on it. this is harry reasoner. good night." (thereupon, the video ended.) mr. persons: so, that is the bottom line. cannot lay it off on reynolds. cannot lay it off on addiction. you have got to look at the mirror. look in the mirror. it is your health that is depending on it, on your decisions. your health. if you think you are addicted, try to get some help for it. did not do it. i submit to you that the evidence, the clear and convincing evidence points, in favor of a verdict in favor of r.j. reynolds tobacco company. thank you for your kind attention.