closing statement mr. bass: may it please the court, counsel, mr. sammarco, members of the sammarco family, ladies and gentlemen of the jury, good morning. the panel: good morning. mr. bass: i would like to start by saying thank you. we recognize the effort that it takes, the time you take away from your lives, your jobs, your other responsibilities to be here. when you came, what seems like probably a while ago, i think it was about three, three and a half weeks ago, to the initial jury selection process, you were one of many, probably did not think that you would get called 3764 and selected to hear the case, but you did. you came in with other potential jurors, participated in the process fairly and honestly, answered the questions put to you, and you were selected. and as you did before participating in the process, you participated fully in this process. we saw you right here at counsel table. we saw you listening intently, taking notes, asking questions of the witnesses, good questions, questions that we probably should have thought to ask. and so for that -- you know, the process really does not work and it really depends upon you all, quite frankly, the willingness to come in and give up your time, the willingness to listen, the willingness to be honest in answering the initial questions during jury selection, and the willingness to be fair. and so on behalf of really the process, on behalf of mr. scarola, myself, mr. quinlan, but really most importantly on behalf of john sammarco, we say thank you. we say thank you because this is john sammarco's day in court. this is his day in court for himself, for his 3765 beloved wife theresa. now, you heard a lot from the family. they were here. as you look out in the gallery, it probably does not surprise you to see a lot of members of the sammarco family here. what we heard in all the testimony, not just from the plaintiff's witnesses, but from the defense witnesses that were read in, not a bad word can be said about this woman and about this family. all right. but i would say this, and i think the evidence is clear, on one side we have the sammarcos. now, they are in this courtroom with philip morris, but that is the only thing, the only thing that the sammarcos have in common with philip morris, the fact that they shared this courtroom today. and at the end of the case, at the end of the case, as you have heard, you are going to be weighing responsibility, responsibility for what happened here. and i suggest to you we have brought you a mountain of evidence and told you the story of theresa sammarco, and not only theresa sammarco, but so many others. we have brought you a mountain of evidence to 3766 allow you to make that choice in dividing up responsibility. you heard a lot about terri and john's life together, john senior. you heard they lived a life of faith, they lived a life of family. not a bad word was said. the things that were said about theresa and john are the things that people hope to have said about them. theresa was a daughter, a sister, a mother, a wife, a grandmother, a friend. she was a person of faith. but unfortunately for her, unfortunately for the sammarco family, philip morris and its co-conspirators did not see things the same way. the evidence in this case and has proven -- excuse me, the evidence in this case has proven that philip morris survives and profits on selling a highly addictive and deadly product that has caused tremendous death and destruction, not only theresa sammarco's death, but so many other americans. mr. kelly: objection, your honor. williams-state farm. the court: objection is overruled. 3767 mr. bass: staggering, staggering numbers, nearly 450,000 americans each year die smoking-related deaths. mr. kelly: same objection, your honor. the court: overruled. mr. bass: the evidence in this case has also proven not only that cigarettes are highly addictive, but the defendants knew about it, that the defendants designed their cigarettes to sustain and maintain addiction. the defendants knew that it caused death and disease, yet what did they do with that knowledge? they kept it to themselves. they kept it to themselves. i want you to think about, you know, dr. cummings testified what seems like a while ago, and he was on the stand for quite a while. but i know you all recall all of the story that he told. through the defendant's own documents -- you know, the beauty of being a plaintiff's lawyer in this case is that we get to prove our case not by standing up here and trying to convince you all, we get to use the defendant's own words to prove most of our case, words, 3768 statements, feelings, thoughts that they wrote thinking that no one else would ever see them. those are when people are at their most open and honest. that is when they really reveal themselves, when they are writing something that they think no one else is going to see. those are the documents that we brought you. and most of this case was proven through philip morris and its co-conspirators' own mouths. for example, you recall dr. cummings talking about the 50-year coverup, the conspiracy, and how it all happened because for first time in a long time there was a dip in stock. there was a dip in cigarette stock. so what happens on the same day that that happens? a western union telegram goes out to the heads of the major domestic tobacco companies, and an emergency meeting is called. and so if you knew nothing else about why they did what they did, you would know that it was in response to one thing, and for one purpose only. money. profits. greed. this is a forwarding memorandum, we call it that, it is at the top, and this was -- hill & knowlton was the pr firm, you remember, 3769 that was called in. not scientists, not doctors, not public health officials, a public relations firm had to deal with the tanking stock price of cigarettes. and in those closed-door meetings, hill & knowlton did an interview. and here's some of the things they learned from the scientific research director: "suppose everybody smoked just one cigarette less a day. that would be maybe 40 billion a year." and again, "the stock market fall is terrible when you remember dividends are going to be much larger next year with the ept," which is the excess profit tax. if you knew nothing else about why they did what they did, you know this, and that is all you need to know, that from that moment on, and for the next 50 years at least, every single day they chose money and greed over the health of theresa sammarco and the american public. and so the question -- and really the only question is, what are you all going to do about it? that is what today is for. john sammarco 3770 has had his day in court and we have presented the evidence. i'm going to talk to you for a little while, and as you heard, mr. scarola is going to talk to you, defense counsel and mr. scarola, and then that is it. you all, after hearing all the evidence, are going to have the chance to go back in and talk about it. and the question i have for you is, after hearing everything, after hearing the court's instructions, after hearing all the evidence, what are you going to do about the evidence that you have heard? certainly, you know, in closing argument we have a limited amount of time. i'm not going to try and cram a discussion of all of the evidence that we have seen over three weeks, you know, into the hour and a half or so that i'm going to talk to you. otherwise why would we even put on evidence, right? you saw it, you heard it, you were taking notes. so i'm just going to talk about a couple of things in conjunction with the court's instructions, some of the evidence, and how i 3771 think it fits and some of the things i submit we think you should consider. but first just kind of some bigger picture things. you have seen a lot of terrible documents from philip morris and its co-conspirators, okay? these lawyers here, though, are not philip morris. you saw the lawyers in the case getting along, okay? and so what i'm asking you not to do is equate mr. kelly with philip morris; mr. sexton, mr. carpenter with philip morris. okay? and the reason i'm telling you that is because you saw and you heard some of the documents. we are going to talk about some of those things, too. okay? but mr. kelly, his colleagues, are not philip morris. you also saw a lot of collegiality among the lawyers. and, you know, maybe you have seen television, some of you, i know, have sat on a jury before, maybe that was your experience before, maybe you saw television, maybe you were expecting it, maybe you were not, but certainly there was, you know, cooperation, which you may or may not have expected, and 3772 there was some moments of levity, which you may or may not have expected. but we often find that in the most serious and tragic circumstances there has to even be a little bit of levity as we go along. that should not take away, though, from the seriousness of this case or the tragic-ness of this case. i know you all know that, but i just want to say it. another thing. her honor has given you the jury instructions and has read them to you. and that is your guide for really, you know, if you have a question about how you should apply something, you can find everything you need in the jury instructions. for example, it defines what a sign is. it defines what a symptom is. it tells you what you should consider in certain things and what you do not have to consider. so the things you can see that you need are in the jury instructions. but just a couple i want to highlight. our burden of proof. you heard her honor talk about it and we talked about it in jury selection, as well. right? this is not a 3773 criminal case where we all have heard and talked about the burden of beyond a reasonable doubt. you know, in criminal cases, the highest burden in the court system there is. here, preponderance of the evidence or, literally, the greater weight of the evidence. and that is why we talk about it in scales. and that is the visual you are going to see used throughout this presentation, right. a tipping, an ever-so-slight tipping of the scales, preponderance of the evidence. okay? that is the burden of proof. simply a tipping of the scales. her honor read weight of the evidence. in deciding this case, it is your duty as jurors to decide the issues, and only those issues, that i submit for your determination." so, you must come to an agreement about your verdict, you may use reason and common sense to reach conclusions, you may draw reasonable inferences from the evidence, but you should not guess about things that were not covered here. this, of course, is just part of the instructions -- you are going to have the full 3774 instructions. but the reason i want to note this is reason, common sense. you do not have to check that at the door. okay? philip morris might want you to, but you do not have to. you may draw reasonable inferences from the evidence. and, of course, the verdict form. those are the questions -- there are no other questions that you are going to be asked to decide except for on the verdict form. we are going to go over that as we go through, but those are the questions for your determination. and, finally, believability of witnesses. you heard from both expert and what we call lay witnesses, or nonexpert witnesses; the family members, for example. and so this just talks about that a little bit. "you have heard opinion testimony from persons referred to as expert witnesses. you may accept such opinion testimony, reject it, or give it the weight you think it deserves, considering the knowledge, skill, experience, training or education of the witness, the reasons given by the witness for the opinion expressed, and all the other evidence in 3775 case". and i wanted to highlight this because, while we get into it, because it is kind of a big-picture issue. i want you to ask yourselves, at least as far as experts, you have heard from the family members, of course, who did we bring you by the way of expert witnesses? we brought you the best. michael cummings, dr. michael cummings, 30-plus years in public health and tobacco control. publishing hundreds of peer-reviewed publications, including on addiction, cigarette designs, tobacco industry conduct, marketing; the things he spoke about. researching, award-winning addiction research. nci, cdc, nih. he has reviewed for prestigious journals and surgeon general's reports. he is taught medical students and doctors. he has treated thousands and thousands of patients for nicotine addiction and addiction-related disease, counseled thousands. cigarette-design lab, we talked about, remember dr. cummings talked about the design of the cigarette, how it is designed for addiction? 3776 well, he knows that because he runs a cigarette-design lab. and, of course, the tobacco document repository. 30-plus years in public health. just like dr. david burns, 35-plus years, it says here, in nicotine addiction and disease. but, you know, the thing about dr. burns is, he entered the public health sector right out of graduating medical school, went to the office on smoking and health in 1975, that was responsible for surgeon general's reports. that was one of his first assignments was to put together the 1975 surgeon general's report. dr. burns has been a firsthand witness to the lies and deceptions and attacks on the public health community by philip morris and his co-conspirators. since 1975 he has been involved in some way in virtually all of the surgeon general's reports. like dr. cummings, he is done research on the issue that he talked about. he is reviewed for prestigious journals and the surgeon general, he is taught medical students and doctors on nicotine addiction and disease. he 3777 has treated it. he is a pulmonologist. he has testified for international groups, congress, state legislatures. those are some the witnesses that we brought you. public health authorities, leading witnesses in their field. and so when you think about all of the evidence, as the court said, you should think about the witnesses and who said it. okay. so enough preliminaries. let us talk about the verdict form, which are ultimately eight questions. the only eight questions that matter in this case. the first three questions -- you have heard us talk about class membership, engle class membership. the first three questions on verdict form are the class membership questions. and we are going to break them down because they are broken down into three questions. but when thinking about class membership -- and i'm going to talk a lot about this today, you know, what the issues are and what they are not. okay? the issues in class membership is not about fault, awareness or choice. they are 3778 simply going to be the three questions that are asked of you. okay? question number 1 -- and the first question -- and, really, it is fitting that the first question is: "was theresa sammarco addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine?" number 1 is the first question; and it is going to be phrased just like that, "yes," "no," when you get the verdict form. the issue is not could she have quit? did she try hard enough to quit? did she know it was hard to quit? the issue is not whether she was a respectful smoker who did not smoke around her kids, or who went outside to smoke, or did not smoke around children or babies. the issue is not whether she was strong-willed or whether she had read reader's digest articles throughout the years about whether nicotine was difficult to quit. that is not the issue. the issue, and the only issue here, is was theresa sammarco addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine? and from our perspective, really, this question should not be all that difficult to answer. why? well, because all of 3779 testimony that was given, and the opinions that were given, both by experts and family members, was that she was addicted. all of the testimony and the opinions given are uncontroverted, unrebutted. the defendants could have called a witness, whether an expert or nonexpert witness, to contest that fact, but they did not. why? because the evidence is overwhelming. the one witness they did call, nonexpert -- they called three if you remember -- where we read -- where we had -- mr. kelly read and he had someone playing the part of the witness. one of those they called, edith martinelli, a niece of theresa sammarco's. who said, "yes, theresa sammarco, my aunt, was an addicted chain smoker." that is a defense witness. they could have called somebody to rebut the evidence of addiction, but they did not. theresa sammarco was a woman who referred to herself when trying to quit as "feeling like a junkie trying to get off drugs." robert, can you switch over to the elmo, 3780 please? thank you. mr. philipson: turn the head and press the power. there you go. mr. bass: this medical record is in evidence. mr. philipson: do you want to zoom? mr. bass: yes, please. thank you. i've taken the liberty of highlighting it. february 14th, 1991. this is from doctors cunningham and bates. extremely anxious, depressed, secondary to quitting smoking and family and friends hounding her. "feel like a junkie trying to get off drugs." this was a woman who was addicted to nicotine. and here is the thing, she got it wrong. she was a junkie. she was a nicotine junkie. now, this record does have some significance and the statement does have some significance later on. but, see, here's the thing. she felt like a junkie trying to get off drugs because she was. she was. now, like in opening statement, we are not sure as the trial goes along if the defense is going to contest it or not. they did not call 3781 anyone to contest it, i do not know what they are going to get up here and say. so we do need to talk a little bit about what evidence there was on this question. and so who do we hear from? dr. david burns testimony on addiction. we just talked about dr. david burns. one of the things we did not highlight was dr. burns authored the chapter in harrison's principles of internal medicine, which is an internal medicine textbook used in medical schools. he wrote the chapter on nicotine addiction. and he really, as you recall -- excuse me -- that dr. burns presented his testimony via videotape. he told you he has a very common sense way of looking at it. he starts with the fact that nicotine is addictive. we heard all about various internal documents about how nicotine is addictive. we heard all about how once it gets into the brain -- or, rather, the cigarette smoke is inhaled, it gets into the lungs rapidly, and it is into the brain within seven to ten seconds; and then once nicotine gets there it binds to receptors and neurotransmitters are released. and that 3782 happens each and every time. you heard all about that. dr. cummings, who did not give a case-specific opinion on addiction, talked about that process. so dr. burns starts with the notion that nicotine is addictive, which you all know, it is unrebutted. exposure to nicotine causes brain changes. the evidence in the case is that addiction is a brain disease. nicotine addiction is a brain disease. it is a chronic relapsing brain disease. exposure to nicotine causes brain changes. theresa sammarco began smoking early in life and she was addicted by 1954. the evidence is, and the testimony, that she started smoking in approximately 1952, as a 15-year-old. the reason that matters is because the testimony is, and the evidence is, is that the earlier somebody starts doing something addictive, the likelier they are going to become addicted to it. the earlier they start, the more likely that they are also going to become powerfully addicted; and that is 3783 because -- excuse me -- the adolescent brain is still developing. and so when you introduce an addictive substance to the adolescent brain, it is going to interfere with the development. it is going to cause more long-lasting connections. the type of connections that make a person more powerfully addicted, the type of connections that makes it more difficult to quit, the type of connections that causes relapse even after someone might not be smoking for a while. and so, you know, dr. burns continues, you know, kind of with this common sense notion that because cigarettes are addictive, and because nicotine gets to the brain and does what it does, each -- with each puff of cigarette the vast majority of people that smoke for a substantial period of time are addicted, and that makes sense, right? if you use an addictive substance, smoking 20, 30 cigarettes a day, eight to ten puffs, nicotine in every single puff, doing what it does to your brain, if you do that for a long time you are going to become addicted to it. it is logical. remember, we can use our common 3784 sense. let me put that down. i'm sorry. she was a heavy smoker. the evidence was a pack to a pack and a half a day for 45 years. that is 20 to 30 cigarettes a day, eight to ten puffs, 200 to 300 puffs on a cigarette a day for 45 years. she smoked from the time she woke up until she went to bed. when she did not have a cigarette, she was anxious and irritable. she tried on multiple occasions to quit, but was unsuccessful. she smoked even after she was diagnosed with lung cancer. not because she wanted to, to keep smoking. she desperately wanted to quit. every single witness who took the stand said she wanted to quit. when she what is unable to quit, she beat herself up. when she was unable to quit, she cried. is that someone who wants to keep smoking? no. that is someone who does not want to keep smoking. there is no doubt that she was powerfully addicted to nicotine. following up on this, this common sense notion. theresa sammarco's addiction to nicotine, we talked about it. a pack and a 3785 half packs per day, one and a half packs per day, we did the math, 10,950 cigarettes a year, nearly 500,000 cigarettes in her life, equaling 3,942,000 hits of nicotine in her brain. do we need to know anymore than that? we also heard from dr. cummings. he talked generically, key features of cigarette addiction. very similar to the way that dr. burns talks about it. persistent daily use. are you smoking every day? amount smoked per day. of course, that matters. you are using an addictive product, the more you use it means the likely you are to be addicted. time to first cigarette after getting up in the morning? think about it. why is that a key indicator? because you have been without while you are sleeping. your body needs the nicotine. some other criteria. early age of initiation. just like dr. burns said. that matters. and i think you all understand why that matters. difficulty refraining from smoking. failed quit attempts. john sammarco, junior, talked about his mom having to leave 3786 sporting events to go smoke. withdrawal symptoms after quitting. used despite harm. all things that theresa sammarco exhibited. mr. scarola: thirty minutes, hardee. mr. bass: thank you. we also know that cigarette is designed for addiction. dr. cummings talked to you about that. one thing i want you to think about, though -- we know the cigarette is designed for addiction. one thing i want you to think about when you are considering the evidence is philip morris and others have the ability to take nicotine out of cigarettes. you saw the video of the plant. they have the ability to take nicotine out. and they do it in the process. they could keep it out if they wanted to, but they do not want to. why? because nobody has ever smoked -- nobody would then become addicted. those cigarettes do not sell, and that is all about money. so what do they do? they put it back in. but they put it back in at just the right amount to sustain and get people addicted. i showed you this document. they have known 3787 for a long time. why do people smoke? this is 1959. for addiction. and so mr. kelly might come up here and talk to you about the changing definition of "addiction." right. we talked about that. he mentioned it in opening statement. and you are not going to get a definition of "addiction" from the court. all right. but no matter what, no matter how the world health organization defined it, no matter how the surgeon general defined it as a habit in 1964, philip morris has known at least since 1959 that people smoke for addiction. and so was theresa sammarco -- excuse me -- addicted to nicotine? the greater weight of the evidence suggests yes. dr. david burns; mr. sammarco; john sammarco, junior; jimmy sammarco; edith gentile; edith martinelli; and even dr. paul bates, d.o., who if you recall on cross-examination of dr. keller -- we will talk about dr. keller in a little while, mr. scarola asked dr. keller if he reviewed dr. bates' deposition. mr. kelly: objection, your honor, argument outside the evidence. 3788 mr. bass: judge, i recall -- the court: overruled. the jury will recall the evidence. i remind you again that what the lawyers say is not the evidence. mr. bass: thank you, your honor. mr. scarola asked if dr. keller had reviewed dr. bates' deposition. he had. and dr. bates' opinion was that theresa sammarco was addicted, although dr. keller disagreed with that assessment. mr. kelly: objection, your honor. arguing outside the evidence. the court: overruled. mr. bass: so was theresa sammarco addicted? yes. first question. and really it is fitting, i think, that the first question is addiction really, because addiction, if you think about it, is kind of the linch pin for everything that is going to come. remember this document, philip morris knows that nicotine is the drug that keeps smokers smoking. first -- the title of this is "smoker psychology review program." "first, every undertaking has to have some 3789 mission. i was state our charter from philip morris in this fashion: "study the psychology of the smoker in search of information that can increase corporate profits. "there are some distinctive features about the cigarette market. we sell a product that is bought often and used from 10 to 60 times a day, day in, day out. we provide a product that is the essential commodity in a habitual act. "you are all familiar with pavlov's dog. present a dog food, he salivates. ring a bell each time you present the food, and in due time, you can ring the bell without the food and he will salivate. "put a hungry rat in a cage. put a lever in the cage. make it so that a push on the lever delivers a pellet of food. in its random movement, the rat will push the lever. he will get the pellet. the rat will soon associate lever pushing with the food pellet. in time, he will be rapidly pushing the lever for food. "consider the smoker. smoking the cigarette is the lever press. the effect of 3790 that smoking act upon his person is the reward. that effect reinforces the smoking act. he comes to push the lever 10 to 60 times per day. our task is to understand the reinforcing mechanism, or process, whereby the habit is established and maintained. such is our model. conceptually simple on the surface, but the complexities lurk in numbers beneath the surface." when you are considering responsibility in the case, ask yourselves: did theresa sammarco have any idea that philip morris was comparing her, as an addicted smoker, to a lab rat? mr. kelly: objection, your honor, improper argument. the court: overruled. mr. bass: of course, she did not know that. another document that i want you to think about when you are thinking about how addiction kind of permeates this case, thinking about responsibility, this is from 1980, you might recall that the comment "the lawyers remind us that the entire matter of addiction is the most potent weapon a prosecuting attorney can have 3791 in a lung cancer cigarette case. we cannot defend free choice if the person was addicted." think about this is an internal company document, okay. addiction is the most potent weapon a prosecuting attorney (indicating) can have in a lung cancer cigarette case. the next question on the verdict form is: was theresa sammarco's addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine a legal cause of her death from lung cancer? and this is -- this is really tied to the first question. why? because there is a stipulation, and it is undisputed that theresa sammarco had lung cancer. we know that. it is undisputed. it is stipulated. we know that her cigarette smoking caused her lung cancer. that is been stipulated. and we know that her lung cancer caused her death. that is been stipulated. and so the only thing in this question that is left is addiction. and so, naturally, if you find her addicted in question one, then the answer to this is yes as well. why? because the only question that remains really in this analysis, based upon 3792 stipulations is -- mr. kelly: objection, your honor, improper argument based upon the stipulation. the court: overruled. mr. bass: and i'll show you what i mean. all right. you start with addiction to nicotine. if you find her addicted to nicotine, you are going to find that her addiction substantially contributed to her smoking, which we already know caused her lung cancer and caused her death. and so that is why really answering yes to question one necessarily means yes to this question. and, you know, talking about the stipulations, the stipulations really, you know, are not a gift from philip morris, okay. think about what you heard about -- mr. kelly: objection, your honor. that is improper argument. mr. bass: judge, i think i'm entitled to explain the -- the court: repeat it again. mr. kelly: not a gift. mr. bass: a stipulation is not a gift from philip morris. 3793 the court: the objection is sustained. mr. bass: let us think about what we learned about cigarettes. thousands of chemical compounds including cyanide, arsenic and tobacco-specific nitrosamines, over 70 carcinogens. "45 percent of all long-term smokers die of a smoking-related disease. 450,000 americans die each year of smoking." she smoked for 45 years. of course it caused her lung cancer and her death. they are compelled to stipulate under these facts. the surgeon general in 2004, this idea that addiction causes disease, we have a flow chart here where the surgeon general in the 2004 report, figure 2.1, "scheme linking nicotine addiction and lung cancer via tobacco smoke carcinogens and their induction of multiple mutations takes in critical genes." that is the chart i showed you earlier about starting at addiction and ending at lung cancer and death. it is kind of a cruder chart of this right here. we start with nicotine addiction which causes cigarette smoking, and you go down the flow chart and end up with lung cancer. and dr. burns talked about the process as 3794 well, right? he started with the notion -- and, again, this -- the amount of nicotine doses, this is important, because with 3,942,000 hits of nicotine, every single hit, while it contains nicotine, also contains seven -- at least 70 known carcinogens. right? so if we are talking about 3.9 million hits of nicotine, we are talking about -- i cannot even do the math on the exposure to carcinogens over a 45-year history. and dr. burns, if you recall, he went through the process about starting at a normal lung cell and he explained how ultimately cigarette smoke causes damage to the cilia and then it starts -- it sits there on the surface. and then ultimately it seeps down into the cells and you see these things starting to change. and that takes time. right? that takes time. that takes years. and then ultimately we get to the point where we have a tumor, and then ultimately we have metastatic tumor. and that takes years. and it takes years. and people that smoke for years are addicted. and so that is how addiction causes lung cancer and 3795 death. but, again, even though dr. burns -- mr. philipson: point it this way. mr. bass: this way? okay. maybe it was ricocheting before. mr. scarola: and you just turned off the tv in three judges' offices. mr. bass: on and off. on and off. right? and for good measure, we have dr. burns' testimony here excerpted. "was that lung cancer caused by her addiction to smoking? "absolutely." and this really sums it up. "it was caused by her addiction, which necessitated her regular exposure to the cancer-causing substances in smoke. there is no doubt that addiction caused her death from lung cancer." and so, again, the scales of justice, remember the burden of proof, an ever so slight tipping of the scales. we have the surgeon general, and i put "generic" in quotes because see saw the genic flow chart about the concept 3796 of how addiction causes lung cancer. dr. cummings generic, he explained it. dr. burns gave you the opinion. we have the philip morris stipulated facts that her lung cancer was caused by cigarette smoking. we have the evidence of addiction. and you put those two things together, and you have a yes to this question. but then we also have the medical records which talk about lung cancer, and the death certificate. so not only is there a slight tipping of the scale, it is overwhelming, the evidence that we brought you. was theresa sammarco's addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine a legal cause of her death from lung cancer? yes. if you find yes to question one, you should find yes to question two. now, it is important to understand -- and we are going to talk about the third component in a second here, but what is important to understand, you will see it on the -- on the verdict form, right, under each question. if you answer -- if your answer to question one was no, then your verdict is for defendant 3797 philip morris. and so if you do not think that theresa sammarco was addicted, which is the first question, and you answer no, philip morris prevails. that is the only question you can consider. if you answer no to question two, philip morris prevails. and if you answer no to question three, which we are going to talk about, philip morris prevails. so a "no" to any of those questions, philip morris prevails. a "yes" on all three, theresa sammarco is an engle class member. still the third class membership question. as of november 21st, 1996, did theresa sammarco have signs or symptoms that were diagnosable with the benefit of hindsight as lung cancer, yes or no? and so what is helpful to remember here, as you all go back in deliberate, is this, that there are two paths for plaintiff to get to "yes" here: signs or symptoms. not both. one or the other. i submit there is a preponderance of 3798 evidence in our favor as to both, but if you disagree about one, there is the other. so that is important to know. you also got a definition of -- thank you. her honor gave in the jury instructions definitions of "sign" and "symptom." okay. very helpful. right? a sign is an objectively observable physical condition. not observed. observable. an important distinction that i believe mr. scarola made very well with dr. keller. observable. not when it was observed, but when was it observable. right? when was this -- and remember the play-doh demonstration that mr. scarola did with dr. keller, and we plopped it on the chart that dr. abel had, and everyone agreed that this was a three-dimensional -- you know, a fairly representative three-dimensional size of the tumor that was found on ct of mrs. sammarco. right? so really, was this -- just four months prior with this tumor, whatever size it was, we know it was probably a little bit smaller, was it observable if the ct scan would have been 3799 done. that is really the basis of the question here. but, of course, we also have symptoms. a symptom is a perceptible physical condition of which the patient is subjectively aware. not subjectively aware that it is a lung cancer symptom, but with the benefit of hindsight, is it a symptom that can be linked to lung cancer? but, you know, i think it is clear to you all that this really is -- that philip morris is all in on this, this question right here. right. it is the only witness that they called, dr. keller, to talk about it. but let us think about something. we are not trying to suggest -- the starting point for this is, theresa sammarco had lung cancer. no one is trying to suggest that we are trying to prove the case based upon her symptoms without a diagnosis of lung cancer. no one's trying to say, well, a mass was observed, it was never biopsied, so we do not know if it was lung cancer. it could have come from somewhere else, it could have been a shadow on the -- no, she had lung cancer. okay? and so knowing that, it makes it 3800 relatively easy to work backwards just a few months to answer this question as to whether the tumor was -- signs were observable a few months before, or there were symptoms that can be linked to the lung cancer just a few months before. because we know she had lung cancer. so knowing that she had lung cancer, what is the question? right. the question is not -- and knowing the definitions you have been given, the question is not when she was first diagnosed with lung cancer. we know that was may of 1997. that is not the question, though. right? the question is not when her tumor was first observed, right? because we know it is not observed. we know it is was it observable. the question is not, when did she think that she might have lung cancer? and i think there is -- one of the jury instructions addresses that. "the plaintiff need not prove that theresa sammarco or any of her doctors had notice or knowledge of her lung cancer on or before november 21st, 1996." so those are not the questions, when she was first diagnosed, when the tumor was first observed, when she thought she might have it. 3801 the question is: with the benefit of hindsight, looking back, did theresa sammarco have signs or symptoms that were diagnosable, observable, as lung cancer as of november 21st, 1996? right? was this tumor identified by ct on march 25th, 1997, 3 by five -- 3 by 3.5 centimeters, was it observable and thus diagnosable only four short months earlier? of course it was, because we know that tumors, particularly of this size, excuse me, particularly of this size, do not appear overnight. tumors grow. right? people tend to think of cancer as if it were being hit by a lightning bolt, but in reality, cancer is a series of chronic changes that occur over a long period of time. that is why we showed you the diagrams from dr. burns, taking you from normal cell to cancer and then to metastasis. it does not happen overnight. it did not get to this side overnight. and i said it once, but i'll say it again because it is important, a sign, observable. not when it was observed, but when it was observable. 3802 what was the evidence? well, first we are going to talk about dr. keller, the defense pulmonologist. and let us talk about who he was, okay, who he is. he is a pulmonologist, not an oncologist. now, as mr. scarola said in cross, and it is important for me to say here, too, i'm not criticizing, we are not criticizing pulmonology or pulmonologists. what we are criticizing and pointing out is that he is not the right specialty to be talking about tumor growth rates. oncologists are. and so that is very important. they brought you a pulmonologist. just like they did not bring anyone to contest addiction, they could have brought an oncologist who deals with treatment of cancer including tumors. and on that note, dr. keller, when a diagnosis is made -- and he might participate in that diagnosis in some or many of his patients, right? but once the diagnosis is made and confirmed, he refers his lung cancer patients for treatment to oncologists, radiation oncologists, and/or a thoracic surgeon. 3803 and that depends upon the stage. stage i or stage ii are operable, so he goes to a thoracic surgeon. stage iii, metastasis, stage iv, distant metastasis, he sends to oncologists just like dr. abel. you recall, dr. keller was solicited by shook, hardy & bacon, lawyers, in 2008 to help them with tobacco litigation. entered into an agreement to review cases. member of the american thoracic society, yet does not abide by their policies and/or standards to participate as an expert witness on behalf of the tobacco company. quite frankly, he did not give a darn about those policies. you should consider that when reviewing what he had to say. you should consider that when comparing him to the witnesses that we brought you. and so i start with dr. keller because -- mr. kelly: this way, hardee. mr. bass: i'll get it right on the very last slide. i will get it, maybe. all right. you recall this chart? and robert, obviously, everyone knows how helpful he is, took a picture of the chart and 3804 we were able to put it right here. you remember mr. sexton had dr. keller draw this chart. and this is why i want you to ask yourselves if dr. keller's testimony, based upon the jury instructions that you have been given, is helpful at all. everything he talked about, remember, we are talking about -- we are not talking about when she was diagnosed, right. we are not talking about when she had a needle biopsy. we are not talking about when it was first observed, the tumor on ct scan, or even when a chest x-ray revealed some kind of abnormality. we are not talking about those. we are not talking about when it was first observed. we are talking about when it was observable. okay. and so i ask you to think to yourself, well, dr. keller's not an oncologist. dr. keller's testimony dealing with things that happened, as the instructions are telling you now, are really irrelevant. and so what helpful testimony did he bring? well, on cross-examination he did give good testimony for the plaintiff, and that is, 3805 scientists have been studying growth rates of cancers for a very long time, decades. remember that admission on cross-examination? agrees that tumor growth rates is or are a very well-studied area. remember that admission on cross-examination? growth rate of adenocarcinoma, theresa sammarco's tumor, has been studied many times. he agreed that median growth rate in those studies of adenocarcinoma, approximately 300 days. and what are we talking about there? 300 days. we are talking about the median time it takes for a tumor to double in size. right? not to grow from nothing to this size but to simply double in size. and then another thing that he admitted, right, we have been talking about -- on the chart i'll show you in a minute about, you know, if a ct scan or x-ray would have been done prior to november 21st, would, you know, would it have been seen? of course, in our view it would have been. but we have been using a 1-centimeter mass as kind of the size that might be observable. 3806 well, dr. keller has seen tumors as small as 4 millimeters on ct scan, okay. so obviously, dr. abel's estimation was very conservative that a tumor is observable at 1-centimeter because dr. keller has seen them much smaller on ct. and, of course, as we have talked about it before, and we cannot hammer it home enough, and dr. keller acknowledged it, and, of course, the court has instructed on it, not exactly, although it ties into the definition of sign, there is a difference between what is diagnosed and what is diagnosable. remember, sign. observable. not observed. was and would have, based upon peer-reviewed studies, which i'm going to talk about in a moment in dr. abel's testimony, this size tumor on march 25th, been observable only four short months before. mr. scarola: an hour, hardee. mr. bass: thank you. and just to drive home the point that dr. keller is not the person to be talking about growth rates. recall one of you asked the question, "how much time have you spent 3807 personally learning about growth rate and doubling time? "answer: quite a bit of time. i mean, i have tried to read some of the recent literature. i might have spent a few hours reading about it." the witness they brought you to try and convince you that tumor growth rate and doubling time is not a way that we can use in this courtroom has spent only a few hours reading about it. i ask you to consider that when considering his testimony versus the testimony of dr. howard abel. cornell and harvard educated physician. first hematologist and medical oncologist in broward county. board certified, internal medicine, 1969. hematology 1972. oncology 1977. oncology equals the study and treatment of tumors, exactly what we are talking about here. practiced medicine for 44 years, 37 years in broward county. and what was his testimony? he gave testimony regarding signs and symptoms. what was his testimony? 3808 signs. theresa sammarco's tumor was identifiable and diagnosable before november 21, 1996. volumetric doubling time is a way to understand tumor growth. right? how the tumor grows. it is not a one-dimensional or a two-dimensional thing, it is three-dimensional. it grows and it looks like that. it can be applicable going forward and backward. adenocarcinoma, the type of cancer that theresa sammarco had, is the slowest-growing type of lung cancer. what did he base his opinion on that the tumor was identifiable and diagnosable before november 21, 1996? he relied on peer-reviewed studies which provide a range of growth rates. and that is how they look at it, right? and our burden is not to pinpoint exactly what size the tumor was on november 20th, 1996. we just have to prove by a preponderance of the evidence that it was probably more likely than not observable. that is why we gave you a range, because that is what the peer-reviewed studies give ranges of. and we are talking about ranges of 3809 doubling time, a smaller doubling time meaning that it is growing quicker, a longer doubling time, like 300 days, meaning it is growing much, much, much slower. tumor identification equals tumor diagnosable. and even -- and these ranges are based upon the study, or studies, the most recent one i think from december of 2012, which utilized new computer technology. right? remember that? 43 days was the fastest doubling time in the study. right? meaning it doubled in size more quicker, or more quickly, so therefore, back on november 21st, it would have been smaller. even that, and he talked about that is an outlier, but even that, 1.4 centimeters, still larger than the minimum size that he says to be diagnosable, but way larger, a centimeter larger than the smallest that dr. keller's ever seen on ct. right? but -- and we did that because, you know, we wanted to show you, even using the fastest-growing in the peer-reviewed study based upon computer technology, even using the fastest, it is still observable. 3810 median, though, 300 days. that is the median. and dr. keller acknowledged that that is been seen in studies. the median, the average in this study, 300 days, 2.8 centimeters. right? and 300 days is -- the doubling time, it is growing much slower. only 2.8 centimeters. so either way you look at it, or any way you look at it, really, studies, the fact that cancer does not strike overnight like dr. burns said, common sense. right? this 3 by 3.5 mass seen on march 25th, 1997, was observable, and thus, diagnosable only four short months before, because we know a tumor of this size does not appear overnight and it does not grow to that size overnight. and remember we included the exercise, and we were looking at the picture from this here. and so it looks funny because you are looking down on it, and so -- but anyway, i think you all remember when he plopped it down in the 3-centimeter circle, you know, and dr. keller agreed that that was the size. so that is why it looks a little -- maybe a little bit wider, but ... and you recall he went through that 3811 with him. and that really illustrates what we are talking about, you know. when there is a doubling, it is not -- if it gets cut in half, then that, whatever it is after that, gets cut in half again. so you see the progression. it is not all that, you know, dramatic. and, of course, there is testimony about symptoms. dr. abel, symptoms of lung cancer that is in the testimony and in medical records. clubbing of fingers, weight loss, hemoptysis. hemoptysis is spitting up blood, right. we know that. chronic cough, fatigue, body aches, numbness in fingers. opinion with a benefit of hindsight. the constellation of symptoms are indicative of lung cancer because these are all lung cancer symptoms, and we know she had lung cancer. dr. keller tried to tell you that none of these were related, of course, but when asked the hypothetical by mr. scarola, "doctor, i want you to assume that you return to your office this afternoon to resume your clinical practice of medicine. you meet a patient of 3812 approximately 60 years of age, a female patient, who comes in to you with a history of 45 years of a pack and a half a day, uninterrupted smoking since age 15. a female who has some tobacco-related illnesses, increased fatigue, recent incidence of a loss of 6 pounds, and recent incidence of spitting up blood. you examine her hands and you find pronounced clubbing. what action do you take? "probably all my patients i would do chest x-rays, perhaps, yeah." of course he would. of course he would under those circumstances. and besides that, dr. keller has never seen clubbing except for in late-stage lung cancer. so either way, either way, the answer to question 3 is yes. sign or symptom. either way, the answer is yes. and then you have class membership. and the engle findings apply. smoking cigarettes cause lung cancer. nicotine in cigarettes is addictive. philip morris placed cigarettes on the market that were defective and unreasonably dangerous. 3813 and, of course, the concealment and the conspiracy findings, and then philip morris was negligent. one of the next issues for your determination is going to be whether philip morris' concealment or omission of material information was a legal cause of theresa sammarco's death, and then also whether the conspiracy was, as well. so i'm going to talk about those together. so we know from the engle findings that philip morris was a co-conspirator and part of a conspiracy with many other cigarette manufacturers to conceal or omit information regarding the health effects of cigarettes or their addictive nature with the intention that smokers in the public would rely on this information to their detriment. of course. and that is information we brought you. we brought you marketing. why else would someone smoke filtered cigarettes if they did not think that filtered cigarettes were filtering out the bad stuff? well, we know that is not true, and we know now that, in fact, the smoker is getting more 3814 bad stuff, but of course that is why people in the 1950s were smoking -- were smoking filtered cigarettes. of course that is why smokers in the 1970s and '80s were smoking light cigarettes. because they thought, as advertised, that there was lower tar and nicotine. right? so, of course, philip morris and other companies believed and intended that the public would rely on this information. now, we know that the conspiracy and the concealment continued until after theresa sammarco died. she died in 1998, and it was not after that until philip morris finally admitted what it knew about the addictive nature of nicotine and the health hazards of smoking. dr. cummings talked to you about how lung cancer is basically a manmade disease, right, there were no -- there were no instances, or hardly any, of lung cancer in the 1900s, 1910s. of course, 1913, cigarettes are introduced, and you see the blue line, consumption goes up, and what happens 15, 20 years later? lung cancer starts. and we know that as cigarettes increased, so -- in the 1940s and 1950s, so too did, at 3815 that time, lung cancer rates in males. and folks were paying attention to that. there were some medical journals that came out around that time, 1953. now, theresa sammarco started smoking in 1952. and you heard that, you know, it was an era where the companies, philip morris, made smoking appear safe, healthy, normal. we showed you the ads, we showed you some movie clips, it was glamorous, it was in movies. we talked about how advertising works in philip morris' own words. you saw that video. and, by the way, if you want to watch any of these videos again, they are in evidence. and -- i do not know that we have them in here, but if you needed to look at one -- want to look at the videos, something can be given to you or you can come out here and watch the videos. so you have these documents here, but you need to know that any of these videos that are in evidence you all have the ability to see if you want to. we also know that august 1953, as dr. cummings talked about, philip morris marketed and studied the smoking habits of 3816 young people. right? this is a roper poll that was done for philip morris. "what is the last brand of cigarette you smoked regularly" is the question. and here we have the 15-to-17 age range. and so, you know, that information was important to philip morris. why? ask yourselves why. because the younger somebody starts smoking, the better it is for business for them. right? because once you get a young person smoking, chances are better that they are going to become addicted. and when they become addicted, there is a great chance they become a customer of yours for life. and so they were interested in knowing about, and they wanted youths, like theresa sammarco, as a 16-year-old in 1953 who is already started smoking just the year before. they want those people. they need those people. the bottom document -- i think you saw mr. scarola read to you the 1984 document, this is from r.j. reynolds, a co-conspirator, but these companies are not different. it asks: "why, then, are younger adult smokers important 3817 to r.j.r.? younger adult smokers are the only source of replacement smokers." replacement smokers. smokers that they need to pick up the slack and fill in the ranks when other smokers die or quit. think about that for a minute. think about that, when you are thinking about responsibility in this case and you are thinking about entitlement to punitive damages. less than one-third of smokers start after the age of 18. so, 69 percent of smokers start before the age of 18. like theresa sammarco. so we know from the chart that there is a dip in consumption. what happens? we talked about this in the beginning. stock prices fall. a dip in consumption. what are we going to do? we are not going to tell the public what we know. we are going to get together, ban together, agree to enter into a conspiracy, but here is what we know when we are doing that. we already know cigarettes are difficult for people to break. we already know that cigarettes cause cancer. boy, would not it be wonderful if our company was first to produce a cancer-free cigarette. and then we know why 3818 they did it. suppose everybody smoked just one cigarette less a day, that would be -- would maybe 40 billion a year. so what do they do? rather than provide this knowledge to the public, say, you know what, these studies that came out in life magazine, about tumors growing on the backs of tar [sic], you know what, folks, america, public, those tumors could be growing inside you as well. they did not tell people that. what did they do instead? they banned together and agreed that they were going to enter into a conspiracy to try and keep americans smoking, so they could make money. and what do they do? they come out, january 4th -- and, by the way, this is all -- these alarm bells are going off and happening and all this conspiracy is being put together over the christmas holiday season of 1953. what do they do? they come out with the frank statement where they basically make promises to the american public about the things that they are going to do, and the things that they believe. we believe the products we make are not 3819 injurious to health. they know it causes cancer. promise to cooperate closely with those whose task it is to safeguard the public. you see, as time goes on, not only do they not do that, they start attacking the surgeon general. they start attacking the very office and person whose job it is to educate the public about cigarettes. but internally, while they are starting this plan and implementing it, there is no doubt or confusion that cigarettes caused cancer, right? you saw the documents: "carcinogens are found in practically every class of compounds in smoke." that is a 1961 philip morris document. 1962, r.j. reynolds: "obviously, the amount of evidence accumulated to indict cigarette smoking as a health hazard is overwhelming." another document: "cigarettes have certain unattractive side effects. they cause lung cancer." and so what do they do? they engage in this campaign of doubt, confusion of deceit, 3820 and it works. right? 1957, had this committee had not been formed, the cigarette industry by now would have been in a deplorable position. the tirc has been a successful, defensive operation. so, even though there is some information out about the potential health hazards of smoking, what has this plan successfully done? it has successfully, and been successful, because people are still smoking even with that information out there. so they have done their job. they have created enough doubt. one of the ways they have created doubt and they have created reassurance, as well. right? and how do they create reassurance? filtered cigarettes. do not worry, we are the good company. we promised you in the frank statement, in january 1954, that we have an interest in safeguarding the public health. we do not believe there is anything wrong. if we find something, we will let you know. did that ever happen before theresa sammarco died? did that ever happen from them? rather, they did the opposite. creating 3821 doubt, because doubt was their product. it is also a means of establishing a controversy. and we -- you saw the video clips of all of the, you know, public statements that were made. you saw, again, later on in years, saying this -- our creating doubt and confusion and deceit, it is working. "1972, for nearly 20 years this industry has employed a single strategy to defend itself on three major fronts. while the strategy was brilliantly conceived and executed it has helped us win important battles." this is working because people are still smoking. mr. philipson: you want to go back? we are going to play that. mr. bass: okay. (a videoclip was played and transcribed as follows:) "ann browder: and i have to disagree with you in that we do not know what causes the ailments that have been attributed to the cigarette smoking." "ted koppel: cigarette smoking does not cause cancer, yes or no?" 3822 "edward horrigan: it is not known whether cigarettes cause cancer. has not been causally established." "ted koppel: cigarette smoking -- no causal relationship between cigarette smoking and emphysema." "edward horrigan: despite all the research to date, there has been no causal link established." "ann browder: the case is still open. the jury has not come in." "mr. stossel: it may not be harmful -- you are not convinced? "ann browder: it may be or it may not be, we do not know." "unidentified speaker: do cigarettes cause cancer?" "unidentified speaker: i do not know if they do or not." "unidentified speaker: i'm not in a position to give you a does or does not answer." "mr. campbell: yes, i may be convinced. we do not know what causes cancer in general right now, so i think that we may find out what 3823 causes cancer and we may find out some relationship, which has yet to be proven." (video ended.) mr. bass: what impact does this campaign of doubt have on addicted a smoker? all right? that is really -- that is really the question, or one of the questions. what impact does it have on an addicted smoker? well, you have heard both dr. cummings and dr. burns talk about this notion of cognitive dissidence, right? the fact that in an addicted smoker if you hear two competing messages -- remember, addiction is a disease of the brain. okay? in a smoker that hears two competing messages, they are more likely to listen to the one that suggests to them they do not need to change their behavior. right? the cigarette companies knew that. that was their plan, to give smokers a self-rationale to keep smoking. to give smokers a psychological crutch to keep smoking. one of the ways they did it, create doubt. put the message out there that nothing's wrong with it. 3824 the other way to do it? filtered cigarettes. if you are worried, okay, or if you have slight concern, here, smoke these. these new, filtered cigarettes are going to trap anything that comes out. they knew that was not the case, though. and, in fact, they are more dangerous. dr. cummings talked about that. they are more dangerous -- we know now, today, that they are more dangerous. more promises. "if our product is harmful, we will stop making it." these are public promises designed to create cognitive dissidence in the smoker. recall they promised to cooperate with the surgeon general, but we talked about how they did not turn over all the information they had in 1963 to the surgeon general. 1961, "present technology does not permit selective filtration." letter to surgeon general, 1963. "it is possible, of course, to modify the chemical composition of cigarette smoke by the use of filters." more attacks on the surgeon general 3825 designed, as dr. burns said, to undermine the public health message. public health is trying to get the message out, the cigarette companies are blunting it and trying to create confusion. they are not cooperating with the surgeon general. ask yourselves if that is the type of behavior that has an impact on addicted smokers. yes, it does. dr. burns and cummings told you that. on addicted smokers, like theresa sammarco. but also if it is a type of conduct that warrants punitive damages -- mr. kelly: objection, your honor, improper argument. the court: sustained. mr. bass: was this -- was this intentional? was there withholding of information from the surgeon general intentional? was it fraudulent? remember, there is the jury instruction that says: it does not matter how the information gets to the smoker. right? this is part of the chain. not cooperating with public health is part of the chain that prevents all the information from getting out. 3826 they duped the surgeon general with filters here and with lights later on. and dr. burns has testified about that. "attack more where they attack the surgeon general, the number one health problem is the surgeon general." 1988. 1988 is important because not only do we have evidence of what we call reliance in this case, theresa sammarco. you know, she -- theresa sammarco did exactly what the industry suggested she should do. she went from unfiltered cigarettes in 1952, to filtered cigarettes in 1954. filtered cigarettes, at that time, although they were on the market, were really starting to take off. and you saw the chart. and we are going to come to it later, i think. actually, we are going to come to it -- a little bit later. i thought it was right there. anyway, then, in the 1970s, when lights come out, she starts smoking lights. exactly like the industry told her she should do. and so while the focus on the concealment and conspiracy question is after may 5th of 1982, 3827 you can use the evidence of her relying on what the industry is saying in the years leading up to it. mr. kelly: objection, your honor, improper argument. mr. bass: judge, it is -- the court: overruled. mr. bass: you can use the industry -- excuse me -- her reliance before 1982 as an inference of reliance post-1982. why? because she is still smoking light cigarettes. okay. she is still smoking light cigarettes and thinking that she is not getting as much bad stuff, just like they were advertised. all right? she is smoking them into the '80s and into the '90s, after 1982. this is -- i want to spend just a little bit of time on this. remember we talked about, you know, not only did the cigarette industry conceal the health -- what it knew about the health hazards, it also concealed what it knew about the addictive qualities of nicotine. and so this is an example of, you know, we talked about that they are trying to -- 3828 industry, that is -- undermine addiction. they do not want people to quit. right? we know that. okay. so besides concealing the health hazards and creating doubt, when they have a chance to weigh in on addiction like they did in 1988, because, remember, that is whether the surgeon general came out with, you know, a very important report defining nicotine as addictive, talking about how the pathophysiology, how it creates addiction is similar to heroin and cocaine. although, the cigarette industry knew, philip morris, almost 30 years before this report that people smoked form addiction. this came out. what did they do? they issued a press release, "claims that cigarettes are addictive are irresponsible and scare tactics." they do not want the public to think that cigarettes are addictive because if the public knows and the public health knows, then the public health is going to start to be able to help more people stop smoking. you remember theresa sammarco's medical record from 1991? "i feel like a junkie trying 3829 to get off drugs." the concealment of the addictive properties of nicotine, it got to her. because if she believed that she was -- that nicotine was addictive and a drug, she would have said, "i'm a junkie. i'm addicted." she said, "i feel like a junkie" because she had no idea, she had no idea, because the full truth was concealed from her. the message of the public health was blocked. that is how the conspiracy and the concealment impacted millions of smokers, and theresa sammarco. she did exactly what the industry said she should do, following the chronology of her smoking history, unfiltered to filtered to lights. saying that she feels like she is a junkie, rather than "i am a junkie." mr. scarola: an hour and a half, hardee. mr. bass: thank you. right. and we know that philip morris and their co-conspirators manipulate and control the level of nicotine. we talked a lot about that. right. they can take it out, they can keep it out. but what happens if they keep it out? 3830 people stop smoking. they cannot have that. we talked about -- right? this is what i was looking for when i talked about the filter charts. theresa sammarco -- theresa sammarco follows this chart. very well might be her smoking. right? she is in that chart just like, ultimately by 1970, when lights -- just about the time lights are introduced, actually, we have that percent of the market, eighty percent smoking filtered. light cigarettes. theresa sammarco smoked light cigarettes. dr. cummings and dr. burns explained the lights sham, right? the defendants allowed public health scientists to believe that lights were safer even though the defendants knew they were not. "despite the ftc machine numbers, smokers were getting the same amount of tar and nicotine, but thought they were smoking a safer cigarette. "public health scientists did not learn that these defendants were gaining the system until their internal documents exposed their secrets." one of the major, major tobacco control moments, as dr. cummings talked about, was when 3831 these secret internal company documents were released, because that gave public health so much more information that they had no idea about before, including things like being misled about what philip morris knew about light cigarettes. we put a document in evidence called "human smoking behavior." and it is long. it is pt4389. and it is all about things like compensation. right? talking about -- and i did not -- we did not mention the internal philip morris document that talks about the illusion of filtration. but here we talk about compensation, and that is that smokers will unconsciously or subconsciously smoke more on a lower-delivery cigarette to get the same amount of nicotine. philip morris studied and studied and studied and studied and studied, and those are just some of the studies about human smoking compensation. i'm jumping ahead to waxman. mr. philipson: want me to get waxman? mr. bass: yes. thank you. recall -- before we play this, please, 3832 robert. thank you. recall 1994. even in 1994, philip morris still claiming nicotine in cigarettes not addictive. still doing that to try to undermine cessation efforts, but this time they do it in front of congress. (a videoclip was played and transcribed as follows:) "unidentified speaker: i would like you to rise. and those who will be testifying as well, will you rise. "will you raise your right hand. do you swear that the testimony you are about to give is the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth? "the panel: i do. "unidentified speaker: please consider yourselves to be under oath. "representative ron wyden (d-oregon): let me begin my questioning on the matter of whether or not nicotine was addictive. let me ask you first -- i'd like to just go down the row -- whether each of you believes that nicotine is not addictive. "i heard virtually all of you touch on it. 3833 just yes or no. "do you believe nicotine is not addictive? "unidentified tobacco representive #1: i believe nicotine is not addictive, yes. "representative ron wyden (d-oregon): mr. johnston. "james johnston (rj reynolds): congressman, cigarettes and nicotine clearly do not meet the classic definitions of addiction. there is no intoxicating -- "representative ron wyden (d-oregon): we' ll take that as a no. and, again, time is short. if you can just -- i think each of you believe nicotine is not addictive. we just would like to have this for the record. "unidentified tobacco representative #2: i do not believe that nicotine or our products are addictive. "unidentified tobacco representative #3: i believe nicotine is not addictive. "unidentified tobacco representative #4: i believe that nicotine is not addictive. "unidentified tobacco representative #5: i believe that nicotine is not addictive. "unidentified tobacco representative #6: a 3834 nd i, too, believe that nicotine is not addictive." (video ended.) mr. bass: thank you. 1994, after they held their hand up, swore to tell the truth, that is what they say to congress. facts on reliance. remember, reliance -- you know, the focus is after may 5th, 1982 for legal reasons. okay. but as we talked about, and this makes common sense, right, if you start relying on something well before that and you continue to rely on it, and it does not change, it is happening in 1982. it is happening -- mr. kelly: objection, your honor -- sorry, hardee, to interrupt. objection, your honor, improper argument. mr. bass: judge, that objection was -- same objection was made earlier and it was overruled. the court: overruled. mr. bass: what do we have? 1952 theresa started smoking marlboro unfiltered cigarettes. 1954, theresa switches to filters when they 3835 came out and were heavily promoted. 1970s, theresa switched to lights when they came on and began to be heavily promoted as a safer alternative. after 1982, she is still smoking light cigarettes. 1987, edith martinelli, theresa smoking marlboro lights. theresa tells her that she was trying to quit by going to a light cigarette, lights had less nicotine and were going to help her quit. 1997, short period of smoking ultra lights before she ultimately quit. ultra lights. and theresa, like millions of other americans, were unaware of the manipulations that philip morris and their co-conspirators engaged in. and, again, we have the video clips that have been played that are post-1982. still trying to create the controversy. still interfering with people's cessation efforts. still not telling the public that their products are designed for addiction. still not telling the public that lights are not doing anything for them. so yes -- mr. kelly: objection, your honor. 3836 preemption. the court: overruled. mr. bass: and so, yes, did the concealment and conspiracy impact theresa sammarco? absolutely. why else was she smoking filters? why else was she smoking lights? because that is what they were saying was a safer alternative. the real sad -- this is a tragic case on so many levels. but what is very sad and disturbing is that all of the opportunities that the tobacco industry had to tell the truth, but chose not to. and so we listed a couple of things through the years on here. but if you think about it, every single day from december -- whenever they first met, december 10th, 1953, until they finally admitted what they knew in 1998, every single day for 50 years, these defendants, philip morris, chose not to tell the public what it knew about cigarettes. mr. kelly: objection, your honor. preemption. the court: overruled. mr. bass: every single day. every single 3837 day, it chose -- the industry, philip morris, chose not to tell folks who were smoking filters or lights that those were not doing anything for them. the clerk: five minutes. mr. bass: thank you. until an hour 45? the clerk: uh-huh. mr. bass: thank you. think about all the chances, when you think about responsibility. think about all the chances that they had to do the right thing, but every single day placed profits over safety and lives of people like theresa sammarco. and that is one of the things you are going to be doing is looking at fault. right. and for our part, we acknowledge fault because -- let me get the exact language here. i cannot find it -- because while theresa tried to quit, for whatever reason, she was unable to until it was too late. but we acknowledge that -- you know, we acknowledge and mr. sammarco acknowledges that, you know, even addicted people have responsibilities and that if you try and quit 15 times, you can try and quit 16 times. if 3838 you try and quit 20 times, you can try and quit 21. so even though she tried, she could have tried a little bit harder, because everybody can try a little bit harder. so that is really what we are talking about, we are talking about acknowledging. we are talking about simply for not being able to quit smoking. we are not talking about for being lied to about why cigarettes were hard to quit. we are not talking about other intentional fraudulent conduct. right. and so that is why the court and the verdict form tells you that if you answer yes to question 5 or 6 -- excuse me, question 5 or 6, the intentional tort counts, the fraud and the conspiracy, the verdict will not be reduced by theresa sammarco's intentional fault because we are not acknowledging any fault for the lies and the manipulations that was told to theresa sammarco. okay. but theresa sammarco did have a responsibility to try and quit. she met that as best she could, evidenced by this chart. she tried hypnosis. she tried cold turkey. she tried the filter thingy. we put it there 3839 because that is what edith martinelli referred to it as. whatever it was, it was something that in addiction to the filters that she had, she put on the end of cigarettes because she believed it would help her quit. tried the nicotine patch. tried gum. tried cutting back. lenten quit attempts. switched to lights. switched to ultra lights. but at the end of the day, the most important thing besides the quit attempts, when thinking about responsibility, this is a woman who wanted to quit. she tried. she was unable. and when she was unable, she cried. john sammarco, junior, said she cried so many times because she could not quit smoking. remember she goes to confession or maybe just to talk to father o'brien. father o'brien, her confidante, her pastor, says, if things are this bad and you are trying to quit, you need to go back to smoking so that you save your house. imagine how bad off she must have been if father o'brien is telling her you should go back to smoking. so compare her efforts to quit. compare 3840 the things she did. think about in her day and age, there were not all of the cessation aids that are available now. she did what she could. she had everything to live for. she had every reason to quit. and she tried, but she just could not. compare that with what we have heard about philip morris and co-conspirators when you are thinking about responsibility. that is just a shot of some of the pharmaceutical quit aids available today. and so i'm getting ready to sit down. mr. scarola is going to talk to you about mr. sammarco's loss. but there is just a couple of things that i want to talk to you about. one, we talked about in the beginning, which seems like a little while ago, i asked you, i said, knowing what you have heard in this case, what are you going to do about it? right? this is a document from 1968. "our basic position in the cigarette controversy is subject to the charge and may be subject to a finding that we are making false or misleading statements to promote the sale of cigarettes." 3841 that sums up what they were doing, but it also shows that one day, one day they thought and feared they might be accounting for the things that they did in a courtroom just like this. they knew it. the things they did were wrong. beyond wrong. in fact, go to the dictionary, and you are not going to find a word in there that describes what they did and how they felt about people. and so today's that day of reckoning. today is that day where you say, yes, you did, philip morris, co-conspirators, you did make false and misleading statements to promote the sale of cigarettes. and you did not care about anyone except yourselves and your pockets and your bank accounts. are punitive damages warranted against philip morris in this case? you better believe it. and the court, her honor, talked to you about a phase ii. what you should understand about phase ii is, it will be very short. mr. kelly: objection, your honor, that is improper argument. we do not know. we have not even talked about that. 3842 the court: sustained. mr. bass: one last thing -- thank you, jack -- is you are going to be asked, as we talked about, responsibility. the vision of responsibility. and we can make suggestions to you but, of course, it is up to you. and so based upon everything that you have heard, based upon terri sammarco, knowing how much she had to live for, knowing how hopelessly addicted she was, feeling like a junky trying to get off drugs, wanting to quit. crying, but unable. thinking about everything we heard about philip morris, we are going to suggest to you that you put no more than 5 percent of the responsibility on theresa sammarco, and 95 percent on philip morris. of course, it is up to you, but think about all the things that philip morris did to keep addicted smokers like theresa sammarco smoking. thank you very much for your attention throughout this whole trial. thank you very much for your attention today. closing statement mr. scarola: good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen. what i will be speaking to you about for just a few minutes at this point in the trial is what is probably going to be the most difficult task that you will face during the course of your deliberations in this case. and it is the most difficult because it is the area in which the law gives you the least guidance. as you go through the jury instructions with regard to all of the issues that hardee spoke you to about, you are going to find some very specific instructions that will lead you unerringly to a just result if you carefully examine those instructions. but when it comes to making a determination as to how you translate the loss that john sammarco, senior, has suffered into a dollar verdict, the totality of what the law tells you is summarized here. you are told: "there is no exact standard for fixing the compensation to be awarded. any such award should be fair and just. write on the verdict form in dollars the amount of damages which the greater weight of the evidence shows john sammarco, senior, sustained as a result of her, terri sammarco's, death, including any damages he is reasonably certain to incur or experience in the future." 3846 there is no exact standard. so one of the important responsibilities that the lawyers in a case like this have is to provide you some guidance as to how you might go about arriving at a fair and just verdict, an award that is fair and just compensation for the enormous loss that john sammarco, senior, has suffered in the past and will continue to suffer through the balance of the statistically anticipated joint life expectancies of john and terri sammarco had terri's life not been tragically cut short. what can i say about that? we have tried very hard in the presentation of the evidence to you to give you a foundation from which you would be able to have some insight into the magnitude of john's loss without ever appealing to your sympathy. you know from the evidence that is been presented that in march of 1997, the sammarco family's world was turned inside out and upside down. it was a pretty remarkable world before march of 1997, not -- not unaffected by the same kinds of trials and tribulations that every human life is exposed to and that every 3847 family endures, but it was a remarkable family. it is a truly remarkable family. but it lost its center. it was a life the pleasures of which were epitomized by a gathering around the table that john sammarco built with his own hands to share a meal that terri cooked with her own hands, pasta and gravy, surrounded by children and grandchildren and extended family and friends. it was a life in which john and terri were just beginning to reap the rewards of the hard labor in which they had engaged with great satisfaction for faith, for family, and for a future that they planned to share together. and then like a lightning bolt, cancer reared its ugly head and a war began. it had been there. it had been growing. and in retrospect, the family lives with the thought that maybe there were things that we could have and should have and would have seen with the benefit of hindsight that is 20/20, but we did not. and it struck us like a lightning bolt and war began. and john for 17 months sat and held his wife's hand while the chemicals were pumped 3848 into her veins. he sat out in the waiting room and he prayed while the radiation was aimed at those cancer cells. he watched his wife be eaten away by disease. he helplessly watched for 17 months as cancer spread to her brain and began to destroy the love of his life. so how -- how can you begin to put a dollar figure on that 17 months? and what about the 16 years since that time, when every time john sammarco walks through his front door, there is the poster-sized picture of john and terri. when every direction that he turns in that house, you see another picture of terri and the family, terri and her grandchildren. the notes on the refrigerator. there today, every day for every year, every month, every week, every waking hour, how do you begin to put a price tag on that? and knowing that it does not end here. it continues on for some, if i remember the number, six more years. and we are going to look at that. what can we do, how can we put -- how can we put a number onto that? well, i'm going to suggest something to 3849 you, and then i'm going to try to put that number in context. but before i do that, i want to be sure that you understand, we are not here to ask you for sympathy. you know, you know how many tears have already been shed by john and for john and will continue to be shed at every family gathering when terri's absence is palpable. you know that. we do not want your sympathy. a verdict infected by sympathy is an unjust verdict. justice. how do you do justice? you do justice by eliminating sympathy from your verdict and making absolutely sure that to the fullest extent possible your verdict reflects empathy. mr. kelly: objection, your honor. that is a golden rule argument and that is improper. the court: sustained. mr. scarola: may i be heard, your honor? the court: just rephrase it and move on. mr. scarola: sympathy means you hurt and i hurt with you. do not render a verdict out of shared hurt. render a verdict that reflects understanding. you hurt, and i have taken 3850 time and effort to understand that hurt. i am rendering a verdict that to the very best i possibly can reflects a full and complete understanding of all you have been through and all you are going to go through. no sympathy. understanding, comprehension, from the glimpse into the sammarcos' lives that you have had, from the glimpse into john sammarco's life that you have had, render a verdict that reflects understanding. so these are the numbers that i suggest to you. for the 17 months in the past, from march of '97 through august 26, 1998, i suggest to you that fair and reasonable compensation is $100,000 per month, that is $1.7 million, for having endured that horrendous, tragic, helpless experience of watching the love of his life eaten away by cancer. for the 15-1/2 years since terri's death, from august 26th, 1998, until today in this courtroom, 15-1/2 years, $500,000 a year, $7.75 million. for the seven additional years, that is the joint life expectancy based upon the charts 3851 that we have seen, $500,000 a year, $3.5 million. total compensation for 23 years, 11 months of mental pain and suffering, $12,950,000. that is a tremendous amount of money, is not it? for an enormous loss. so, how do we put that in perspective? how do we -- how do we justify those kinds of numbers when we are left with a task as to which the law provides no guidance? well, we are told that our verdict must be based upon the evidence in this case. so what has the evidence in this case shown us about what people are paid for the burdens they are asked to carry? because that is what we are doing. we are paying john sammarco for the burden that he is being asked to carry. mr. philipson: two minutes. mr. scarola: thank you. there have been 8,942 days of suffering in the past and suffering in the future for which there must be compensation to john sammarco. that is what all those other numbers add up to. 8,942. 3852 well, dr. keller -- mr. kelly: objection, your honor, improper comparative valuation. the court: overruled. mr. scarola: dr. keller gets paid $6,000 a day for carrying his burden on behalf of philip morris. that is $53,655,000. that is how much dr. keller charges for carrying a burden. if we take the higher number that he said was not a raise, that he is been charging since the beginning, $8,000; that is $71,536,000 for dr. keller carrying the burden that philip morris imposed upon him. there are 16 waking hours in a day. 8,942 days, 143,072 waking hours -- only waking hours -- we are not counting the sleepless nights, any of the sleepless nights -- 143,072 hours times the lowest rate that dr. keller charges to carry the burden for philip morris, that is $53,652,000. mr. kelly: improper per diem argument, your honor. the court: overruled. mr. scarola: florida's current minimum hourly wage is $7.93 an hour. if john sammarco 3853 were to be paid for the waking hours when he must carry this burden, at just the minimum wage of the state of florida, $1,135,000. let us put this in perspective. is this a minimum wage job that john has been asked to do? i suggest no. and if you tried to buy tickets today to the current showing at the broward center for the performing arts and you got the good tickets, if any of those seats were still available, $324 for about three hours entertainment to relieve the pain or burden of whatever it is that you would like to get away from. that is more than a hundred dollars an hour. a hundred dollars an hour to be entertained. that is $14,307,200. so how did we get to these numbers? well, we got to them -- we got to them trying to put john's loss in perspective and find a rational basis for translating that loss into dollars and cents as difficult as that is, in spite of the fact that there is no guidance in the law. and we look at those things around us and our common sense and our common experience and we said, this is more than a minimum wage job 3854 and it is got to be worth at least something close to what we pay to go see a show at the broward center for the performing arts. so these are the suggestions that i made for you. they are not binding. i suggest to you that they are reasonable minimums. i ask you to consider them carefully. i ask you to return a verdict free of sympathy and reflective as much as it possibly can be reflective of a full and complete understanding of the loss that john has suffered. i will have an opportunity to speak to you again, after defense counsel has had their chance to speak to you. and i will, at that time, i assure you, join in giving thanks for the incredible dedication that you folks have shown to this job. thank you very much. closing rebuttal mr. scarola: thank you very much. may it please the court. ladies and gentlemen. this is what i want to talk about. i will never have the time to address everything with you that i would like to say, but there is one thing that i told you that i would say that i must absolutely take time to do, and that is, to join in the statements that were made by both hardee and mr. kelly about how much we are indebted to you for the sacrifices that you have made to be here. the strength of this jury system rests squarely upon the willingness of folks like you to make the kinds of enormous 3956 sacrifices that you have made in order to assist us in resolving this dispute. and personally, on hardee's behalf, but most particularly on behalf of john and the sammarco family, we are extremely grateful to you and know that you will do justice because you have dedicated yourselves so faithfully to this task. thank you very much. the first question that you have been told repeatedly you are going to address is the question of addiction. you have been told that you have the discretion to accept whatever definition of "addiction" you want to accept. well, that is not true, and the reason it is not true is because judge henning is going to tell you, you must accept these facts as true, because they are stipulated facts. and among the stipulated facts, number 4, nicotine in cigarette smoke is addictive. is addictive. you cannot use a definition such as the definition that has been discussed earlier in this testimony about the need for intoxication, because everybody agrees nicotine is not intoxicating. it does not fit that definition 3957 of "addiction." but because there is a stipulation that nicotine is addictive, the definition that you must use is one that fits, nicotine. nicotine is addictive. terri sammarco was clearly addicted to nicotine pursuant to any definition except one that would require that she become intoxicated by smoking. i suggest to you that the stipulation, compelled by the evidence in this case, that stipulation makes the answer to question number 1 obvious and easy. there is another stipulation. theresa sammarco died of lung cancer caused by her smoking cigarettes. that is a stipulation that was compelled by the overwhelming evidence in this case that the type of lung cancer that terri sammarco had is caused almost exclusively by lung cancer, and her adenocarcinoma of the lung was caused by 45 years of very heavy smoking. so nicotine in cigarette smoke is addictive. theresa sammarco was smoking because she was addicted at least -- at least in material part, and therefore, theresa 3958 sammarco died of lung cancer caused by her smoking cigarettes. the answer to question number 2 is yes. that brings us to question number 3. question number 3 is what was described in opening statement by opposing counsel as the manifestation issue. when you get judge henning's instructions in writing and you take them back there with you and read them carefully, as i'm sure you will, you will find that the word "manifestation" appears nowhere in those instructions. the court does very carefully define the standard. the standard -- and incidentally, before i skip this, dependence, habit, intoxication, they are all irrelevant. they just do not make any difference. you will find that what we must prove with regard to the november 21, 1996 cutoff date is covered in three instructions. and i suggest to you that it might be helpful, because i've tried to do things in the short amount of time that i have that will -- that will make your job a little bit easier, you might want to just jot down that when you 3959 get to question number 3, the instructions that deal with question number 3 are instructions 8, 13 and 14. you are going to read all of them, but you might want to take those and put them on the side over here and say, okay, these are the instructions now that deal with this question. let us reread them again before we answer the question. and what you are going to see when you look at those three instructions is that the court will tell you, what must be proved is that as of november 21, 1996, theresa sammarco had signs or symptoms that were diagnosable with the benefit of hindsight as lung cancer. now, i watched the clock and opposing counsel spoke about this question for one hour and 20 minutes before we took a break. and in that one hour and 20 minutes, the word "hindsight" never passed his lips. and there is a reason why it never passed his lips and there is a simple illustration as to why. remember he spoke about whether there was a quarter in his briefcase? and as we stand here right now, we do not know whether there was 3960 a quarter in his briefcase or not. and i guess we could take it downstairs and we could run it through the x-ray machine, and we might be able to see that disk on the x-ray machine, and maybe we could tell it was a quarter and maybe it would look like one of those round batteries or some -- a washer or who knows what it might look like. but we could take the briefcase, we could open it up, and i promise i'm not going to do this, we could open it up and we could dump it out, and then we could look and we could see, is there a quarter there? and once we found out that there was, in fact, a quarter by opening up the briefcase and dumping it out, with the benefit of hindsight, we will know that it was there because the briefcase sat there the entire time. now, we did not open up terri sammarco's lung because there was no surgery, but we reached inside her body, and we reached inside the body with a needle that extracted cells from that very large tumor that was in her lung, and we pulled out those cells and we found out, this is an adenocarcinoma. at that 3961 point in time, we knew what was inside terri sammarco's lungs as of the time that we extracted the cells. now, the question then becomes, how long were those cells in terri sammarco's lung? and everybody in this case agrees, everybody agrees that no one can tell with precision, and that is another phrase that we heard repeatedly from -- from opposing counsel, somewhere i have it. here you go. the phrase that we heard repeatedly was, "we cannot know precisely how big that tumor was at any given point in time." and i absolutely agree, and dr. abel agreed and dr. keller agreed, we do not know precisely how big it was at any point in time. and if what we were required to prove is, with the benefit of hindsight, how big was the tumor at any given point in time, then the answer to that question would need to be no, we do not know. medical science has not reached that point. but what medical science has told us, and dr. keller has admitted this as well, what medical science has told us is that we know 3962 what size it probably was. because the standard is not proving precisely how big the tumor was at any given time, the standard, what we are required to prove by a greater weight of the evidence is, was it probably, was it more likely than not, diagnosable as of november 21, 1996? that is the date down at the bottom, that is what was referred to as the manifestation date. so what does medical science tell us? forget about dr. abel. put him aside for just a moment. what does dr. keller tell us that medical science says? in the three hours that he has investigated this topic, three hours, he said, "all of the studies that i am aware of" -- and there were many studies of adenocarcinomas -- "all placed the median doubling time at 300 days, 303 days, 305 days, right around 300 days, the median doubling time." the fastest doubling time ever observed in any scientific study that anyone has seen is 43 days. dr. keller admitted that. now, do we know whether this was the fastest adenocarcinoma in terms of its growth 3963 rate ever observed by science? or the slowest adenocarcinoma every observed by medical science? we do not know that. we do know, because dr. keller admitted it, that just because you have finally identified it, its growth rate does not change. its growth rate does not change. do we know precisely what that was, no. do we know probably what it was, yes. probably, the probabilities are that it behaved like all of the other adenocarcinomas that were observed by medical science, and the likely doubling rate was 300 days. but what did we do for you? we said, let us assume that it was not 300 days, that it was fully three times faster than that. it doubles at 100 days. that means it was 2.2 centimeters on november 21, 1996. let us assume it was even faster than that, it was 60 days. that means it was 1.8 centimeters. let us assume that it was the fastest-growing adenocarcinoma ever reported by medical science, 43 days. that means it was 1.4 centimeters on november 21, 1996. 3964 and when it was finally biopsied later and found out to be cancer, adenocarcinoma, with the benefit of hindsight, we know that the 1.4-centimeter diagnosable sign of cancer was cancer. we know that. so the only way that question number 3 can be answered no is if you were to ignore the court's instructions on the law and ignore the fact that we have the benefit of hindsight in making this determination. we never need to reach whatever contested issues there may be about symptoms and whether they are specific or nonspecific symptoms. again, i suggest to you that with the benefit of hindsight, we know why there was finger clubbing. we know why. dr. keller told us, in 30 years of practice, he has never seen finger clubbing except in association with late-stage cancer. now, could it have been caused by something else? sure. could all of those symptoms have been caused by something else? is it possible? the answer to that question, answered honestly by dr. abel, was yes, it is possible, they could have been caused by 3965 something else. but now that we know that the cancer was there, these are symptoms that are probably associated with cancer. the greater weight of the evidence associates them with cancer. you take all of it together, you take all of the signs and all of the symptoms and you put them together, and there is absolutely no question about the fact that with the benefit of hindsight, terri sammarco had cancer on november 21, 1996. it was there. and that is really the issue. can we say now with the benefit of hindsight that the cancer was there by november 21, 1996, or did terri sammarco get hit by cancer lightning? a sign is defined, a symptom is defined. that is what appears on those other two pages, page 13 and page 14, that i suggested you need to look at. that tells you signs and symptoms. and they are the same definitions that both of the doctors agreed to. symptoms are subjective, it is what the patient perceives. signs are objective, it is what the doctor can observe. signs and symptoms in this case clearly 3966 support the finding that this disease was not only present, but it fell within the blue circle. it was diagnosable as of november 21, with the benefit of hindsight, because we had a lesion that was substantially larger, almost four times larger, three times, almost four times larger than with the benefit of hindsight we know can be detected with a pet scan. it only takes .4 centimeters, only .4 centimeters, and this was 1.4 centimeters. if we assume it to have been the absolutely fastest duplicating doubling adenocarcinoma ever observed by science. while i have this here, there was, you will recall, a criticism for not calling dr. bates, dr. jancko, dr. morse, the radiologist, and the pathologist. well, i think you all know that there is the power of subpoena to compel witnesses to appear in the courtroom that is available to both sides. anyone is capable of subpoenaing anyone that they believe to have relevant and material information. and if you cannot get them here into the courtroom, you can take their depositions in advance under oath and you 3967 can present their testimony that way. so it is not that the plaintiff did not call dr. bates, dr. jancko, dr. morse, a radiologist, or a pathologist, it is that both parties decided they were not going to help you find the truth in this case. that is why they were not called. but then ask yourselves, why did not the defense call dr. dorce, whose name you heard in opening statement? why was there no oncologist called by the defense? why was there no addiction expert called by the defense? why was not there a historian to come in and contest the historic documents that were described to you in detail with extraordinary ability to recall dates, names, times, places of a man who has studied these documents now for decades? dr. cummings, the world's most renowned authority on the secret documents of tobacco. i'm going to race through this very quickly. this is an overview that addresses issues with regard to the apportionment of fault and reliance as well and there is some overlap here. what does philip morris and what do 3968 philip morris' co-conspirators, the other tobacco companies who interrupt their christmas vacation to wind up at the hotel in manhattan and plan this strategy to try to salvage their business when people stop buying their cigarettes, because they have now been linked to cancer? they give away free samples of their addictive product to soldiers. mr. kelly: your honor, i'm going to object as improper argument, not related to the harm that mrs. sammarco sustained. the court: objection is overruled. mr. scarola: they buy the endorsement of sports heros, tv and movie stars and other celebrities. they spend a billion dollars a year -- you saw that figure in evidence -- a billion dollars a year promoting the sex appeal, the power, the sophistication of a product -- mr. kelly: objection, your honor, that is specifically preempted for the period of time after 1982. mr. scarola: your honor, it is not preempted. the court: i remind the jury that they 3969 will make the determination of what was in the evidence and what they have heard and what they have seen. what the lawyers say is merely argument. you may continue. mr. scarola: they promote the sex appeal, the power, the sophistication of a product that they knew to be addictive and lethal. they create a false controversy about the health risks of smoking, discredit the science that proves the product is lethal, they deny addiction, they demean the public health officials, including the surgeon general, who are trying to educate the smoking public. they manipulate the nicotine levels of cigarettes to increase their addiction levels. they addict children -- mr. kelly: objection, your honor. mr. scarola: -- when their brains are most susceptible. mr. kelly: sorry, counsel. improper argument concerning the in limine order. mr. scarola: this has nothing to do with that subject matter, your honor. it has to do 3970 with the physiology, which is a matter that has clearly been testified to. the court: continue. mr. scarola: they addict children when their brains are most susceptible to the physiological changes that promote the strongest addictions. they promote filtered cigarettes and safe -- mr. kelly: your honor, i have a motion on that when we have a break. the court: continue. mr. scarola: they promote filtered cigarettes as a safe alternative to quitting while concealing knowledge that filters do not work. they promote low-tar and nicotine cigarettes, lights and ultra lights as a safe alternative to quitting, knowing that they are even more dangerous than full-flavor cigarettes. that is what they do. and when theresa sammarco falls prey to those schemes, that calculated scheme by buying and using the product that the cigarette conspirators induced her to buy -- the clerk: five minutes. mr. scarola: -- enticed her to buy. 3971 thank you. they blame her for making the choice that she was trapped into by their marketing. when theresa sammarco continues to smoke to feed the nicotine receptors in her altered brain, they blame her for choosing to become a nicotine addict, even though they knew about those changes, but hid that knowledge. when theresa sammarco misses a chance to quit in the early '50s, when she is just beginning to smoke, because the link between cancer and smoking is discredited by the cigarette companies, who tell her, pay no attention to those scientific studies, when she believes them, they blame her for choosing to believe what they said. when terri and the rest of the smoking public rely on their promise to remove anything harmful in cigarette smoke as soon as it is identified, they blame terri for choosing to believe a promise, that they knew, but terri did not, was absolutely impossible to keep. the internal documents, you have seen them. they knew they could never do it, but they were promising that they would. 3972 and in the process, terri becomes even more addicted. they blame terri for not knowing she was being treated by the cigarette conspirators, like an addicted lab rat. they blame her for not knowing the truth that was hidden about filters and lights. they blame her for daring to think that what you were told in opening statement was true. nicotine is a natural part of the plant. all we are doing is providing what nature provides when what we now know is what they are doing is taking low-grade tobacco and taking stems and extracting the nicotine from the junk and then spraying new nicotine on the junk and selling their most -- mr. kelly: objection, your honor, misstates the evidence. mr. scarola: -- addictive product. the court: overruled. continue. mr. scarola: and selling their most addictive product, the most addictive product they are capable of producing, while deceiving the smoking public about the levels of addiction. when the truth is nicotine gets 3973 sprayed on whatever they choose to put in there. now the loving family that surrounded theresa sammarco during all of her adult life could not overcome the effects of that intentional effort to keep terri sammarco buying cigarettes, filling the coffers of this defendant and serving as a replacement smoker for one of those 450,000 other americans that they were killing. mr. kelly: objection, your honor. state farm-williams. the court: overruled. mr. scarola: it was finally, although the loving family was not enough to overcome the strength of terri's addiction, it was finally the grieving family that surrounded her death bed, that was able to provide her the strength to overcome that addiction. and what does it tell us about how strong that addiction must have been, that that is what it took to finally do the job? can there be any doubt about the level of love that this mother had for her children? about the level of love that she had for her husband. about the level of love that 3974 she had for her grandchildren. how strong must this addiction have been that even that much love could not do it. what do we know? what do we know about addiction? we know from dr. cummings and we know from -- time? the clerk: one. mr. scarola: thank you. we know that motivation is not enough to overcome addiction, successful quitting requires motivation, times external support, plus one. the motivation and the external support are not enough alone. if motivation is zero, it does not happen. if external support is zero, it does not happen. it is got to be greater to overcome the addiction. we know that. so we know how strongly addicted terri was. and remember these, concealment of smoking cancer relationship. this is -- did this continue after 1982? the answer to that question was yes. concealment of nicotine addiction. did it continue after 1982? it continued to 1988. 3975 the clerk: time. mr. scarola: filter deception. did it continue to 1998? yes. light, low-tar nicotine deception. did it continue after 1982? yes. it continued to 1998. the clerk: time, your honor. mr. kelly: did the buzzer go off, your honor? the clerk: yeah. mr. scarola: may i have 30 more seconds, your honor, just to finish. the court: finish. mr. scarola: thank you. ultralight deception continued to 1998. genetic mutation due to filter vents. continued through 1998. every one of terri's family members were asked: "before you heard the testimony that you heard in this courtroom, did you know that those things were false? and their answer was "no." no. the sammarco household was deceived. terri sammarco was deceived. she believed she was smoking safer cigarettes after 1982. she 3976 believed that. she was deceived. what i never got to, but thank you so much.