closing statement mr. kelly: good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen. the panel: good afternoon. mr. kelly: may it please the court. counsel and mr. sammarco and ladies and gentlemen of the jury. it is nice to be able to look at you and www.phippsreporting.com 888 811-3408 talk directly to you again. it is been a couple of weeks, and i've been avoiding you in the hallways, so now i get to talk directly to you. and i have some considerable ground to cover. i'll try to do it in an organized fashion so that it will be helpful to you in the jury room. you have some very serious issues to decide shortly. some of them are going to be simple. i think some of them are going to be kind of complex. some of them could be very technical in areas that you do not normally find yourself considering issues in, like in the medical field. but whether it is simple or complicated or technical, they are all serious. and we are very grateful. i speak, i think, on behalf of everybody. i'm just really mimicking mr. bass' comments. we are very grateful that we have a jury who is going to be fair and responsible and objective, not going to be swayed by any emotion or feelings for or against either side. that is so very important, and we are so very grateful you have promised to do that, and going to follow the instructions. 3862 and with that, i'm going to get to discussing the evidence. i'm not going to cover all the evidence, you will be grateful to hear. i'm going to try and focus on the evidence that relates to mrs. sammarco. for example, you heard today from mr. bass that he thinks that the evidence indicates that mrs. sammarco was somehow influenced by something that happened in 1954 that continued to influence her all the way up to 1982, as if nothing happened to mrs. sammarco between 1954 and 1982. you know from the evidence that a lot happened to mrs. sammarco from 1954 to 1982, and i'm going to focus on that evidence, not the evidence that does not relate to mrs. sammarco. i'm not going to be able respond to every document. i'm only going to respond to those that relate to mrs. sammarco. during mr. bass' closing, he asked a number of questions, and i assumed he was not asking them of you, because you cannot respond. so i thought i'd write some of those questions down, and i'd answer them for mr. bass. 3863 and to start off with that kind of a response, robert, could i please have the elmo. mr. philipson: sure. mr. kelly: so mr. bass asked the question, why do we put on evidence? and i think he was making reference to the fact that we are going to argue here a whole bunch of evidence, why do we have to put on the evidence? well, the evidence is what you take back to the jury room to base your deliberations on. that is what you decide the case on in light of the evidence and the instructions, the documents, the witnesses. what i'm doing now, what mr. bass did and what mr. scarola did and will do, is not evidence. none of what we are saying is evidence. the evidence, you have already heard. it is in the box, the box you are taking back to the jury room with you. so please do not confuse what happens in argument with what happened from the witness stand. mr. bass asked the question, who were not called as witnesses? and so i thought i'd give him at least a response from our side that 3864 suggests just a partial list of all of the medical witnesses the plaintiff did not call. mr. scarola: excuse me, your honor. i object. that is improper argument. the witnesses were equally available to be called by both sides. the court: the objection is overruled. mr. kelly: dr. bates. you all know dr. bates. he -- you have not met him, but you know his name. he was the personal primary care physician doctor for mr. and mrs. sammarco dating back to the late '80s. still practicing here in the area. and his records are fundamental, a foundation of the claim that plaintiffs are making with respect to manifestation. he was not called as a witness. dr. jancko is also referenced in the medical records. you are going to have all the medical records back in the jury room, for better or for worse. there is a whole bunch of them, but the ones that i'm going to be talking about are all in evidence for you to take back and review. one of them is dr. -- from dr. morris. dr. morris is the ent, the ear, nose and throat 3865 specialist who treated mrs. sammarco for the hemoptysis back in '96. he also practices here. he was not called as a witness. and then there is a whole bunch of testimony, at least argument, i should say, a whole bunch of argument -- and i made the mistake, too. argument is not evidence -- whole bunch of argument about radiology and pathology and what could have been found, what would have been found, what might have been found had someone looked. well, the folks who actually found the tumor and did the biopsy, the radiologist and the pathologist, were never called as witnesses in the case. the entire medical case is dependent upon dr. abel, who i'm going to talk about a little bit more. counsel indicated that according to dr. burns, mrs. sammarco was addicted by the year 1954. that would be before mr. sammarco met her, and we do not know anything about the circumstances in mrs. sammarco's life that the age by which -- which influenced her to start smoking. there is just no evidence in the record whatsoever. there is not even any 3866 evidence in the record of what cigarette brand was being smoked at the time she became addicted to cigarettes. there was reference to if a ct scan were done. and on that point, i wrote up here on the board a pretty important date for you, i think, under the instructions you are getting with respect to the manifestation claim. as of november 21, 1996, the signs and symptoms that you are going to be considering on that issue are those that existed as of november 21, 1996. and if a ct scan were done, we do not have to guess about a ct scan. several were done. we know when they were done. they were done after november 21, 1996. and that is what we will be talking about in the evidence. mr. bass suggested that dr. abel had testified that theresa sammarco's signs and symptoms were identifiable and diagnosable before november 21, '96. and you will see when you get into the jury room and have the instructions to look at that on manifestation, this term "diagnosable" is very important because not only do the signs and symptoms have 3867 to be present as of november 21, '96, they had to be diagnosable as lung cancer by that date. and so this is what mr. bass said that dr. abel was going to talk about. i'm going to point out to you, i think, a little bit later in the presentation exactly what he said when testifying here in court, and what he said was that they -- those signs and symptoms identifiable by november 21, '96, you could not diagnose lung cancer from. they were not diagnosable, is dr. abel's testimony. and i'll show it to you when we get to that part of the presentation. counsel indicated that dr. abel said these symptoms were all lung cancer symptoms. we will show you the record testimony from dr. abel that all of these symptoms are what is called nonspecific symptoms, symptoms which are not specific to lung cancer and cannot be described as lung cancer symptoms because they are nonspecific, which means they could be caused by any number of conditions. talking now about mrs. sammarco, counsel briefly spoke about mrs. sammarco, that is mr. bass did, and this is a quote that i heard. 3868 "she believed that lights were safer, just like they were advertising," and i think there was a gesture over to the defense table. and speaking of the defense table, i want to thank you not only on behalf of myself, but on behalf of mr. sexton and mr. carpenter and all the folks that have been helping keep us organized here for serving as jurors. so on behalf of them, thank you. so, she believed that lights were safer, just like they were advertising. you can look through all the evidence in the case. you are going to have it back there in a couple of boxes maybe, and you are going to see a lot of advertisements maybe from the '30s, and '40s, and the '50s. lights, marlboro lights, were introduced in the 1970s. there is no advertisement for marlboro lights in evidence, let alone any that says lights were safer. there is not one marlboro light ad in evidence. i think counsel indicated: "the plaintiff admits mrs. sammarco is partly at fault for causing her injury and death because" -- and this is a quote from mr. bass -- "for whatever reason, she did not try hard enough to quit. 3869 for whatever reason." mr. bass did not say because of addiction, or because she did not know smoking was dangerous. he said, "for whatever reason, she did not try hard enough to quit." the record testimony in the case indicates, as described to her son, john junior, mrs. sammarco told him she did not quit because she believed that it would not happen to her. not that she was too addicted, not that she did not know it was dangerous. she told her son that she did not believe it would happen to her, and so she continued smoking. that is the record testimony in the case. you do not have to guess of what the reason is that mrs. sammarco continued smoking. it is already in the case through the testimony of her son. i'm going to start talking about manifestation. that was the first element of the -- excuse me for not turning around -- that was the first element of class definition that was in the jury instructions, so that is where i'm going to start in my discussion with you of 3870 the evidence and the law. and i thought it would be helpful to put into context the evidence we are going to talk about by letting you know where i think it takes us. add up all the evidence and you come to a bottom line. and i put what i think the bottom line is here for the evidence on manifestation. and i've broken it down signs, symptoms and the requirement to be diagnosable. signs. the first sign of lung cancer was observable february 28th, 1997. that is the x-ray. there was no sign of lung cancer observable before november 21, 1996. and i'll explain that to you in a moment when we talk about the evidence, but the -- i was going to use an analogy. i've got my briefcase here. i think i left a quarter in my briefcase. it may or may not be in there. i can show you the briefcase, we could look at the briefcase, and that quarter is not observable. the quarter's inside and we do not have the capability to look through things with the naked eye. you cannot hear it, it is not making any noise in there; it is not like my cell phone, it is not going to ring, hopefully. 3871 and we are not going to be able to feel it, because it is got all sorts of stuff in here, other than maybe that quarter. so it is not observable for us right now. but -- but, if i took this downstairs to the guard and asked him to run it through the scanner, on the x-ray machine down there, then, maybe, maybe that quarter might be observable. but it depends. it depends on what else is in the bag. it depends on whether anybody is actually looking for the quarter when they run it through the scanner. whether the scanner is good enough to pick up my quarter or not. same is true with mrs. sammarco and the radiology. before november 21, 1997, the tumor was up in the upper right azygos lobe area of the right lung inside, not observable with the naked eye, could not hear it, could not feel it, not observable, unless there was an x-ray or a cat scan available to look for it. you remember dr. abel. dr. abel, at one time, thought that there was a ct scan in march of '96. there was that typographical error, the march of '97 ct scan was actually march of 3872 '96. and so for a long period of time he thought there was a ct scan march of '96 that someone had just missed observing the tumor and the mass until it was sent for diagnosis later in '97. well, that is a good example of a ct scan in which the tumor was not observed, but was observable. it was observed in '97, or so he thought. and then he learned that the typographical error had been made and there was no ct scan in march of '96. that was a mistake. well, that mistake has consequences because there is no longer anything before november 21, '96, by which the tumor could be observable. okay. so that is signs. symptoms. before november 21, '96, all the symptoms were nonspecific. we are going to go through those symptoms, and the testimony from dr. abel and dr. keller is identical that none of those symptoms are specific to lung cancer; they are all nonspecific. cannot diagnosis lung cancer from symptoms. it has to be diagnosable. this testimony is not disputed. lung 3873 cancer can only be diagnosed with a biopsy. cannot diagnose from an x-ray. cannot diagnose from a ct scan. have to go in and get some tissue and look at it under the microscope by the pathologist to see if you can diagnose. that is the testimony. and we will show you the records of how that proceeded. and the first biopsy was performed in april of '97. that is some of the evidence from the bottom line -- we will get into more detail in a minute. robert, would you please switch me over to the computer? mr. philipson: sure. it is switched. mr. kelly: okay. ready now? mr. scarola: point it at hardee. mr. kelly: okay. now, hardee used the actual drawing that mr. sexton did when he was up on the examination and i've -- i have not done it, but we had it made a little bit more easily readable for you during this part of the case. so, here is november 21, '96. that is the date the window closes on the class claim that mr. sammarco's making. and you look before 3874 november 21, '96, and i think now there is no dispute in the record that there is no x-ray or ct scan from which a tumor would be observable before november 21, '96. that the first x-ray on which something is seen is february 28th, '97. and what is seen is a prominent azygos lobe, not identified as cancer, obviously not diagnosed as such because you cannot diagnose cancer from a chest x-ray. but a month later a ct scan is done and the ct scan is -- has identified a mass in the upper right azygos lobe, and identifies it as being about three by three and a half centimeters, having been growing all that time to that size as it is identified. and then there is a needle biopsy into the mass in april, that is uncertain -- the experts, i think, conclude that the records do not reflect whether it was positive or a false-negative, they were not sure from the records, but there is no diagnosis made of the biopsy of the mass in the right lung. the diagnosis is not made for certain until may 13th when the metastatic lymph node biopsy's done and the cells are identified, and 3875 that is when the diagnosis was made. so that timing sequence, there is no criticism of the amount of time that it took to go from point a, to point b, to point c, to point d to get to diagnosis, but it is undisputed that all of that is required before you get to diagnosis. you cannot say that an x-ray finding is diagnosable, at least the doctors do not say that. the ct scan, you cannot diagnosis from, you have to do the biopsy. let me talk about growth rate just for a second. we will get into it in a little bit more detail, but now that i've got the timeline up here let me spend a moment on growth rate, because both dr. abel and dr. keller said the same thing. and they said -- you know, there is more that they agreed to sometimes than you might have thought, but as we look through the record, this is one thing they agreed on. if you have a tumor that is growing at .1, and you measure it with a ct scan, and later, sometime later, you measure that tumor again, with the same ct scan, you can determine for that tumor, and that tumor alone, a growth 3876 rate. you have two points in time, two different measurements, and you can determine a growth rate for that tumor if there is no treatment in between. both dr. abel and dr. keller said if there is treatment in between, then you cannot establish a growth rate because you alter the growth rate once there is treatment. and that is what happened with mrs. sammarco's tumor. there was a measurement on this ct scan, there was the diagnosis and treatment began right away. the next ct scan, getting a dimension on the tumor for mrs. sammarco, is in july. by july, treatment had already started. so, there can be, and there is, not in the record, any specific precise growth rate for mrs. sammarco's tumor because they do not have the two data points uninterrupted by treatment. now, back when mr. able -- i'm sorry, dr. abel -- i apologize -- dr. abel was first hired, retained in the case, he was given two medicals records and two medical records only. and one of them had the march '96 date on it, with the ct scan, the typographic error. and 3877 it started him down the path of believing that manifestation occurred in november '96, because there was a ct scan in march of '96. if there is a ct scan in march of '96, then, of course, there is a sign before november 21, '96. he called it "a slam dunk." well, appropriate term for this time of year, with the basketball tournament on, but as some of us have been watching, no, if you are duke, villanova, or syracuse, you thought you had a slam dunk, but you did not. and it turns out dr. abel did not either, because the march '96 ct scan turned out to be a typographical error. the medical records did not reflect any other x-ray or ct scan before november 21, '96. and he had to start down the path of trying to figure out a theory by which he could establish a tumor size before november 21, '96. and that is the doubling rate episode that dr. abel embarked on. now, mr. scarola spent a lot of time talking to dr. abel about growth rate and doubling time; and did i, too. and mr. scarola spent a lot of time shouting at dr. keller about growth rate and doubling time. 3878 you were shown a slide from dr. keller suggesting that he would only spent two hours in his entire career studying growth rate and doubling time. the reference indicates he is very familiar with doubling rate and growth analyses as used in scientific research, not validated for clinical research, and that he spent two hours studying the recent studies and literature that he talked about on examination. growth rate and doubling time, at one point in this case, before dr. abel went down the road and testified in the second deposition -- at his very first deposition, when he thought he had the slam dunk of the march '96 ct scan -- dr. abel testified, "i do not need to use a doubling rate or growth rate analysis," he said that three times. "i do not intend to use it. it is a coarse litigation technique," words he used at that deposition. he told you here at that time he admitted, at that first deposition, saying that that technique is not appropriate because you make assumptions that are not precise. he admitted 3879 that. and then when dr. keller was here and said it was a coarse litigation technique, dr. keller was challenged by counsel that dr. abel had -- i think i said that wrong. when dr. keller was testifying and he said dr. abel indicated it was a coarse litigation technique, and counsel challenged him that that really was not what he said at his first deposition, that was some later time, we went back and looked, and this is dr. abel's testimony here in court. "question: now, at the first deposition, you had described doubling time as a coarse litigation technique; do you recall that?" dr. abel's answer: "answer: i certainly do." this is his first deposition in january of 2011, before dr. keller's deposition when the defense position is laid out that the manifestation occurred in 1997, and before his second affidavit and his second deposition. in his first deposition, he described growth rate and doubling time as a coarse litigation technique. 3880 now, when dr. abel came to testify in court, he had been retired for about eight years, had not been practicing medicine as an oncologist for eight years. all he does now is testify in litigation matters for counsel. he was asked this on direct examination. "question: and you, as an oncologist, did you use and apply concepts of tumor growth rate in your own clinical practice?" this was a week or two ago. he looked at you and he said: "question: yes, i certainly did." and then we showed you dr. abel's sworn deposition testimony from 2003 in an entirely different case where he is asked these questions. "question: is there a term of art that you use in your field, sir, to describe growth rates of malignant tumors? you call it a growth rate or do you call it something else, so you and i can communicate on that topic?" dr. abel's answer was: "answer: yes. well, no. the term is not used in my field. it is used in your field, in litigation. and it is referred to as doubling 3881 time." back when he was practicing -- he retired in 2006. in 2003 when he gave this sworn deposition testimony, the question could not have been more clear. and he said: "question: i do not use it in my field, either growth rate or doubling time, not used in my field." two weeks ago, he told you something entirely different. that deposition in 2003 goes on. "question: well, within your field, do oncologists and hematologists discuss the rate at which malignancies grow?" let me stop for a second and remind you that the distinction counsel tried to make in his closing argument between a pulmonologist and an oncologist is that oncologists use growth rate all the time. when he was asked this question in 2003: "question: well, within your field, do oncologists and hematologists discuss the rate at which malignancies grow?" he answered: "answer: no. i only discuss that with lawyers." 3882 i do not know if there is any way to reconcile the statement to you under oath in this courtroom that oncologists and he personally uses growth rate and doubling time in his practice and the testimony he gave under oath in 2003. the last question in the discussion. well, if -- the lawyer asks him: "question: well, if i use the term 'doubling time,' then you will know what that means, correct? "answer: i know what it means. i hope you know what it means." now, this is one of those occasions on which dr. keller and dr. abel agreed. it was for a very short period of time in this case, but at the time that dr. abel was originally deposed, back in january of 2011, he referred to this technique as a coarse litigation technique, which is the exact same opinion dr. keller told you about in the deposition back in 2003, dr. abel admitted that doubling time and growth rate are not used in a clinical practice. and oncologists, specifically, do not use them. they are only used with lawyers. and he came in here and he told you 3883 something exactly the opposite, because without some credibility with you for his new theory using a doubling time, the case would go away. one other point on the use of doubling time and growth rate in a clinical practice, and, again, i think both dr. keller and dr. abel were in agreement at one point on this, growth rate and doubling time are not precise techniques. it is based on assumptions, no question about it, about the size and the location and the density, all sorts of assumptions about the tumor that is being measured, but it is not precise. you get a wide range of potential growth rates. in a clinical practice, no doctor is going to -- no medical professional, including doctors, is going to treat a patient that needs -- who needs precision with assumptions. the reason that dr. keller explained that growth rate and doubling time is a research tool for scientists and not used in a clinical practice is because you cannot take a patient and assume they are going to be average. because they could be anywhere else on the scatter. so you treat what you are presented 3884 with, and that is what you treat. so when we have mrs. sammarco presenting with a 3.0-centimeter mass, you treat that mass. you do not care what it was three weeks ago. you treat it right now. that is why they need precision. and they get precision from the ct scan. and you do not get precision from the estimates the research scientists are able to provide with growth rate. now, in considering dr. abel's testimony, which is the foundation for the plaintiff's manifestation claim, you can consider all of his testimony, both in this case and under oath in other cases. particularly, you can consider that when they are contradictory and there is no explanation why he changed his opinion so drastically. he was confronted in court with his prior testimony, confronted and allowed to explain. he explained a lot during his examination. he never tried to explain how he said at one time we never use them, and in court certainly i do. you can consider dr. abel's demeanor while testifying. under the instructions, you can consider that. i think a witness provides a 3885 lot of nonverbal cues when they are testifying that you may pick up on, and you are entitled under the instructions to take into consideration what you see about that demeanor and whether the witness is responsive and provides objective responses and to-the-point responses or whether you get long explanations. you can take all that into consideration when you weigh the credibility, the believability of the witness. i'm going to take you back to opening statement for a moment, and in opening statement mr. scarola said that we can -- or that you can determine the actual doubling time of mrs. sammarco's tumor because there is a measurement on the ct scan in march, and there is a measurement in the ct scan in july, and one in november. and you can see if you compare the measurements of the dimensions what the growth rate is for this specific tumor. what we found out from the evidence is that once treatment begins, the fact that the tumor does not seem to grow very much or very fast cannot be used to establish a growth rate. both dr. abel and dr. keller said the same 3886 thing. this analysis cannot be used. what was needed in this case for the manifestation claim to have any legs was for there to be two points in time when there was measurements of the tumor without treatment in between. and then you would have a growth rate that you could at least discuss is applicable to this tumor and not some theoretical average tumor. so a word of caution about medical evidence. the medical evidence comes in in the medical records. and the medical evidence comes in through the witnesses, the doctors who testify. the medical evidence does not come in through the lawyers. we are not doctors. we have to hire doctors. some of us avoided high school biology and did not attend medical school or an internship, or a residency program, or a fellowship program and then acceptance in the american college of pulmonary physicians; others did. brought them in so they could help us address these issues and hopefully you understand them. the lawyers do not provide the medical evidence. we hopefully facilitate the evidence 3887 getting to you, but what i say about medicine, please disregard what any attorney says about medicine. it does not have any weight on the scales. so, dr. abel, using this litigation technique of taking what is a scientific analysis of growth forward and trying to put it back on average, did he give you a precise size for previous dates? no. he gave you a wide range and suggested that this tumor was the average. there is no basis at all to suggest that mrs. sammarco's tumor was average. it was her tumor. it was unique to her. there is not any reason to think it was on one side or the other or in the middle. we will never know. we will never know, because we do not have the data to know. that is the evidence. and when the evidence is lacking, when the evidence is not here, through nobody's fault, it is just not available, it carries no weight on the scales of justice. and if the claim is dependent upon information that is not here, the claim fails. that is the objective, fair way to assess 3888 plaintiff's burden of proof. it is the plaintiff's burden. and the evidence has to be there. it is not, maybe it was there or it could have been there or possibly was there. if it is not there, well, you have to call it as you see it. and this was -- i'll show you some of the diagrams that you have seen earlier in the case. excuse me. i'm not sure which one is the best to show you. counsel, i'm showing this one. mr. scarola: yes, thank you. mr. kelly: okay. so we have the mass in the right azygos lobe area of the lung, of the right lung. i should say that better. the upper azygos lobe area of the right lung. and the question is, how big precisely was it at some point in time. nobody knows that. would it at some smaller size have been observable on x-ray, given the structure in the area? unknown. dr. keller gave you a pretty good summary of the anatomy of the chest and the lungs, and you know now there should be a clavicle across here, that azygos lobe area is hard to see on x-ray. 3889 and that at a certain size -- at a certain location, certain size tumors are observable if there had been an x-ray done or if there'd been a ct done in some places. and in some places, they are not. dr. abel never said that the tumor was observable by ct scan before november 21, '96 in that location where it was. why? never asked the question, first of all. what would he have said? who knows. but we do know that what the size was at some point in time before is not understood precisely. and that whether a ct scan could find it or not was not asked of dr. abel, so there is no testimony to put on the scales of justice on the plaintiff's side on that point. and then the question goes on, though, because it is not enough to be able to observe something, you have to prove that you could observe it, but once you observe it, it is also got to be diagnosable. diagnosable. that is the burden the plaintiffs have to establish. and dr. abel was never asked to say whether or not some size tumor smaller than 3 centimeters could be biopsied and diagnosed. 3890 never asked. he talked about diagnosable, but he was never asked that question, which is what the plaintiffs have to prove. just the bottom line before i leave to talk a little bit about symptoms. whether or not there were signs before november 21, '96, is dependent upon your accepting dr. abel's opinion testimony about doubling time and growth rate, which i suggest to you is not worthy of belief, given his prior statements. we will talk about symptoms in a moment, but there is not any evidence that whatever size that tumor might have been, that it was diagnosable by biopsy in that location at that time. so you see, when you listen to the claims of could have and maybe and if, you start to build a series of ifs. if this, well, then maybe if this, then maybe that, but then if this, that, that is not proof. that is subjective guesswork. that is not evidence. that is what you are left with from dr. abel's testimony concerning whether any signs were present, diagnosable, before november 21, '96. and then perhaps that is why so much of 3891 dr. abel's time was spent talking about symptoms, the alternative theory that he came up with once the march '96 ct scan was seen as a typo. okay. here is what we learned from the medical witnesses on symptoms. that lung cancer is not diagnosable from symptoms. no dispute in the evidence on that. you have got to have something more than symptoms to diagnose. remember, the standard is it has to be diagnosable before november 21, '96. another undisputed fact, there are no specific symptoms of lung cancer. let me show you some testimony on that in a second. there are no specific symptoms of lung cancer. what that means is that you could have symptoms, but they could have been caused by a number of different things and they cannot relate to lung cancer if you have got other potential causes. the symptoms are nonspecific. another way to say the same thing, you are going to see in the testimony sometimes reference to nonspecific symptoms, and this is what it means. there are not any specific symptoms for 3892 lung cancer because lung cancer is not diagnosable from symptoms. so that flows together. symptoms are suspicious for lung cancer when they are chronic and persistent. i'm not sure there is any dispute on that, but dr. abel really did not address it. dr. keller addressed it at some length. excuse me. let me put that up there. if you have a symptom and it is caused by a tumor in the lung, usually that is coughing, could be hemoptysis, coughing up sputum that is blood-tinged, when whatever that tumor is, it is impinging upon the main bronchi, which is this trunk -- trunks. that type of tumor that impinges on the main bronchi, typically centrally located, more often than not a squamous cell carcinoma, not the kind that mrs. sammarco had. mrs. sammarco's tumor was up in the periphery. it is possible for a peripheral tumor to grow large enough to interfere with the bronchi, but her tumor at 3.0 to 3.5 centimeters had not got to that stage. so size and location in the periphery 3893 would suggest that you would not expect symptoms from that tumor to create lung problems. it is too far away, it is not big enough. should not have any symptoms. and is that unusual? well, dr. keller -- dr. keller sees lung patients every day. dr. abel, when he was practicing, had about 10 or 15 percent of his patients -- lung cancer patients. and dr. keller was asked, and you saw the sign up -- the testimony up there, if somebody shows up at your office and they have a history of smoking and they have some weight loss and a couple of other symptoms were described, you would send her for an x-ray? and dr. keller said, "whenever i get a referral of a patient, it is always for lung problems. that is known before they show up. i always send them for x-rays." so it is not anything specific to mrs. sammarco if somebody gets referred to him as a lung doctor, he sends them for a chest x-ray. and when mrs. sammarco was ultimately sent to a lung doctor, a pulmonologist, back in '97, 3894 further testing was done to inquire about lung cancer. that doctor was not called to testify either. okay. so dr. keller is discussing how you get symptoms from a tumor in the lung. and there is not much dispute about that in the record. and there is not much dispute that the tumor is located in an area where you would not expect symptoms. and most peripheral tumors are found incidentally, not looking for them, but doing some other type of chest x-ray, and you would find them by accident, because there is no symptoms that even would suggest there is an issue going on with the lungs. that is mrs. sammarco's case. that is mrs. sammarco's case. mr. sexton: mr. kelly, you have used one hour. mr. kelly: thank you very much, terry. okay. move along here. so dr. abel in his deposition, back in 2011 in his first deposition, talking about symptoms, here is was he was asked. "question: and my question was really more symptoms. you are not testifying here today that she 3895 had symptoms specific to her cancer before diagnosis, correct? "answer: she had -- the cough is a nonspecific symptom, so it is not specific to her lung cancer. we cannot apportion the degree of a cough that is attributable to one cause or another." and then his second deposition, after he had been developing his new theory about symptoms and not signs, this was his testimony. his answer. "answer: all the symptoms we have discussed are nonspecific. "question: meaning that they may be attributable to cancer or they may not be, correct? "answer: that is correct. "question: so while it is possible that some or all of the symptoms she had were related to her cancer, it is also possible that they were not, correct? "answer: the symptoms that she was having may be related to the lung cancer, and the symptoms that she was having individually or in the aggregate may not be related to the lung cancer." maybe, maybe not, does not move scales of justice at all. and i would just make a quick 3896 comment that it appears that the scales of justice mr. bass was using is broken. it only goes in one direction. did you note that? always the same way. the scales of justice are not moved by maybe, maybe not. okay. so symptoms. you cannot diagnose from symptoms. and here is what dr. abel testified at deposition, and then he came in and testified in court. and here is what mr. quinlan asked. "question: doctor, did theresa sammarco have signs or symptoms diagnosable as lung cancer before november 21, 1996?" important question. that is the question you are being presented with to see if there is any evidence in the record to support that. and here is dr. abel's answer. "answer: the answer is yes, but i'd like to make a little qualification on it. she had signs and symptoms that would direct her physicians to do the necessary tests so that the diagnosis would be made. neither her symptoms existing alone nor the presumed x-ray image existing alone is diagnosable as lung cancer." both of these bodies of knowledge would 3897 lead to other immediate investigations which would provide a diagnosis of lung cancer at some later -- i'm adding this part. at some later time. so as of november 21, 1996, the symptoms and the signs that were available then, that existed then, according to dr. abel, were not diagnosable as lung cancer. i'm going to skip ahead just little bit to dr. abel's constellation opinion. he had an opinion that there was a constellation of symptoms, kind of like the question mr. scarola asked dr. keller, if someone showed up and said they had a, b, c, d, e, what would you do about that? well, the records do not quite suggest that mrs. sammarco had all of those symptoms at one point in time. here's what the records suggest. and i would note that both dr. burns and dr. keller thought dr. bates was a very good record-keeper. it is only dr. abel who cannot find support for his opinion and theory in the records who criticizes dr. bates. the first medical record in 1996 is in january. january of '96, mrs. sammarco's 3898 weight is 118. she had a sore throat, glands in the back of the neck painful, her stomach was sore, achy pain lower back, dyspepsia, abdominal cramping, denies chest pain, shortness of breath, states under more stress, possibly precipitating elevated blood pressure, no clubbing noted. those symptoms do not appear again when she is next seen in june. the weight's now 112. stomach problems, body aches, very fatigued. thinks related to nerves. denies any weight loss. still stomach problems in june. the next treatment is in august, and that is with the ent. the ent is the doctor who treats above the neck, and he treated for the hemoptysis. there is no testimony from the family that mrs. sammarco went to an ent, but the records indicate she saw somebody who was a specialist above the neck and not down into the lungs for the hemoptysis. that is dr. morris. the next record we have is september 26th. her weight is now back up to 114. and she sees the doctor for a painful cyst in the right ear, and really no other references to conditions. 3899 and then that is where the class window ends, november 21. there are no more treatment sessions with dr. bates before that. the next one is right after, a month later, december 30th, '96. and this is the visit where her weight is at 112, she had bronchitis, and she is been coughing for a week, productive cough. the doctor notes, no chest pain or hemoptysis. dr. abel agreed. no shortness of breath, and the diagnosis is acute tracheobronchitis. she is treated with antibiotics, cough medicine, cough suppressant, and for all indications, that acute condition cleared up. it is not chronic and persistent. because if it is lung cancer causing the condition, the tumor does not go away. it does not leave and then come back. if there is a condition, a symptom that is caused by the lung cancer, it continues until the lung cancer is treated. that is undisputed in the record. hardly a constellation of symptoms in 1996. i'm going to run through some of the symptoms. you have heard all this from dr. keller, so i'm not going to spend a lot of 3900 time on it. but the productive cough is reported in the records, and you will see these if you want to look through them, every year or so around the fall there is an acute bronchitis, tracheal bronchitis, that is treated with antibiotics. there is wheezing or shortness of breath, comes and goes with the bronchitis, nonspecific symptom, not sufficient to diagnosed lung cancer, and it comes and goes. so it is not chronic and persistent. and an example there is december 30th, denies any shortness of breath. fatigue is another nonspecific symptom that comes and goes in the medical records. is not noted in the later medical records around time when it is closest to the actual diagnosis in december, no mention of fatigue. the weight loss, another nonspecific symptom, the doctors agree is not -- you cannot diagnose lung cancer from weight loss. and dr. abel agreed that -- let us see if i have a clip on this. okay. well, this is dr. abel agreeing that there is no indication of hemoptysis in 3901 dr. bates' records. even though there is a reference on december 30th to "no chest pain, hemoptysis," dr. bates reads it same way dr. keller does, "no chest pain or hemoptysis noted." okay. and this is with respect to the weight loss. "question: okay. and for the entire eight or nine years before '98, her weight fluctuated from, one, a high of about 118, to a low of about 109, correct? "answer: that is correct. "question: always in the area of about 112 to 114 -- "answer: correct. "question: -- on average, right? "answer: yes." and that is what her weight fluctuated between in 1996. it started out at a high of 118, but the average is between 112 and 114 for the balance of the year. not really any indication of a weight loss. and then there is a reference to "clubbing," which dr. abel and dr. keller is agree is a nonspecific symptom from which you 3902 cannot diagnose lung cancer. and i have a timeline here. let me walk you through it. because there was a question about whether or not james, the son who is the emt and the paramedic, observed clubbing, and when he did. and here is the question he was asked at trial: "question: okay. do you know how far back in the '90s?" and here's james' testimony: "answer: i would say early on, you know, i could see that she had clubbing of the fingers right at fingertips. they were starting to get a little bit fatter and stuff like that. and, again, she had, you know, poor circulation. she had a delayed cap refill. and, you know, she had some things that would attribute to that." and so we look in the medical records and we see that there are cardiovascular problems dating into the late 1980s, all the way through the diagnosis of lung cancer. there is abdominal problems, you saw some of them in '96 and an abdominal aneurysm, and that goes all the way through the diagnosis for lung cancer. 3903 and those conditions are potential causes of clubbing. and we see that the clubbing is present, it is identified as not being there, it pops up again, it is not there again, and on and on. it is not a persistent or chronic condition from which you would look to a tumor in the lung to explain when it begins in the early '90s. okay. almost done with the manifestation issue and then, your honor, a short break? the court: (nods.) mr. kelly: "were there symptoms before november 21, '96, from which lung cancer could be diagnosed? was the tumor big enough to cause symptoms before november 21, 96?" do not know. dr. abel did not provide the evidence you need to make that determination. "was the tumor in the right location in the lung to cause symptoms before november 21, '96?" no. dr. keller's the only one who addressed that issue, and he explained why that is. "were any of the symptoms specific to lung 3904 cancer?" no, both doctors agree you cannot diagnose lung cancer from those symptoms. "were any of them chronic or persistent so that you would suspect a lung cancer being the cause?" no, they are all acute, temporary, intermittent. "could lung cancer be diagnosed from those symptoms?" both experts agree, no. your honor, now is a good time. thank you very much. [#deleted recess#] mr. kelly: thank you, your honor. hello again. i'm going to talk about a new topic. when i'm almost all done i'm going to go through the verdict form to show you where these points come up, but the verdict form is a little different than the instructions. i'll kind of follow the instructions, but i'll clear that up at end to indicate where you are going to find these issues on the verdict form. so, the next issue that you may encounter is whether or not mrs. sammarco was addicted. and as i told you in opening statement, i'm going to tell you now, you will not find any www.phippsreporting.com 888 811-3408 definition of "addiction" in the legal instructions that are your guidepost for deciding this case. so you heard lots and lots of definitions of addiction, dating back to the 1950s, all the way up to the present time, and i do not know now, i did not know in opening statement, which definition you are going to pick. you may pick the one that dr. cummings sometimes used, that if you smoke every day, regardless of how much you smoke, you are addicted. i do not know if that is the one you are going to choose. so, whichever one you choose over the entire period of time there are addiction definitions, from the 1950s to the 1990s, if the facts fit mrs. sammarco -- from mrs. sammarco, fit that definition, then you will deal with that appropriately. i'm sure you will. and then that definition gets transferred over to later questions. you will see how that works in the verdict form. but there is one thing i want to talk about, and that is hindsight. everything we do today, looking back, is hindsight. and as we 3907 look back 50, 60 or more years, we have to remember that we cannot take today's knowledge, and today's attitudes, and today's beliefs back with us to understand what was going on at that point in time in the past. we talked about that, i think, in jury selection. you will see in the records, the documents, references to addiction from time to time in documents or in statements, and to understand the context or the meaning of that term in that document or statement, you have to remember the time in which it took place. i've got a couple of examples to show you, to let you know what i'm talking about here. so there is a document that you were shown in the closing argument that is from 1959. and it uses the word on the next page "addiction." and this one document is the basis for the claim in this case that philip morris, as far back as 1959, knew cigarette smoking was addicting, as that term is used in later years. so i wanted to show you, for example, that the memo writer is indicating earlier this year -- "early this year, i was assigned the task of reading and studying the reports now on 3908 which pertain to the subject of psychological research. these were the chicago tribune report and the series of roper reports and such other reports as came to my attention." you know from the other documents that roper reports are surveys of people, normal, everyday, average people. and we know back in the '50s and in the '40s and in the '30s, that "addiction" and "habit" were defined the same way. sometimes they defined each other. and it was common, common at that time -- dr. cummings agreed that it was common at that time for the term "addiction" and "habit" to be interchangeable, especially when talking about whether or not cigarette smoking is hard to quit. the other reference that you were just shown in closing argument was the 1994 congressional testimony, and it is alleged that that testimony was false because the surgeon general had changed the definition of "addiction" in '88. if you listen carefully to that clip, you hear the executive trying to explain to the congressmen that "cigarette and nicotine does 3909 not meet the classic definition of addiction. it does not cause intoxication" -- and he is cut off. you know from the testimony of dr. cummings that from 1964 to 1988, the definition the surgeon general used had addiction requiring intoxication. that is why cigarettes, according to the surgeon general until he changed the definition, were not considered addicting. they were considered habit-forming. so that is the context in which the testimony's given in '94. you cannot assess it with today's sensibilities and understanding. you have got to go back there in time and recognize that even dr. cummings testified that when the surgeon general changed the definition -- definition in 1988, respected authorities in addiction outside the industry objected to it. and you may or may not remember that at that time, the psychiatric association was using dependence because the term "addiction" was being misused. the context is very, very important in understanding the documents. you recall that 3910 regardless of the definition, the basic character of tobacco use has not changed since 1492 when it was reported that use of tobacco was hard to quit by columbus' scrivener. throughout the 1900s -- there is mark twain as well. i will not do that one again. throughout the 1900s, there is references to nicotine fits. nicotine fiend. those are references to the fact that it was well-known as long as tobacco's been used that the nicotine in the tobacco can be hard to quit. whether you call it addiction or habit or dependence or whatever, that fact has never been disputed. it is commonly known and given those kinds of terms to reflect everybody knows it, because when you say that guy's a nicotine fiend, everybody knows what you mean. he is using tobacco and he is finding it hard to quit. that goes back to the early 1900s. no secret there. and 60 million smokers who fall under the definition of "addiction" that dr. cummings could use have quit smoking. the brain changes that you were told about, those smokers who quit and quit for good all had those same brain 3911 changes. that is the physiology of our bodies. those brain changes occur. it does not prevent a smoker from quitting. all those millions and millions of smokers who quit had those brain changes, and quit. those brain changes occur when other substances that fall under the broad definition of "addiction" are considered, like coffee. coffee has the same brain changes. chocolate has the same brain changes. exercise will have the same kinds of release of endorphins. mr. scarola: your honor, i'm sorry, but that is entirely outside the evidence. there is no evidence of brain changes from chocolate or any other substance. mr. kelly: yes, there is. this is dr. cummings' testimony. the court: i reminded the jury that what the lawyers say is not evidence, and you are to recollect the evidence on your own. mr. kelly: okay. but all of those brain changes occur with all of those other substances as well. let me move to another issue that you may find on the verdict form, and that is whether 3912 an addiction to cigarettes was a legal cause of mrs. sammarco's lung cancer and death. and legal cause is the central issue -- instruction on that issue. i'm going to take you back, then, for a moment to our earlier discussion of legal cause, back to mr. scarola and mr. bass' car accident in the intersection, where you will recall mr. bass is waiting at the intersection, and along comes mr. scarola, and lawfully driving, not at an excessive speed, comes into the intersection, mr. bass heads across, they collide. there is some damage to the car, and mr. bass wants mr. scarola to pay for the damage to the car. and the question of whether or not mr. scarola or mr. bass is responsible for the damage to the car is the legal cause question. there is no issue that the cause of the damage is the car crash. just like there is no issue in this case that the cause of the cancer is the cigarette smoking. but what the legal cause is, is dependent on circumstances beyond the collision. who had the red light, who had the green light, who had 3913 the last clear chance, what did that intersection look like, was there clear vision. lots of issues before you can figure out whether or not mr. scarola should pay mr. bass for the damage to the car. and the same is true with respect to the legal cause connection between -- i will take mr. bass' car off the screen -- between cigarette smoking leading to lung cancer, and addiction. the way that the plaintiff argued it to you was that the only thing, the only thing that causes somebody to smoke is addiction. you have got to look at mrs. sammarco's life and ask yourself what were the factors in her life that contributed to her smoking, her continuing to smoke, the extent to which she quit, and the extent to which she did not quit, what factors influenced her decisions. no question but that there is an admission by the plaintiffs that mrs. sammarco was -- i'm sorry, by the plaintiff, mr. sammarco, that his wife was at fault for not quitting sooner. and it, by reason of that fault, caused in part her injury and death. 3914 so there is something else at work here other than addiction. and you find it in the evidence related to mrs. sammarco. because you have to look at her individual situation to determine what factors influenced her and the role, if any, substantial role addiction played. excuse me for a second. counsel? counsel? i think it is fair to say that the evidence reflects that mrs. sammarco's family, the martinelli family, had a substantial influence on her choices to smoke growing up and in her adult life. you will remember this is her dad james martinelli, that is her mom, edith martinelli, that is her uncle, and family gathered around the sammarco dining room table in a very typical spontaneous photograph just catching them in a normal day, or a normal evening. and that is the very fun and -- fun-loving group. you recall the relationship between mrs. sammarco and her brother was one which they were very, very close, a lot of teasing going on. it was a very fun-loving family, and 3915 i think the photograph captures that in a way that you can read a lot into the picture. so these are some of the factors that influenced mrs. sammarco's smoking. the martinelli family were heavy smokers throughout. cigarette smoking was a part of the social fabric of the martinelli/sammarco household while the martinellis were there. there was a kind of ritual that mrs. sammarco had with her mom in the morning where they would come down and before anybody else in the house got up, they would share a cup of coffee and a cigarette together for some 20-plus years. we know that addiction did not cause mrs. sammarco to start smoking. we do not have any evidence of the circumstances under which she started or what brand she started smoking. we know from the plaintiff's opening statement that addicted smokers can quit and have the responsibility to stop. and we have the question that really has not been answered: when was it that mrs. sammarco could have quit that forms the basis for the plaintiff's admission that she could have quit? 3916 there is not any indication that she could not have quit, as the plaintiffs admit earlier in time when, like millions of other smokers, information about the dangers of smoking became widespread and well-known. remember that mountainous chart that dr. cummings used. it is about the mid-1960s where the peak occurs, and then beginning in about 1969, 1970 when the new warnings went on the cigarette packs that there begins a steady, steady, decline that is continued to this day. we know that mrs. sammarco was aware of the dangers of smoking from a variety of sources. there were the pack warnings, of course, beginning in 1966, improved in 1970. there is the martinelli family experience. there is her doctors discussing with her every time she goes to see them the dangers of smoking. and that is testified to by mr. sammarco. all the way back to 1957. we have the family members, her sons and her husband and her daughter, edith, and the paper she provided back in fourth or fifth grade, all of those give you some indication of the factors and the circumstances in which 3917 mrs. sammarco is smoking. and we know this much about mrs. sammarco from the evidence. i took these notes from the family talking about mrs. sammarco. character was strong-willed, intelligent, a strict disciplinarian, formidable, tenacious, and meticulous. mrs. sammarco never threw away her ashtrays or lighter or cigarettes. addiction did not prevent mrs. sammarco from cutting back. you will see some -- i'll show it to you in a second -- in a little bit, some of the testimony about cutting back, that according to dr. cummings, once you are addicted, you have to maintain a level of nicotine coming into your system to satisfy the receptors in your brain. that is dr. cummings' view of the world, of nicotine. and so no matter if you smoke the same cigarette or you smoke different cigarettes, you always get that same amount -- you need the same amount of nicotine if you are addicted. mrs. sammarco does not fit that profile. does not fit that profile. the profile mrs. sammarco fits is she is cutting back on 3918 her smoking the longer she smokes after her mother is out of the house and she is the only other smoker in the house. mrs. sammarco is not fitting the profile that is painted by dr. cummings. and i think there is a reason for that. let me suggest this to you. because i was thinking about dr. cummings and his perspective that he brings to his testimony, and makes no bones about it, he is an advocate against tobacco companies and he is biased against tobacco companies. he would be the first to tell you that, and i do not begrudge him for a moment that opinion, those viewpoints. it is america, he is entitled to them. but you get to take those biases into consideration when you consider his testimony. here is another thing to think about, let me suggest to you. dr. cummings spent 30 years in a smoking cessation clinic. he saw those smokers who could not quit on their own. so he saw the smokers who did not quit what they say, cold turkey. we know from the records in evidence -- the testimony in evidence, i should say, that 95 percent, virtually all of smokers 3919 who quit, quit cold turkey. so dr. cummings' view of the smoking population is that slice of the smoking population who has not quit cold turkey. they are the ones who need assistance. and that is who he is seeing. that is who he is telling you about when he talks about the smokers that he sees. mrs. sammarco is not part of that small population. she did not need assistance to quit when she decided to quit. motivation is the most important thing. when she had it, she quit. so the population that dr. cummings is talking about is not mrs. sammarco. what do the witnesses say? dr. cummings said, "smokers have many reasons for smoking. smokers often begin smoking because their families and friends are smokers." dr. cummings says, "smoking has behavioral components and becomes a strong habit for smokers. it is not just the physical addiction. there are behaviors, and the individual alone -- that the individual alone is in control of." dr. burns said, "addiction did not prevent 3920 mrs. sammarco from quitting." he said -- that is, dr. burns said, "addicted smokers are responsible for their smoking behavior including mrs. sammarco." tens of millions of addicted smokers quit for good, and on the average, about three weeks is what it takes for the physical withdrawal symptoms to go away. and on the subject of motivation, dr. cummings said this: "if a smoker does not want to quit, he or she will not stop smoking." motivation is such an important factor. now, there is dispute in the records, the testimony, about how often mrs. sammarco actually tried to quit by stopping. seems to be a lot of testimony that mrs. sammarco cut back, like at lent, but did not stop. never threw her cigarettes away. but some of her testimony -- well, the family testimony about hypnosis and a patch and gum, the details, as you look back in your notes, the details of those quit attempts are very, very thin. for example, when was the gum attempted? was it even nicotine gum? when was a patch 3921 obtained? from whom? for how long? there are no details about that at all. when was hypnosis and what kind of hypnosis and what was that about? nobody has any details about those quit attempts at all. but mr. sammarco, who had the best vantage point of all, was asked in trial here: "question: okay. other than those two attempts, the hypnosis and lenten quit, do you recall any other occasion when she made a concerted effort to quit for a period of time?" mr. sammarco's answer. this is mr. sammarco, senior. "answer: she never actually stopped smoking. "question: okay. "answer: and like she would try to cut back if anything. that was like the only attempts that i would say that she tried. "question: okay." and this is the last answer. "answer: that is all it was. she tried to cut back." this is a very intelligent, strong-willed, organized, and meticulous woman. she had a plan for running that household. she had a 3922 plan of scheduled meals that were the same every week, same great-sounding breakfast on the weekend. did not have a plan to quit. dr. cummings tells us that you need a plan if you intend to quit, if you want to be successful in quitting. she had a plan to cut back and not quit. and we do not have to guess as to what reason there was for her to continue smoking because we have it in the record from her son john that "she told me that she believed that it would not happen to her." that she would see an elderly person smoking and point to them and say, "see, they are alive. it does not bother them." she did not believe it would happen to her. with that belief, she never had the motivation sufficient to quit. cut back, yes. control her risk by doing so, yes. that is the family's testimony. there is a claim that she was getting, that is, mrs. sammarco was getting mixed messages from philip morris. the evidence is that for 30 years, in the late 1960s through the late 1990s, the loudest mixed message mrs. sammarco 3923 was getting was from her husband, who would tell her not to smoke, and then let her know, "i'm going out to the indian reservation to pick up your weekly carton of cigarettes, i'll be right back." there is not a stronger mixed message. if you want to look for something that the plaintiffs are calling cognitive dissidence, i think it just means a mixed message, that is what the evidence suggests. another disputed issue, did mrs. sammarco actually enjoy smoking? the family did not think so, they certainly did not enjoy her smoking, but did mrs. sammarco enjoy smoking? and so we offered you the testimony of her niece, edith martinelli, a smoker herself, who observed mrs. sammarco enjoyed smoking. those two smoked together on a pretty regular basis. she would know. well, the bottom line on whether or not it is just addiction that causes someone to smoke or whether there are lots of other factors in somebody's life, choices they make for reasons completely separate and apart from a daily dosage of nicotine, you can consider 3924 all the evidence in the case, because the plaintiffs agree that mrs. sammarco is at fault in part for not quitting sooner. and you take that admission and you wonder, what does that mean? it means she could have quit sooner. we would all agree with that. why did not she? they want to say it is addiction, but she gave us the answer. she did not mention addiction. she did not mention it is too hard to quit. she said she did not think it was going to happen to her. let me move on then to another issue that you may address in your deliberations, and that is related to findings of fact. and i just want to make a couple of points. they are in the instructions, you will see them there, but the findings of fact have no application for all the issues we just finished talking about. the findings of fact do not establish any liability with respect to mrs. sammarco. you are not going to find mrs. sammarco's name in the findings of fact at all. it remains the plaintiff's burden of proof to connect up those findings of fact to mrs. sammarco. so the next issue you may address is 3925 comparative apportionment. there is really no new evidence to consider. it is given all of the evidence we have just discussed about the family and mrs. sammarco's reasons for the choices she made, accepting that the plaintiffs admit mrs. sammarco is at fault but not willing to accept one hundred percent, what part, if any, is assigned -- should be assigned to philip morris, consider this evidence before you. it is lawful to manufacture and sell cigarettes. all of the cigarettes philip morris sold -- manufactured and sold from '66 through the end of mrs. sammarco's smoking had the appropriate required warning label on them. that mrs. sammarco never heard any statement from philip morris, or any tobacco company for that matter, that influenced her to smoke. philip morris made and sold and mr. sammarco bought and mrs. sammarco smoked cigarettes that were lawful to make, sell, buy, and smoke. the plaintiff and philip morris agree that mrs. sammarco could have quit in time to avoid 3926 her cancer, but according to the family's testimony, she did not think it would happen to her, and she continued smoking, albeit cutting back. so it is our position, given all of that testimony, mrs. sammarco is not just partly responsible for her choices and her decisions, she is one hundred percent responsible for the choices and decisions she made with full knowledge of the risks. there is another issue you may get to in the verdict form, and it relates to mrs. sammarco's decisions after may 1982. i'll write that down here. another date that is important for consideration of the evidence. there is a claim in the case that mrs. sammarco by may of 1982 was unaware of the dangers of smoking and relied on some omission or concealment of information of which she was not aware in her smoking decisions after 1982. kind of a complicated issue, lots of elements the plaintiff has to prove. they are all in the instructions. but let me just talk about the evidence i think is going to help you 3927 answer this question on the verdict form. by 1982, mrs. sammarco knew entirely about the dangers of smoking from a number of sources. there is no way in this record that anybody could suggest that mrs. sammarco was unaware of the dangers of smoking. when the plaintiffs admit that she should have and could have quit, they are essentially admitting she knew the dangers of smoking. but for this claim, this is a little different claim. it is got a couple of different features to it. all the other claims for compensatory damages, if there is a reduction for comparative fault, the award is reduced. but this one, the admission of fault that might lead to comparative fault apportionment, if you apportion it instead of giving one hundred percent, does not apply to this claim. it is one of the complicated features of this claim. but the evidence, the facts the plaintiffs have the burden to establish are that mrs. sammarco by 1982 did not know the dangers of smoking. the evidence will be, has been, when you get into the jury room, this is 3928 evidence: the family told her in no uncertain terms that lights were no safer than other cigarettes. her family experience, it could not be more personal, told her about the dangers of smoking. all of her doctors told her. the pack warnings were present. there is no evidence that mrs. sammarco saw, read, heard, and relied upon any statements from philip morris. there is no print or billboard ads for marlboro lights in evidence that would suggest there is anything on there that is inappropriate in any way. by the time marlboro lights came out, there were not any commercials on television anymore for cigarettes. those went off the air in '71. marlboro lights came into the market after that. so all this information you saw back in the '30s and '40s and '50s, by the time we get to 1971, and certainly by '82, there are no ads on tv or the radio. every print ad has the required warning on it. all of that past history does not stick around, new history comes into being in the '70s and the '80s. this is the time period you are referencing, '82. 3929 the only ads -- the only ads that referenced lower-tar cigarettes being potentially safer for the smoker that are in evidence are those from the public health community. you will remember the ad on the left, "bad is better than worse," with the ftc tar and nicotine ratings at the bottom. this was put out by the public health community, the department of hew put that out. the position of the public health community from 1966 through 1998, this is undisputed in the record, was that if you do not smoke, do not start. if you do smoke, you should quit. but, if you do not quit, you should switch to a lower-tar cigarette. that is the position of the public health community. and they put out publications, advertisements, like the two you are seeing here, that said exactly that. no marlboro lights commercials or ads, but the public health community was saying that. by 1982, the warnings had been on the packs for 16 years. by 1982, it had been 25 years since her doctors began warning 3930 mrs. sammarco about the dangers of smoking. it had been about ten years since her father died of emphysema from smoking, and her mother had passed away in 1980. since the 1960s, her children had been telling her in no uncertain terms what the dangers of smoking were. john junior pointed out the pack warnings. john junior told his mom, he said, in plain words, that smoking would kill her if she did not quit. james said the same thing, maybe even more strongly, given his background as an emt and paramedic. and, of course, edith had been telling her mom that in different ways since the fourth grade. but there is other evidence in the record about 1982. dr. burns testified, plaintiff's expert, that by 1981, 95 percent of all smokers knew that cigarette smoking causes cancer. that is dr. burns. by 1981, 95 percent knew that smoking caused cancer. in fact, he said, "at that time more people knew that smoking caused cancer than knew the name of the president." 3931 the plaintiff has the burden to establish that mrs. sammarco, not some other theoretical smoker, but mrs. sammarco was unaware of the dangers of smoking by 1982. and then there is additional elements that have to be proved on this claim that mrs. sammarco saw, heard, or read some statement through some means that got to her from the tobacco industry that did not tell her what she needed to know. i told you it is complicated. there was not anything she needed to know in the first place. there is no evidence that some statement from the tobacco company made its way directly or indirectly to mrs. sammarco. there is just no record of that in the evidence from any of the family members. plaintiff's counsel admitted -- plaintiff's counsel indicated, let me say it that way, indicated in opening statement that there was not going to be any evidence that mrs. sammarco saw any particular ad or company statement, and, of course, dr. cummings, in his pretrial conversations with mr. scarola -- there is nothing wrong with having a 3932 conversation with your witness -- but, remember, that dr. cummings was the witness who sometimes asked himself his own questions, sometimes led the attorney, and sometimes, as in this email, gives legal advice to the lawyers about how to get evidence into trial. this gives you some indication of the level of bias that dr. cummings has toward his activity as an expert witness for which he is paid very handsomely. so he writes: "in other words, the wallpaper argument that everyone was exposed is not good enough by itself. it would be useful to comb the record to see that the plaintiff was directly exposed to specific forms of marketing and pr. for example, family members who recall seeing spokespeople on tv shows, or recalling reading newspaper articles or magazine articles where the industry denied the health risks of smoking," are suggested. there were no such references in the evidence. there is no indication that any industry statement, through some circuitous route, gets to mrs. sammarco. it does not have to get to her directly. 3933 it can get to her indirectly. but it has to get to her to prove what they -- what the plaintiff has to prove on this claim. and there is no evidence, even when they got the suggestion from dr. cummings as to what to look for, no evidence that any industry statement ever got, directly or indirectly, to mrs. sammarco. mr. sexton: that is two hours, frank. mr. kelly: thank you, terry. all right. i'm more than halfway. before i move on to the next point. there were admissions from dr. cummings on the stand that he -- he was on for a long time -- you may not remember all the admissions. let me cover just a couple. dr. cummings agreed that philip morris never made a public statement, out in the public, that might somehow get to mrs. sammarco. pm never made a public statement that lower-tar cigarettes were safer. pm never made a public statement that lower-tar cigarettes were less addicting. pm never made a public statement that lower-tar cigarettes were easier to quit, or would help smokers 3934 quit. dr. cummings admitted that from the late '60s through 1998, the public health community recommended that people switch to lower-tar cigarettes. and there is been a suggestion that there is -- the tobacco industry promoting low-tar cigarettes and the public health community saying, do not do that. for this period of time, 1966 through 1998, which is the relevant period of time when the conduct of the companies would affect mrs. sammarco, the public health authorities, the public health community, the public health scientists, the surgeon general in his reports or her reports, for that period of time, had the view, based on the science and epidemiology available at that time, that lower-tar cigarettes were resulting in a reduction of injury and death to those smokers who quit for that entire period of time. the last piece of evidence that you have on that is from 1996, dr. samet's article in the nci publication, reporting that he has reviewed all of the population studies, the epidemiology, up to that point in time. and 3935 what the surgeon general said in 1981, that lower-tar cigarettes are producing less risk is true today, in 1996. not saying it is true now, please do not misunderstand me. i'm trying to keep you in the context that is the basis for the claim in this case. and that is related to mrs. sammarco. and that is the testimony. the companies were not outliers, doing something nobody else recommended. the public health community recommended that activity for a substantial period of time, throughout the entire time mrs. sammarco was smoking. mr. sexton: you have about 25 minutes. mr. kelly: thank you. kind of a summary of this claim. they say it is kind of complicated, the plaintiff has a lot to prove. but questions, in the evidence, you may find yourself answering: "by 1982 was mrs. sammarco unaware of the dangers of smoking?" no way, under this record, can that be answered yes. that is clearly, here in this record, by 1982, no. "after 1982, did mrs. sammarco hear, see or read and rely upon any statements from 3936 industry concealing the dangers of smoking?" there is no evidence that she heard anything, let alone relied upon information. there is just no connection between what the evidence is that you have seen and mrs. sammarco on this concealment claim. and, lastly: "was any such statement a legal cause of her lung cancer?" meaning, was there something she was unaware of, that she did not have information on, that was kept from her, had she known it, she would have stopped smoking soon enough to avoid lung cancer." so when, after 1982, after having smoked for 25 years or so, would mrs. sammarco have to quit smoking, had she known something she did not already know, that was kept from her by the cigarette companies, to avoid her illness. the plaintiff has to prove all that. there is no evidence as to when, if she had quit smoking, she would have avoided her lung cancer and death. that is just not in the record. there is no proof of the causation element on this claim; that is a medical question. there is just no evidence that if she quit sometime after 1982, she would have avoided her lung 3937 cancer. not in the record. now, i talked a little bit about dr. burns and dr. cummings. there is an additional claim in the case that you may get to, if you get this far in the case and have to address another question, and that question relates to mr. sammarco's claim to punish philip morris for intentionally engaging in the conduct that is alleged in this claim after 1982. and on that claim -- now, this is a separate -- this is a claim for punishment damages, not compensatory damages. this is -- whatever you decide for compensatory damages, if you get that far -- and by discussing it, i do not suggest for a moment that you should get that far -- but there is a difference between compensatory and punitive damages. and punitive damages are for more money to the individual, not for a class, not for a group, the individual -- mr. scarola: pardon me, your honor, excuse me. that is an entirely improper argument. there is no evidence with respect to what happens to punitive damages or where they go; 3938 and it is an improper consideration. i ask the court to instruct the jury to disregard it, as a matter of law. mr. kelly: can i be heard on that, your honor? the court: i will be providing the jury instructions they need to know regarding the punitive damages in this case. mr. scarola: thank you, your honor. mr. kelly: thank you, your honor. so it is like an entirely different type of claim, then, a compensatory damage claim; and it requires different rules of law. so, if you get this far on the verdict form you will see that for this claim of intentionally attempting to harm individuals, through this means, the evidence has to be clear and convincing. not just the tip of the scales, as mr. bass has been referring to, but clear and convincing. a whole new standard entirely. and you are not entitled to use the findings of fact, which are the basis for this claim. it gets more and more complicated, i know. but it is in the instructions. and 3939 instructions say that for the punitive claim, which is based on a concealment claim, the findings of fact, if you get this far, cannot be used to decide the punitive damage claim. so i think when you get that far and you read those instructions you are going to see that this claim was not even supported with the findings. so without the findings, this claim falls completely apart, because there is no reliance, there is no causation, and this is the only claim for which punitive damages are even being considered. so, that is your focus; the clear and convincing standard will not be met. in 1982, mrs. sammarco, at some point, is smoking lower-tar cigarettes. and so for this claim that the company should be punished for selling low-tar cigarettes, i would like to take a few moments with you and just go over the evidence that indicates that there is nothing wrong, during this period of time, for manufacturing and selling lower-tar cigarettes with the required warning. we have already talked about from 1966 through 1998, the scientific evidence demonstrated that lower-tar cigarettes were 3940 less dangerous than higher-tar cigarettes. we have already talked about '66 to '98, the public health authorities recommending lower-tar cigarettes. that they all have the same warnings, lower-tar cigarettes did not have any other warning different from higher-tar cigarettes. but there is a claim that -- something called "compensation" occurs when somebody switches from a higher-tar cigarette to a lower-tar cigarette, and that nobody knew about that except somebody inside the cigarette company. well, we know the surgeon general knew about it, because he put it in the surgeon general's report. but more than that, more than that, there is our standard: "'clear and convincing evidence' differs from the 'greater weight of the evidence' in that it is more compelling and persuasive." and "the findings may not be considered when determining whether punitive damages may be warranted against philip morris usa. inc." okay. in 1976 -- so before 1982 -- in 1976, consumer reports publishes an article 3941 that is all about nicotine, low tar and compensation. the very subject the plaintiffs are claiming was hidden from the public health community is published in that consumer reports in '76, with citations to the public health community. now, i'm going to read in some of the those compensation -- some of the compensation article so can you see everything the plaintiffs are claiming was not known by the scientific community was out there in the general public, with citations from the scientific community. "but nicotine intake is also increased by other adjustments in smoking patterns. since 1968, reports in the lancet, nature, and the british medical journal have described several such adjustments. "smokers often smoke a low-nicotine cigarette to a shorter butt. this alteration in smoking pattern is particularly significant because the last few puffs contain much more tar, nicotine and carbon monoxide than the early puffs. "some smokers also increase the size of 3942 each puff, thus increasing the nicotine dose per puff." some shorten the interval between puffs, thus increasing the dose per minute. "there are also other ways to compensate" -- they use the same term -- "for a drop in nicotine yield by drawing the smoker -- i'm sorry -- by drawing the smoke deeper into the lungs, for example, or by holding it there longer before exhaling. "in short, human smokers are not smoking machines. they do not necessarily smoke a low-nicotine cigarette in the same way they smoke a high-nicotine cigarette, nor do they smoke the same number of cigarettes when they switch to a low-nicotine brand from a high-nicotine brand." that is all information available to the general public of which the public health community was well aware, in 1976, hitting all of the points dr. cummings and dr. burns said they did not know about until after 1998. it is all there in black and white, 1976, with citations in consumer reports. there was a claim that the tobacco company was not cooperating with the government. you 3943 remember the testimony about the national cancer institute, tobacco working group, in place from 1968 to 1978, working on -- this is the government's organization -- with academics participation from the industry working on a less hazardous cigarette design. the testing that i showed you a while back, on tumorigenicity, showing that the lower-tar cigarettes had less tumors, used philip morris filters. they are providing those for investigation by the government back in the '70s. there is a claim that we should be taken to task for not marketing a less-nicotine cigarette. well, remember that the company actually made a new technique for low-nicotine cigarettes. built a plant, made the cigarettes, marketed them as "denic cigarettes in a whole bunch of brand families, i think three or four, and its own brand. the public health community took the company to task for putting out a cigarette that might be more dangerous because it has less nicotine in it. not safer. the public 3944 health community criticized the company for putting out a denic cigarette, because they said, people might think this is safe and it is not. so the company puts out the denic cigarette, the public health community criticizes the company. pulled those cigarettes off the market, and just now has -- i showed you the merit ultra -- it does not say anything about low nicotine, it just has low nicotine in it, without trying to advertise it, but got in trouble and people complained about that. so they took the denic off but kept the denic in the cigarette, and it is out there on the market today. i showed you a pack when dr. cummings was here. there is a claim that the psychological research at the company was not shared with the public health community. well, remember motives and incentives. 1972, conference put together by dr. dunn from philip morris, attended by all sorts of people outside the tobacco company, resulted in this book that covers all the articles -- it is in evidence, you can get to read -- not this 3945 one. this one is going back to the library, but there is a copy of it in evidence that covers all the subjects that were discussed and reported on in that meeting. published and edited by dr. dunn. if he is trying to hide the research, he is not doing a very good job of putting it in a book. before i get to -- go through the verdict form with you, as i said i would, i just want to speak just a moment on damages. there is not any issue in the case, and i think i've said this a couple of times, and i mean it wholeheartedly, there is no dispute in the case that mr. and mrs. sammarco had a loving and blessed relationship. that has never been in dispute. if that was a dispute in the case, we would not need to take up your time over three weeks to decide it. that is not in dispute. there is a lot of other stuff we cannot agree on in this case that we have outlined that you are going to have to decide for us, based on the evidence and the instructions, but mr. and mrs. sammarco's relationship is not one of them. i do not have any basis to provide a number 3946 that would not seem completely self-serving to suggest to you as an alternative to the extremely large numbers that mr. scarola put up there. those numbers are outlandish. they all are. they are put up there to get you thinking about large numbers in your head. there is no connection between what somebody charges per hour for testifying and somebody else's loss of a spouse. it is just ridiculous to suggest that. what is also not really clear is the fact that the overwhelming evidence in the case from the family is that mrs. sammarco has not been alone a day since his wife passed away. mr. sexton: ten minutes, frank. mr. kelly: thank you, terry. that he has a large, extended, loving and close family, and they are with him all the time. the suggestion that there is sorrow or grief that is with mr. sammarco every second of every minute of every day, i'm not sure is accurately reflected in the evidence. because the family continues to be just exemplary. so the foundation for those numbers, there is just no basis to accept them in 3947 evidence. and i would suggest that this is the particular issue, if you get this far, if you work your way through the verdict form, that is left to your sound discretion and reason. in the last few moments i have, i'm going to take us through the verdict form. robert, may i have the overhead, please. mr. philipson: sure. mr. kelly: thank you very much. and thank you, robert, for all your help during the case. was theresa sammarco addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine? this is the question that depends upon what your definition of "addiction" is, which i do not know what it is. so your answer could be yes. your answer could be no. this one is entirely up to you. if you answer no, that is as far as you go. if you answer yes, you move on to the next question. was theresa sammarco's addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine a legal cause of her death from lung cancer? and this is the bass/scarola car crash and the broad circumstances of her decision to 3948 continue smoking. and i would submit to you that the answer is no; in which case, your task is over, sign and return the verdict form. number 3. as of november 21, 1996, did theresa sammarco have signs or symptoms that were diagnosable with the benefit of hindsight as lung cancer? and, of course, hindsight, no matter how far we look back, we are about as far hindsight as you can be right now from november 21, 1996, and there still are no x-rays or ct scans before then. the answer to number 3 is no. not diagnosable. if you get farther, then the question becomes one of whether the plaintiff fault should be shared with philip morris. and it is been our suggestion under the evidence and the statements actually of mrs. sammarco that verdict form question should be answered one hundred percent her choice. these are the two complicated questions, and i'll read it and i will show you exactly how complicated it is. did theresa sammarco justifiably rely upon philip morris usa inc.'s concealment or omission of material information or failure to disclose a material fact after 3949 may 5, 1982 regarding the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes or both; and, if so, was such reliance a legal cause of her lung cancer and death? and we have -- there is no omission of material information after may of '82 that she did not already know about, that she could rely upon. it never got to her. and there is no indication that if she quit smoking after may of '82 that she would have avoided lung cancer and death. that answer is no for all the same reasons the next answer is no. and for saving time, i'm going to avoid reading it. it is pretty much the same issues. and then for damages, i'm not going to suggest an amount other than to indicate that that is within your reasonable and fair discretion, taking into consideration the relationship that mr. sammarco has with his entire family and has had that consistently since the date of his wife's death. and then if you get this far -- like i said, i do not think that you will, but if you get this far, now with clear and convincing 3950 evidence being the requirement and not being allowed to look at the findings of fact, the answer is no, i would suggest. mr. sexton: five minutes. mr. kelly: and in between each of those questions, you will see there are instructions. and that will tell you what to do, depending upon your answer. so you take each question and consider it separately, reach your verdict, move on or not. that is how this system -- that is how the verdict form works. and the plaintiff has the burden on each and every one of those elements that you are going to find in the instruction that is necessary to prove to pursue this claim any further with some different levels of proof required. he has the final word in this case. let us just say it this way, he has the next chance to talk to you. i'm not sure if there is going to be any emotion that might creep into the final comments of counsel, but if there is, emotion does not creep into the jury room with you, and you know that. and you know that. mr. scarola has the next chance to talk, 3951 but i have the confidence that comes from knowing that you have the final word based upon the evidence and the jury instructions that you are bound to follow using your fair, objective, reasonable approach to being a juror. so i'm going to going conclude. and i thank you very much for your time and for your attention. and, you know, we kind of sneak glances over at you every once in a while and see you taking notes and following the testimony, and we are so grateful for that and appreciate it very much. thank you very much. thank you, your honor.