mr. wichmann: good morning, folks. it is been a long couple of weeks. and on harry's behalf, we would like to thank you for the attention that you have paid to the case. we can tell you have taken great notes and stayed awake and basically put up with, i hope it was not something that i did that might have irritated you. i know that there were times when i was pulling pages out of a notebook and maybe speaking in a tone of voice that was higher than i should have. i know i was close to you-all during that. so i just want to apologize if anybody thought that maybe i was irritating them. please do not take it out on harry. this is, after all, his case, and it is his one chance in the court to get justice for what is happened. i also would like to ask you to please keep your eye on the ball, as they say, the golfers and the baseball players say. by that, i mean, please try to focus on the issues that the court has 2471 instructed you on and that you will get in the verdict form and not get distracted with issues that are really not in front of you in this case. i think, folks, if you could sum the case up, i would ask you to remember dr. hurt from the mayo clinic when he first came and testified. i asked him about the conspiracy between the tobacco companies. and here was my question. without getting into the legalities of it, can you tell the jury in simple terms why it should not have happened? and his answer was: well, if you have a product -- i'm reading from his testimony -- that is going to cause people to die, it would be my opinion, as a human being, that you should do something about that. he looked at you and he said, and it would not be my idea to hide that and to keep it from the public eye if you have a product that kills that many people. now, he looked at you and he said, it would be my opinion as a human being. reynolds -- you got an instruction from the court that they are a corporation, but they are supposed to be treated just like a person, just like a human being. 2472 well, it seems to me that the golden rule ought to apply to them just like it applies to individuals. and it does not seem to me that it should be that surprising, that a company should do unto others as it would expect others to do unto them. it does not seem surprising to me that a u.s. -- major u.s. corporation should not lie, should not mislead, should not conspire and should not conceal information about a product that it manufactures for 50 years, that, if used exactly the way that they want you to use it, causes addiction and death on an epidemic scale. now, truth really is our goal in this case. do you remember at the beginning, i pointed to lady justice up there? the scales were level and her eyes were blindfolded. well, now is the time when the scales are no longer equal. you have heard all the evidence in the case and have gotten the instructions. the judge gave you the instruction on the greater weight of the evidence. and that is the test that you should use to decide who wins in this case. by that i mean which side is more likely true than not? it could be 51 to 50. it could be 80 to 20. but that is the balancing test. 2473 and you are going to get a road map, a path on how to make these decisions. and it is going to be in the verdict form. would you put that up for me, please, baron? this is going to be your little road map to the truth and to accountability in this case. i'm going to go through the verdict form with you during my part of the presentation, and then mr. millard is going to get up and he is going to talk to you a little bit about some of the questions that you will also have to answer. at the beginning of the trial, the lawyers got up and told you what we thought that the evidence would show. and we told you -- or i told you that that should be considered as our promise to you, and you should hold us to that promise. you should go back there and ask yourselves, this is what the lawyers for the cigarette companies said. did they prove it? this is what the lawyer -- the lawyer team for harry schlenther said. and did they prove it? and did they prove it by the greater weight of the evidence? and we submit we proved our case by more than the greater weight of the evidence. what we told you in the beginning, from harry's standpoint, 2474 that we would prove to you that reynolds engaged in a 50-year conspiracy to conceal information about nicotine addiction and the health consequences; that these were cold, calculated, business decisions that they made for money. now, how bad was it? baron, would you play dr. hurt? you heard that from dr. hurt, and i'm going to show it to you again. q. are you familiar with these statistics, that about 15 million americans have died from smoking during the 50-year period from 1950 to 2000? are you familiar with that? a. yes. i have seen that number. it is actually a little bit higher than that, but it is in the ballpark figure, yes. q. so you agree with that? a. it is probably more than that, but 50 million. it is over 400,000 americans every year. so if you just do the math, it does not take very long to figure it out. q. well, that is right. the very next point, approximately 443,000 americans die from 2475 smoking-related diseases every year. and that is from the cdc, right? a. that is correct. q. and do you agree with that, doctor? a. i do. and that is, just to give you perspective, that is the equivalent of three fully loaded 747s crashing daily, 365 days a year, with no survivors. that is how many people 440,000 people have to be. q. well -- that was the evidence you heard from the witness stand. it was also the evidence that you heard from the u.s. surgeon general, when i read to you 443,000 american smoking-related deaths a year. you will be getting all this evidence, and you will get to take it back there in the evidence room with you and go through it, double-check, make sure what the lawyers are saying is absolutely right and whether or not we proved our case. we also told you -- i told you in the beginning, part of my promise in opening statement was that i would show you, prove to you, that 2476 beverly schlenther was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine and that her addiction caused her copd and death. again, thinking of the scales, that was the promise we made. we did it. and now is the time for you to hold r.j. reynolds accountable. now, what promises did r.j. reynolds make to you at the beginning of the case? when i say promises, i mean like the frank statement. would you put it up, please? do you remember this was the beginning of the whole conspiracy? this was back in 1953, 1954. it was published in 400 newspapers all over the country, including the st. pete times, where beverly was living as a teenager at the time, and in the tampa tribune. and here is what they promised to the american people: we accept an interest in people's health as a basic responsibility, paramount to every other consideration in our business. we believe that the products we make are not injurious. we always have and always will cooperate closely with those whose task it is to safeguard the public health. and the guys that signed off on it were the president of the american tobacco company, the 2477 president of brown & williamson, and the president of r.j. reynolds. now, they also told you in opening statement that they would prove to you beverly schlenther was not addicted. who did they bring? this is r.j. reynolds, a major u.s. corporation, fortune 500 company. they had a witness. they could have brought you the best right there from the witness stand to tell you beverly was not addicted. they brought to you a three-year-old videotaped deposition of dr. neal benowitz that went on and it went on and it went on. towards the end, he was asked: doctor, let us talk about what you know about the smoker in this particular case. do you know the name of the smoker or smokers in this case? his answer on the videotape was: no. the question was: you have not read any of the depositions in this case, have you? his answer was: no. you have not reviewed any medical records in this case, have you? no, i have not. that is the best they have got. that is what they brought you. 2478 now, mr. baringer stood up in opening statement and told you we are going to bring you harry schlenther's brother-in-law. here is what he said in opening statement: the brother-in-law, he will testify that, according to the brother-in-law, she said, i do not care. i like smoking. i would rather be dead than quit. where is the brother-in-law? ask yourselves, where was he? i did not see it. this is r.j. reynolds, a major fortune 500 company, making these promises to you. now, what did they bring you? they brought you one live witness, dr. michel, the historian. baron, if you would. now, it should not surprise you that dr. michel told you, well, i have not done any research ever on tobacco, never done any research ever on nicotine or addiction. not a medical doctor. i'm a historian. no, he said, i have never published or done any research on the history of tobacco in this country. what i found most interesting was he looked over at you and he said for this year, fifty percent of his income comes from r.j. reynolds. 2479 that was not a new revelation. i asked him about last year. he said, well, last year, it was 50 to 60 percent. now, back a year before that, i said, how constant is it? well, maybe back then it was 40 to fifty percent of his income from r.j. reynolds. if they win this case, he will get a full-time job with them. that is who they are bringing. now, he brought a slide show, or a sideshow. what did he do? he just substituted the names. summary of opinions. yes. he puts in mrs. schlenther. well, he had another case that he testified for r.j. reynolds in courts in florida. in fact, mr. frailly's name shows up. same opinions. the next one, baron, please. subject of the testimony. same slide, just substitute the name. and the one i really liked, could you show us, please baron. here we go. boy, oh boy. beverly's name right in the beginning, right in the middle with all these sources of information around her that 2480 she was supposed to know, because everybody knew it was no big secret. nicotine was addictive and cigarettes would kill you. same slide he used in the roland cox case. well, you recall he had something in common with beverly. she was born in 1942. she started smoking in the fifties, almost 10 years before the warnings were on the packs. this young man, he had the benefit of a college education. he was born in 1966, the very year that the package warnings went on cigarettes. he did not have the benefits that beverly did. she dropped out of high school. he went to college and got a ph.d. and guess what. with all that information out there about how dangerous cigarettes were and with the warnings on the pack, he still started smoking. he looked at you and he told you that. yeah, yeah, i guess everybody knew. and they are paying fifty percent, sixty percent of the freight. i did all of this information and investigation, but, yeah, i, you know, i started smoking too. that is what he said. and then the most unbelievable part of his testimony. i read you the u.s. surgeon general's 2481 report on the tobacco industry spending $250,000,000,000 over the years for cigarette marketing and advertising. and this guy told you, well, i went to the two towns where beverly lived in, st. petersburg and high springs. for some reason, the tobacco industry missed those two places when beverly was growing up. with a straight face, he told you, i could not find any advertisements for cigarettes there when she was living there. i just could not find it. so that $250,000,000,000 they were spending went all over the country and everywhere except those two towns that beverly grew up in or lived in. well, how believable is that? then he tells you that -- they read or they played to you smoke, smoke, smoke that cigarette. remember that? he got up there and told you, yeah, this is all part of american history. it goes to show how everybody knew. and he played the song, and everybody smiled. tex ritter. well, what he did not tell you and what you will have back there to look at, because it is in evidence in this case, is poor tex ritter's obituary. the man that performed the song that the reynolds witness said told all of america 2482 about the dangers of smoking. country-western songwriter and entertainer sollie "tex" williams. a heavy smoker best known for his tune smoke, smoke, smoke that cigarette, died after a year-long battle with cancer. his daughter said her father, who was diagnosed a year ago as having cancer, smoked two packs of cigarettes a day, dropping to about a pack a day before he died. quote, he tried to quit but he could not. another in the long list of those americans that were on those 747s that dr. hurt told you about. and i asked the young man that was sitting over there. i said, it just was not tex ritter, was it? he said, no. i said, how about peter jennings? died of lung cancer. yeah, you know, i heard of him too. how about edward r. murrow? the young man said, yeah, yeah, i have heard of him too. and then he had the gall to bring up gallup polls, and mr. baringer brought up gallup polls in 2483 their opening. well, they told you -- and that reynolds witness said -- that gallup poll in 1954 shows that everybody in america, ninety percent of americans knew all about smoking causing lung cancer. well, you can take this back. it is got a pt number on it, pt 03876. look at it yourself. the headline, gallup accuses big tobacco of misusing poll in court. okay? the very organization that they are standing in front of you telling you runs a poll that shows that all of america knew, so beverly must have known, disavows the poll and accuses big tobacco of misusing the results in court. go back. read it. read the article. the 90 percent figure, gallup contends, reflects knowledge of a controversy. hah. sounds familiar. the controversy that dr. hurt told you about, not a widely held belief that smoking causes cancer. meanwhile, gallup says, responding to another question in the poll, only five percent of americans said they thought that smoking causes cancer. they did not bring you that. they did not tell 2484 you that. but boy, they had those polls up there. so take this back, look at it and decide which side is more likely true. now, it seems to be a pattern. if we go to the dimarco letter, please. dr. hurt told you about previously secret, personal and confidential, one of those memos. and, please, i know it is been three weeks. and i know we have went through them all exhaustively. and i know i ripped them out of a book and i waved them around. and i apologize for that. they will all be back there if you want to go through them all. okay? let me give you the highlights, because there is only a certain amount of time i have before mr. millard comes up and tackles me, because he has some things he wants to talk to you about too. but i say it is a pattern. dr. hurt told you, it was a previously secret, december 13, 1982. if you turn to page 2, please. this is not new. what they did when they brought this witness in here, who was making 50 percent of his income from reynolds, they misused the gallup poll with a straight face. it is not new. their own internal records. personal and 2485 confidential. he said also that our medical/ scientific witnesses will say whatever we want them to say, clearly implying, if not stating, that they lacked credibility and integrity. what evidence did we put on? baron, would you play dr. worth's clip, please? q. it is your opinion that tobacco use contributed to her death? a. absolutely. q. would you say it is a substantial contributing factor? a. yes. q. and is it your opinion that she was addicted to cigarettes? a. absolutely. q. and in your opinion, can you state, within a reasonable degree of medical certainty, that she was addicted to cigarettes? a. yes. who was that gentleman? that gentleman was beverly schlenther's treating 2486 doctor, family physician, 1998 until the day that she died. he signed the death certificate. i'm not going to put it up, because every time i try to fumble with this thing, it does not work and it wastes time. but you are going to get the death certificate back there. and you are going to see signed, certified, dr. randal worth, cause of death, end stage copd. and there is a little box in the lower right-hand corner. did tobacco play a part in her death? checked yes. there it is. this man laid his hands on her, took care of her, he talked to her, he treated her, he did his best to take care of her. we brought him in. he told you under oath, said yes, she was addicted to nicotine in cigarettes, and, yes, her addiction caused her death. would you play dr. whims-squires, please? a. yes, she was addicted prior to seeing me. q. and you saw that noted by the physicians as well? a. right. q. and in your opinion, was the addiction the cause of her copd? 2487 a. yes. q. and is it also your opinion, as a medical professional, within a reasonable degree of medical certainty, that the addiction was also the cause of her death? a. yes. who was she? she was the lung doctor, the pulmonology doctor, right down the street, who took care of beverly, put beverly in hospice, gave beverly the breathing device that she needed to live those last few years under this curse of copd that was caused by her addiction to cigarettes. now, you may remember -- it is a long time ago, but the first witness you heard from was by videotape deposition. she was dr. kathleen brady, who told you she was unable to be here because she had to go to an international conference on addiction psychiatrists in switzerland. now, this lady has authored over 300 articles dealing with women and nicotine addiction. this lady is a medical doctor and a pharmacologist. she is the country's foremost expert on women and addiction. she won -- she won the betty ford 2488 award, a very prestigious award given out by the ex-first lady to those professionals who help women who are addicted in this country. she won that award. she testified under oath about modern science. and we are going to get to choice in a second, because all you are going to hear from them is choice, choice, choice. modern science, she said modern science shows by mri technology that when a human being starts smoking as a teenager, that it affects the frontal part of the brain. that is the part of the brain that makes executive decisions. and if that part of the brain is continually bathed in nicotine, then there is permanent damage to that part of the brain. and that is the part of the brain that controls impulse. and that is the part of the brain that it affects. do you have a free choice or not? now, we all know teenagers. they know everything, but they know nothing. it is our job as grownups to protect them. we are going to show you how they did not protect them. they targeted them. but let us hear what dr. brady had to say about whether or not beverly schlenther was 2489 addicted. q. were you able to assess whether or not beverly schlenther was addicted to the nicotine in cigarettes during her lifetime using the dsm-iv? a. yes. q. and what was your final assessment? a. i -- my final assessment is that she definitely had nicotine dependence. q. you used the term "dependence." is that synonymous or does it mean the same as addiction, in your mind? a. in the ds- -- the way the dsm uses dependence, yes, it is the same thing as addiction. q. are you able to reach a conclusion today as to whether or not, under the dsm, beverly schlenther met the criteria for being addicted to nicotine? a. yes. dr. hurt, the man who was in charge of the nicotine dependence center at the mayo clinic, which is world class, told you he is board certified in internal medicine and board certified in addiction medicine. he has written 2490 over 175 peer-reviewed articles, book chapters. he is testified in front of congress. he is testified -- he talked at harvard. he came down twice. told you the exact same thing, that beverly schlenther was addicted. so when you-all get back there and you have your verdict form, the first question is, was beverly schlenther addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine? that seems to be a no-brainer, because if there was a single witness who would come in and tell you that she was not addicted, you do not think reynolds would not have brought them? the next question: was beverly schlenther's addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine a legal cause of her copd and death? yes, yes. that is a no-brainer. you do not think that if reynolds could find somebody to come and tell you that her addiction did not cause her copd and death, that they would not have done it? the balance on the scales is over here, folks. now, this whole addiction thing -- and i'm sure even some of the ladies on the jury have been fishing. but if you think of it from the fish's 2491 perspective, the fish is not out there wanting to get hooked. the fish is not out there wanting to get caught. the fish sees the bait. the fish does not see the hook. the fish bites. some are lucky, because the hook only hits the lip. but some are not so lucky, and the hook goes all the way down and they die. right? they manufactured a product. the bait was nicotine. poor beverly, at 13, 14, and 15, she was the fish. they caught her. and they got that hook down deep. now, they are going to come up and tell you-all about, you know, she was able to quit. everybody is able to quit. bear in mind the multiple quit attempts that her doctors and her family told you about in trying to quit on her own unsuccessfully. wellbutrin from dr. worth. unsuccessful. hypnosis. she tried hypnosis twice. unsuccessful. finally it was the nicotine patch. and it was trying with that first birthday of her granddaughter that she was finally able to lick this addiction. but by no means was that easy. and that is exactly the way that they designed their product to be. they designed their product 2492 to hook people, to keep people addicted. and then they start calling them replacement smokers. they are talking about human beings, like beverly. they are calling them replacement smokers. who are they replacing? those three 747s a day that are crashing. so they are going to want to tell you that one of their best customers -- who started 10 years before the package warnings, smoked all the way to 2001, got sick and died -- they are going to tell you that one of their best customers was (inaudible). now, the point is that nobody chooses addiction. nobody chooses and makes a choice to go out and get addicted and die. they would have you believe otherwise. their historian, everybody knew, so then i guess it means that tex ritter, peter jennings, edward r. murrow, 435,000 people a year that die and make a choice, oh, i'll just choose i want to get addicted and die. that is what their argument amounts to. but dr. hurt came and explained to you how they manufacture the modern cigarette. they put menthol in it. and i showed you -- i had -- right here. just like their cough drops, they put that 2493 menthol in. why? because it gives the smoker the cooling sensation in his or her throat so that she can -- he or her can inhale the smoke and continue the cycle of nicotine addiction to become a constant customer followed by, in their own words, a replacement smoker. dr. hurt told you about ammonia. all of this was unknown, what they were putting in their cigarettes, until the minnesota trial. he showed you that reynolds' competitor, marlboro, figured out how to put ammonia in their cigarettes to increase the ph to increase the kick, to increase the nicotine to freebase. talking about like drugs here, to freebase. that is in their own records. there is a list of them over there. you can write them down. go back there and do that. freebase the nicotine. give those folks that kick. right? he told you about how much ammonia that the cigarette companies use to develop their products. well, i did not hear a single witness come from r.j. reynolds to sit there and tell you, we do not put additives in our cigarettes. we do not put menthol in our cigarettes. we do not put ammonia. i did not see one single r.j. reynolds 2494 witness get up there and say, using our products is not going to be injurious to your health. that is what they are saying now. but that is not what they were saying before minnesota, and that is not what they were saying after the engle trial. could you put up the engle findings, please, baron? you-all check those boxes and find beverly to be a class member. and mr. millard is going to address the other questions on the verdict form. if you find that she is a class member -- the judge read you the instructions -- certain other findings are binding on you. he read them to you. you have them in there. we are not going to repeat them to you. but they are that they conspired to conceal and they concealed material information from the american public with the intention that the american public, like beverly, would rely on that to their detriment. now, let us talk a little bit about the defense. get it out there. choice. i want you to take your pad. every time that mr. baringer, reynolds' lawyer, says choice in the next couple of hours, write it down. you are going to fill 2495 your pad up. it is going to be choice this, choice this, choice this. but ask yourselves, how many times is he going to tell you, say to you, an adult choice, a fully informed adult choice? they do not want to talk about that. and i will show you why. if you will play the small babies clip, please. i do not know if you-all caught this. a speaker: from cbs washington, in color, face the nation, a spontaneous and unrehearsed news interview with joe cullman, iii, chairman and chief executive officer of philip morris incorporated and chairman of the executive committee of the tobacco institute. a speaker: we have no program that i know of to try to help people to stop smoking. we do talk to the question of whether or not cigarettes are hazardous. we do not believe that cigarettes are hazardous. we do not accept that. and this industry can face the future with confidence because when, as, and if any ingredient in 2496 cigarette smoke is identified as being injurious to human health, we are confident that we can eliminate that ingredient. i will tell you that i did read that report. and i concluded from that report that it is true that babies born from women who smoke are smaller. but they are just as healthy as the babies born from women who do not smoke. a speaker: well, what about the higher rate of deaths? a speaker: and some women would prefer having smaller babies. a speaker: how about the higher rate of deaths? a speaker: i do not -- i'm not familiar with that. now, that, ladies and gentlemen, is a choice. that is a fully informed, grown-up choice; that is a choice made by an executive; that is a choice made by an educated man, to tell you it is okay for women to smoke. why? some women prefer smaller babies. that is what they were telling the american public in 1971. 2497 now, mr. baringer is going to get up here and say to you-all, yes, yes, yes, but where is the connection to beverly? right? would you play beverly's clip, please? q. did you ever quit smoking at any time when you were pregnant? a. no. q. for any length of time? a. no. they would bring our babies to us, and we would nurse them or feed them, and then after they took the babies, we could smoke in our bed. we could smoke in our room. we could smoke in the recovery room. q. did they ever encourage you not to smoke while you were pregnant? a. no. my dr. williams smoked. he delivered two of my children. back then, it was different. q. i'm sorry. back then it was different. her children were born in the early sixties, before the surgeon general report came out. this guy got up there from reynolds and told 2498 you everybody knew way back when how bad these were. beverly's own doctor smoked. she smoked in the hospital. that is the way things were. you know what? they were telling women in america in 1971 it was okay to smoke, because they were telling women in america, they were telling the american people, some women wanted their babies smaller. that is what we are dealing with here, folks. now, they will not tell you about their fully informed choices, and they will not tell you about what they were thinking back then, because it was secret until the minnesota trial. if you can put up the pt 2184, please. you can take this document back and you can look at it. and it is dated in 1980. and it is a memo from the tobacco institute, one of the public relations groups that r.j. reynolds funded. and you will see what they were saying about choice then. i'm told that the entire matter of addiction is the most potent weapon a prosecuting attorney can have in a lung cancer/cigarette case. we cannot defend continued smoking as free choice if the person was addicted. 2499 their own words. their own words. yet, again, they are going to get up here today and they are going to tell you it is choice, choice, choice, choice. now, what choices do 13-year-olds, 14-year-olds and 15-year-olds make? how responsible do we hold beverly schlenther for the choices that she made 10 years before the warnings were on the packages of cigarettes when she was a teenager? when she went to school right here in st. petersburg, in high school, and where they had a smoking section for the students, and the students could go up in the library. they could not eat in the library, they could not talk in the library, but they could smoke in the library. things were different then. but they are going to tell you, like their historian told you, well, that school board, that is the school board's fault. then they are going to tell you, well, maybe it was beverly's mom's fault. what did she know? because beverly smoked around her mom when she was a kid. by the way, can you put up beverly's picture, please? 2500 here she is, about 13. this little girl. how grown up was she and how accountable do we hold her today for making that first choice to smoke 10 years before the warnings were on the packages? how accountable do we hold her for smoking or doing what was cool, doing what all the other kids did, what they did in the high school, what they allowed her to do? how accountable do we hold her for that? now, you know, it is interesting, because beverly told you in her deposition -- and you need to bear in mind that that deposition was taken february 16, 2010. she was on end-stage copd at home on her oxygen machine. dr. whims-squires came in and told you she had her on multiple courses of medicine, including morphine. the woman was subjected to questions from the tobacco industry lawyers, and you saw them go on and on and on again. they even asked her: tell us all the medicines you are on. she said, well, i -- i do not know. he said, tell us what medicines you are on. give us the medicines. give us the list. she said, well, i cannot -- i cannot remember. 2501 ten days before she died. she is on morphine. she was in her home. the lawyer could have said to her, ma'am, let us take a break -- because harry was there. ma'am, let us take a break. harry, would you go over to the medicine cabinet and get out her medicines and read them to us? no, no. that is not why they were asking that question time and time and time again. but you know what? the lady had something very interesting to say. would you play beverly schlenther's videotaped deposition? i would like you to see this one. it is hard, but i would like you to see it. q. do you feel like you bear any responsibility, even partial responsibility, for any of your smoking-related illnesses? a. i probably should have never started, but i did. and i do not think it is entirely my fault. q. thank you. some your fault, some the tobacco company's fault? a. yeah, because it is put out there, and if it is put out there, it is going to harm you. 2502 (end of video clip.) mr. wichmann: you know, this poor lady on her deathbed, 10 days before she dies. oh, the words of regret. dr. cummings, we played his videotaped deposition. he is the epidemiologist. i know it is hard with the videotaped depositions. but he told you he did a worldwide study. and the worldwide study showed that 95 percent of the participants who were smokers regretted ever having started. so what she was telling you 10 days before she died was she was regretting the choices that she made as a 13-year-old. but you know what, she was owning up to it. do you think they are going to? do you think they are going to tell you that they accept any responsibility for this epidemic of disease and death in america? you think they are going to tell you they accept any responsibility for this 50-year conspiracy and beverly schlenther's death? i do not think so. one of the questions you are going to have to answer on the verdict form -- and it is right here. it will ask you to state the percentage of responsibility. and i, we, submit that beverly 2503 should be 15 to twenty percent. why? she told you how she felt about it. looking back on the decision she made when she was 13, we are willing to accept that. that is what we would suggest. but you-all, again, ask yourselves, what are they going to own up to? now, dr. brady, the very first witness, came in and told you the cutting edge of modern science with the mri and the brain disease, that teenagers, they cannot make these decisions. they should not make these decisions. but nicotine, if they use it at that age, compromises their brain and it causes permanent brain damage, and it makes it way, way harder for them to quit as an adult. and it makes people who smoke as teenagers, it is -- they become addicted at a much greater rate than those that do not smoke when they are teenagers. that, ladies and gentlemen, was the hook that they got way down deep in beverly. you are also going to be asked for an amount of damages for harry's loss of his wife. mr. millard is going to discuss that at great length with you when he talks. but we are going to ask you for a number between $8- and 2504 $10,000,000. the last question on the verdict form, whether punitive damages are warranted against reynolds, we submit that you check yes. i would like to have a brief discussion with you about that before i sit down. the judge read you the instructions. we have talked to you about punitive damages, and we have talked to you about punishing companies. we talked to you about considering harm to others. we talked to you about the safety and welfare of the american people, the american public. well, let me tell you about what the u.s. surgeon general says today, not back in 1964, not back when they had this old definition of addiction that they are going to trot out again. that does not count anymore. but they do not -- they are not going to want -- they are going to try to confuse you with that. but what does the surgeon general say today? and you have the big book. you can take it back. you can look at it yourself. i'm going to read it to you. the message from the surgeon general in 2012: each day in the united states over 3,800 2505 young people under the age of 18 smoke their first cigarette, and over 1,000 youth under age 18 become daily cigarette smokers. the vast majority of americans who begin daily smoking during adolescence are addicted to nicotine by young adulthood. it is not 1964. that is not 1974. that is not 19 -- that is today. it goes on to say: tobacco imposes enormous public health and financial costs on this nation, costs that are completely avoidable. until we end tobacco use, more young people will become addicted, more people will become sick, and more families will be devastated by the loss of loved ones. that is not 1964. that is not 1954. that is 2012 from the u.s. surgeon general. of every three young smokers, only one will ever quit, and one of those remaining smokers will die from tobacco-related causes. most of these young people never considered the long-term health consequences associated with tobacco use when they started smoking. and nicotine, a highly addictive drug, causes many to continue smoking well into adulthood, with deadly 2506 consequences. that is our surgeon general talking today. eighty-eight percent of adult smokers who smoke daily report they started by the age of 18. this is a time in life of great vulnerability to social influences, such as those offered through the marketing of tobacco products and the modeling of smoking by attractive role models as in movies. do you remember, beverly said she remembered -- and they are going to get up and tell you no, she never relied on anything. she never did. baron, do you have that clip? let us listen to what she said. a. i remember the marlboro man. i remember the camels. q. anything else? a. from the movie stars, you know, and they did all of the -- you know, they were all lovey-dovey and advertised the cigarettes. q. what do you remember in that respect? i do not understand what you mean by that. a. oh, they have -- like you could have humphrey 2507 bogart and lauren bacall, and they smoked and they -- they loved each other and were really lovey and -- can you play "to have and have not"? you have this in evidence. thanks. $250,000,000,000 over the years, according to the u.s. surgeon general. i'm sure it is by accident that those cigarettes appeared in beautiful lauren bacall's hands during that movie. the surgeon general went on to say, 2012, cigarettes are the only legal consumer product in the world that causes one half of their long-term users to die prematurely. the major conclusions -- and you can take it back and look at it and flip through there and say, you know, this lawyer told us it is here. you know, i want to double-check. i want to make sure that he is living up to the promises that he told me. 2508 here is the major conclusion of the surgeon general's report. advertising and promotional activities by tobacco companies have been shown to cause the onset and continuation of smoking among adolescents and young adults. that is today, folks. last but not least -- and this would be chapter 3 of that report: tobacco companies are successfully targeting young people in advertising and promotion efforts to attract new smokers. today, 2012, folks. that is part of what this case is about. i'm going to have a chance to talk to you again after mr. millard, after mr. baringer talks to you about the industry position. thank you very much for your attention. and i know that there is just an enormous volume of documents and testimony and information for you-all to digest. i know how attentive you are. but, please, please pay attention to the verdict form. keep your eye on the ball. okay? and remember, we are grownups. we did things when we were 13. we did things when we were 14. we did things when we were 15. those are not adult informed choices. and once you become 2509 addicted to nicotine -- and you heard it from every single doctor that we brought -- choice becomes compromised, and you cannot confuse the motivation to quit with choice, because the front part of the brain, medically speaking, the doctors told you it is -- addiction is a brain disease. that part of your brain that decides whether you make a choice or not is affected. people want to quit. they try to quit. they go to their doctors but still cannot quit. that goes to the power of the product that reynolds sells. that goes to the product, the addiction and the disease and it has caused this epidemic in this country. thank you very much. mr. millard: thank you. good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen. i know mr. wichmann thanked you-all for your service and your attentiveness and the efforts you put forth in this case. and i want to thank you again. i want to thank you on behalf of mr. schlenther and our entire team. we have watched you guys, and we have seen you working hard, and we have seen you paying attention, and we have seen you taking notes, and we have seen you following along through the evidence. and there has been a lot of evidence. what i'm trying to do now is we are trying to help you see it the way we see it, how the evidence came in. i'm trying to give you an outline and a summary of what we think the evidence did show in this case. in the openings, we talked about what we 2517 thought it would show. now we are going to tell you what we think it did show. mr. wichmann, he is always trying to give me grief because he was talking about promises that we made in opening. i made a couple promises, and i'm here to tell you i was wrong on a couple of my promises. first of all, i told you one of the things that was going to happen in this case is there was going to be a defense that they had the burden of proof on showing that mrs. schlenther had copd before 1990. i told you they would bring in an expert and they would talk about all this. i was wrong. it is not an issue in this case. it is not on the verdict form. you will see no questions asking you about that. in fact, we never once saw a medical doctor take the stand on behalf of reynolds. we never once saw anybody on that stand on behalf of r.j. reynolds telling you that the medical conditions were anything but what mrs. schlenther's treating doctors said they were. nobody, not one on that stand. so what i want to do is i want to look at what the evidence was. i want to look at look a little bit at what the trail of evidence was, what 2518 the trail of medical treatment was, what the trail of conditions were. baron, if i could get that easel up. could you do that for me? mr. philipson: i can. mr. millard: thank you, baron. mr. philipson: you are welcome. mr. millard: in openings i talked about the defense was going to be that her copd started before 1990. it is now that it did not start until after 1996. and we will see on the verdict form, no. 3, the question you will need to answer is, did beverly schlenther have copd on or before november 1 -- 21, 1996? it is our burden to show that she did. if she did, it brings her within the class membership, assuming that these first two questions were answered. and what we focused on is the language on this. we are going to see here the key word is right here. did she have copd? on that, let us go to the next question that goes hand in hand with this. question no. 4, did beverly schlenther know or should have -- or should she have known, in the exercise of reasonable care, on or before that date, november 2519 21, 1996, again, that she had copd and that there was a reasonable possibility that her copd was caused by her cigarette smoking. i'm here to tell you that the evidence is going to show that both of those should be checked yes. the evidence will show that, indeed, she both had copd before 1996 and she should have known, even if she did not know, that she had it at that time. i'm not going to go through all the medical records. we saw them go up there. you saw a lot of records come up. we saw a lot of the treating doctors that came in here. mr. wichmann talked a little bit about them. dr. worth came in. that is her family practice, her internist, her primary care physician. dr. whims-squires, the pulmonologist, specializes in the lung. both board certified, great reputations, local doctors, located -- came in and talked to you. they talked to you about their hands-on treatment of beverly schlenther. they talked about what they saw, and they talked about speaking with her about her condition. they talked about the various complaints she had, the symptomology she was experiencing over time and 2520 what they did about it. i'm going to step back for just a little bit, and let us talk about when the story really begins. you will recall that we had the deposition of beverly schlenther on the screen. and she talked that in her deposition at one point that she said she had asthma. and we heard a lot about that in the medical records, and that she had that for quite a while, and she had inhalers to treat her for that. and she believed that the asthma was caused by smoking. do you remember that? baron, could we show that clip real quick? it is a depo of beverly schlenther. q. earlier you indicated that you believed you associated your asthma, as well, with cigarette smoking; is that correct? a. yes, sir. (end of video clip.) mr. millard: so she was thinking about her cigarette smoking at this time. she is thinking about, you know, i think this is causing me problems. if you will recall later in her deposition, she was asked if her doctors told her 2521 any of that. they said, yeah, absolutely, smoking is bad for your asthma. stop. stop smoking. it is not good. it is irritating it. it is not causing it; it is irritating your asthma. you heard dr. worth. he got up here and he told you that. he said smoking does not cause asthma, but it certainly is an irritant to it. it makes it bad. it hurts. it makes your lungs hurt. now, next we heard in 1990 -- and you saw a lot of this. you saw the dr. mason record up here, 1990. and a big deal was made out of that, when the position was that she probably had it before 1990. that is not what it said. we had the doctors talk about that and showed a lot of evidence. but it does show at that time in 1990, mrs. schlenther was concerned. she said, the doctor did not write what his findings were in that record, you will recall. what he wrote is she thinks -- she thinks -- that she had chronic bronchitis, and it is caused by smoking at that time. she was concerned. she was starting to think, you know what? i think the smoking is 2522 hurting me. i think something is going on. now, what we also heard from the doctors -- and we saw in the records -- which she was not right in her own self-diagnosis as to what was going on. what we did learn, and we heard from the doctors and heard from mr. schlenther and heard from russell, her son, who got up here and said what she did have is she had bronchitis every winter. in the wintertime she gets sick. she suffered from bronchitis. she would go get some treatment, she would go see a doctor, they would take care of it, and there you go. so we do not think she had chronic bronchitis. we learned from dr. worth and dr. whims-squires that acute bronchitis, that it comes and it goes. it comes -- and you can get very sick, and they can treat you for it, and it goes away. chronic bronchitis, the component of copd, is something, once you get it, it keeps going. dr. whims-squires had the visuals up here, and she described the lungs and she described the effect of it. when she described chronic bronchitis, she talked about how the bronchioles, the air tubes, start getting congested with mucus, 2523 excess mucus. you have seen people cough a lot who get bronchitis real bad. there is a lot of coughing. a big component is coughing. that is not what was going on with mrs. schlenther. she had the other aspect going on, emphysema. and you remember dr. whims-squires talked about what that is. and she talked about the balloon. the air goes down the bronchioles into the air sac. and what happens with emphysema is it starts damaging those air sacs, and it causes permanent damage so they do not fill and contract normally. they become like dead balloons, she said. so you are struggling, when you have that, to get breath. breath in, breath out. what did she tell you, the symptomology from that? what are the symptoms? shortness of breath on exertion. and we have heard a lot of evidence about that. and you think about that. think about the witnesses, think about the doctors, think about the records. what we saw happening with beverly schlenther is as this disease progressed, as it does, she became more symptomatic, symptomatic with dyspnea, they called it, shortness of breath on exertion. 2524 we talked about a lot in the records you saw, and we are going to talk a little bit specifically about some of these. you will recall, though, in the 1988, 1999 time frame, that harry and his bride, beverly, were involved in amway. do you remember that testimony? and they talked about going to conventions, and they would go to the big convention hall and walk around and see the booths and do what people do at those kinds of conventions. but it entailed a lot of walking. at one of them with that, he talked about going to indianapolis and being in a football stadium. do you remember that? they were going up and down the stairs at the stadium. and i'm certain that all of us would get a little out of breath just because it is hard going up and down stairs, but nothing unusual. harry told you it was no big deal at that time; that there was none of that symptomology that was lasting, the shortness of breath at that time. beverly was starting to be concerned, though, at that time that her smoking was causing some of her problems. the next thing we saw is that there was a 2525 report. and it was dr. worth's new patient questionnaire. you will recall she came to him in 1998. and there was a questionnaire, and they had a bunch of check boxes. do you have any of these, different tests that have ever been performed. she checked "yes" to pulmonary function and wrote "1994." what do we know? we know that we have no records of the test. we have no records of the results. we have no medical records of that time period. but what we do know from her treating doctors who did treat her -- granted, later on, one of them being a pulmonologist -- that when we do those kinds of tests -- and when do we do those kinds of tests? and what dr. worth told you is that the most likely reason -- remember those scales, more likely than not? he said the most likely reason for doing that at that time was to test or evaluate the signs and symptoms of copd. baron, let us put some of dr. worth up, a clip at 966, 9 through 16, please. q. however you were advised that, at some point in time around 1994, the test was performed, true? 2526 a. correct. q. and in order to perform a test, i think you already told us that somebody would be having signs or symptoms that had alerted the physician to the potential of copd; is that correct? a. most likely, that is correct. (end of video clip.) mr. millard: most likely. do we have any other explanation? we do not. sitting here as jurors, your job is to look at all this evidence, put it all together, to use your common sense to make reasonable inferences as to what the evidence means. put it all together. this is a case that copd is the kind of disease where we are never going to be able to pin it on a date that it started. nobody can do that. doctors told you that there is no way to grab a single date and say, bam, that is the date it started. but they looked at the overall picture, and they looked at what was going on with this patient, looked at what was going on with beverly. they looked at her symptoms. they looked at her treatment. we talked with the family and we heard what they had to say. so in 1994, the most likely explanation as to 2527 what was going on -- there is no evidence to the contrary -- the most likely explanation of what was going on is she was beginning the symptoms of copd. her copd had begun. it was starting to go. and we do not know -- we do not have a record to say exactly what was happening, but the doctors think that is the most likely explanation. but it goes further, because we know in 1995 she then went a year later, or even less than a year, depending on what date in 1994 she had that test. but she did go into a cardiologist, dr. walsh. remember hearing about dr. walsh? he is the cardiologist that her husband had seen and that he credited for saving his life. do you remember that testimony? he said, he saved my life, his quick response, his care for me. his treatment for me saved my life. well, beverly is having some concerns about her heart. she went and saw this doctor. he did not just look at the heart, like the earlier doctor had done in 1990, but he evaluated the whole picture. he said, what is going on here? let us try to figure out what was happening with this person in 1995? well, he made some interesting findings, not 2528 from her statements but from his examination. he put in his report -- and i believe you will recall -- and if we could just put it up, baron. it is exhibit 7, 0118. november 9, 1995. do you remember this document? it is dr. walsh. we talked a lot about it. right here is the third impression. these are his impressions. he is evaluating the patient. he is talking to her. he is looking at her condition and trying to determine what is going on. he says, exertional dyspnea and decreased exercise tolerance, 1995. that is copd. that is it right there. 1995, she had copd. he saw it, he wrote it down, he made a finding that she had it. now, to verify that -- and you heard the doctors talk about that -- is that we find the symptoms of copd, and then we will do these tests to confirm it -- right? -- to find out if it is consistent with the findings the doctor is making. this is emphysema. this is exactly what you would describe as to what is emphysema, the dyspnea on exertion. and he said, let us figure it out. let us go further. let us rule out. let us 2529 make sure it is not her heart. let us see if it is pulmonary disease or heart disease. let us keep following up on this. let us take a look. well, it turns out he is right. and we know he is right, because we have the later doctors who did treat her said, wow, she is got copd, and it is bad. do you remember dr. whims-squires? did the full-on pulmonary function test with her and said at that stage -- and that was 2001, june of 2001, -- when she came to her that time, it did not just start, it was at a severe stage. severe stage. what did she also tell you? she said this was a disease that progresses. it is a progressive exertional dyspnea. if you look down the document a little bit, baron. in the middle here, she has had no problems since that time until the last several months when she has had progressive exertional dyspnea and weakness. you heard the doctors talking. what does that mean? progressive means progressive. it is something that starts and keeps getting worse over time. we know with emphysema and chronic 2530 bronchitis, copd, that it is a progressive disease. you heard the testimony. doctors got up there and told you all about it. once it starts, it is there. it is a permanent problem, it is a permanent injury, and it progresses over time. it is not always bad right at this beginning, but the symptoms are there. and the symptoms started. and we saw beverly, and we will talk about it in a minute. but you saw that she had -- bless you -- she had symptoms of shortness of breath. doctors were taking a look at it. doctors were concerned about it being pulmonary disease. and it was not until, like, '01 when it got really bad. you will remember that. and you saw the records of how bad it got. and we will talk about that in a minute. so at this time, she is got copd. the diagnosis is not a requirement. you can read on the jury instructions. it does not ask you for that. it says, when did she have it? when did she have it, the diagnosis? and you will see from dr. whims-squires that she did not even write that. she said the copd is consistent with the symptomology -- excuse me -- the testing, the pulmonary function testing. the 2531 results were consistent with copd. what is copd? what was she talking about? the ones the doctors had already been talking about. it just is not confirmed by that type of testing. that is all that is. you are going to hear, just as you hear choice, choice, choice from the defense, you are going to here diagnosis, diagnosis, diagnosis. they will talk about that a lot. why? it is not on the jury verdict form. it is not a question you have to answer whether it was her diagnosis or not. it is not required. it is written right here: did she have it or not? it was confirmed in '01. she had it starting in 1995, 1994 time period. something is going on there. we heard the doctors talk about it. let me play real quick, if i could, baron, clip -- it is whims-squires clip 1048, 1 through 17. she is describing the progressive nature of the disease. that is all right. you will recall dr. whims-squires got up, and she talked -- and i asked her. i asked her the question. i said, describe for me the procedure, 2532 the process copd goes through. once someone gets it, does it come and go? is it -- mr. philipson: i got it. mr. millard: does it happen all at once? mr. philipson: sorry. mr. millard: that is okay. a. progressive shortness of breath usually. they, you know, start having more difficulty with -- it depends on the severity of the disease. obviously, it can be simply that they just have trouble to exert themselves to progression to where they have shortness of breath doing anything that they require for their daily activities, like showering, making the bed. so it just depends on the severity of the disease. q. and would you consider copd to be a progressive disease? a. yes, sir. q. and it does not happen overnight; it develops over time? a. yes, sir. q. and as it develops, it goes through a number of different stages? a. exactly, or symptoms. 2533 (end of video clip.) mr. millard: it is progressive. 1995, dr. walsh says she has got progressive dyspnea, shortness of breath. most likely what she was describing is what copd is. so it is happening at that stage. again, we talked in opening. i told you guys that we do not have a lot of records from the past. it is by no fault of anybody. standard business procedure, seven years, facilities, businesses destroy records. the documents are no longer available for that period of time. what we do know, though, is we do know that dr. walsh worked at the same facility as both of the treating doctors. they were partners in the medical practice. and you heard dr. worth talk about that. dr. whims-squires talked about that. in fact, dr. worth said when beverly finally came to him, what he did is he went and grabbed dr. walsh's chart. he saw what he had done and started charting in the same medical chart. he did not start all over. he was not guessing on what was going on before. he saw what dr. walsh found, saw what he talked to -- talked to her about, saw the symptomology that was going on and continued 2534 to treat her. you heard harry -- when harry was talking about dr. walsh, what did harry tell you about the kind of doctor he was? he said he loved this guy. the guy was so good he saved his life. but he went further. he said he was the kind of doctor that just did not just come in and run out in a moment's time, but he spent time with his patients. he sat with them. he talked with harry. he explained to harry what was going on. he listened to what harry's complaints were, what his symptoms were, what his conditions where. and he would even tell harry, here is what i think is going on here, here is what my impressions are of what your problem is, and here is what i'm going to do about it. here is the treatment i suggest we do. here is where i think we go from here. harry said he did that every time he was in there. harry still sees dr. walsh. he still sees him. he said -- when beverly went, harry was with them, and the doctor treated her exactly the same way. so the question becomes, on no. 4, you are asked, did she know? we do not have tests of what she knew or not 2535 at that time, but we know that she should have known, because dr. worth told her. he would say, here is what is going on. here is what we think is happening. you are getting a progressive -- your symptoms are becoming progressive now. there is exertional dyspnea. i think it is a pulmonary disease. i'm going to check it out and follow that up and see what is going on okay. unfortunately, we do not have anything further in the records to describe that. but, again, we have the doctors that saw her afterwards. and they talked to us about that, and they explained what they thought was going on. it is the only evidence we have. reynolds did not bring in anybody to tell you they were wrong or incorrect or their theories or opinions were inaccurate. they were the ones who treated her. they know better than anybody. in fact, if we could show dr. whims-squires clip at 1088, 14. have you got that? mr. philipson: yes. mr. millard: here is what dr. whims-squires said: (a video clip was played for the jury as 2536 follows:) q. how is it that you can determine that the same underlying disease process that may have caused her shortness of breath in 1995 was not the same underlying cause in 1990? a. after reviewing dr. walsh's notes that she had gotten better after the initial, she is started with symptoms again, which shows that she -- whatever issue was going on at the time resolved itself. then when i saw her, she had told me she had progressive shortness of breath over several years and had worsened over the past year, which would link together around the time that dr. -- around the time that dr. walsh saw her into the time that i was seeing her, along with the severity of her disease on pulmonary function test at the time makes -- suggests to me that it is more than just a heart issue that was taken care of or a flare-up of her asthma that settled down, like you might suspect from that because of the progression of her symptoms. her lung function, being less than a liter at the time, which is usually where you start seeing people require nocturnal oxygen, which she did, goes along with it being a longstanding disease of copd, puts that picture to me that, starting somewhere around that time, would have been about the time that she 2537 should have been aware that this was more than something that was fleeting. (end of video clip.) mr. millard: around that time she should have been aware. this is the time that the doctor is looking at the records. and the doctor also knows dr. walsh and knows the way he practices medicine. the same way with dr. worth. they talk to their patients. they explain what is going on. here is what she should have known. whether she did nor not, here is what she should have known. dr. walsh was talking about her symptomology. dr. whims-squires agrees. dr. worth came in here, dr. whims-squires came in here, hands-on doctors, looked at all the medical records, went to the 1990 record, looked at that, looked at dr. walsh, looked at the patient, talked to the patient, treated the patient, got to know the patient, knew her well. they described her personality. they described harry. both of them rendered opinions on these issues for you today. and if you could play the clip starting with dr. whims-squires at 1069, 1 through 15. (a video clip was played for the jury as 2538 follows:) q. and based on all the information you have before you, and based on your training, your skill, your experience, your hands-on treatment of mrs. schlenther, within a reasonable degree of medical certainty, when would you -- what is your opinion as to when she first developed symptomatic copd? a. somewhere around 1994, 1995, from the records that i have available. q. is there any way to put an exact date on that? a. i do not think anybody knows the exact date. q. nobody could, with what we have available? a. right. q. so more likely than not, that is your opinion, that it was in the early to mid nineties? a. yes. (end of video clip.) mr. millard: more likely than not, from all available evidence. nobody can pin an exact date. it is what the pulmonologist, the only pulmonologist we have heard from in this case, that is what she thinks happened. the next clip, if we could, of dr. worth, 998 at 12. 2539 doctor. q. now, based on your treatment of mrs. schlenther, looking at the medical records that you had in your file, looking at the symptomology that she displayed and experienced, when did you start -- when do you believe her copd started to become symptomatic to her? a. i would have to presume that it was somewhere in the mid nineties, you know. and i base that on the way she presented to me in '98 and the fact that somebody had done spirometry or pfts on her in the mid nineties, even though we did not have documentation of that. but that is generally when you do the spirometry or the pulmonary function test, is when somebody starts presenting with those ongoing symptoms and have the risk for copd, i.e., cigarette smoking. (end of video clip.) mr. millard: i do not know if there is any better evidence than the two doctors who actually treated her. they cared for her. they came in, and they were not paid to come in here. they came in to talk to you because they were treating doctors and wanted to tell you what they had done. 2540 they came in here and talked to you about what they thought was going on with her, what the symptomatology was, what her conditions were. but you will also remember they both came in here and they talked to you about harry. they did not just talk about beverly. they said, we got to know this man. this man was at her side all the way through the progression of this disease. and like i said, i'm not going to throw up all the medical records. but let us think back for a second. recall the types of records that we had. this was about the '01 period of time when it really started getting bad. she started running out of breath doing everything. and some of the records said that fact, that she could not do anything anymore. she could not vacuum. she could not clean. she could not pick up the room. she could not take laundry from the washer to the dryer. she could not make it outside to the mailbox without even running out of breath. and whims-squires -- and when dr. whims-squires, on the record, she would get so tired and short of breath that she would not even eat at one point in time. dr. worth said, it does not get any worse than that. that is as bad 2541 as it gets. and harry sat with her, and he held her hand, and he took her to all these treatments. and we talked about in openings, he is not the kind of guy that runs way when the time gets tough. we saw the wedding pictures. he made some vows, through sickness and in health. here is a man that took that seriously. he held her all the way through and never left her. but in doing so, what happened to harry? all right? we heard, too, about his love affair with his wife, that it was serious. remember her -- and this was kind of a cute moment, if you will. when she was testifying, we talked about that he was not her first husband, but she said, he was my best. he was my favorite. i loved harry. and you know he felt the same way. it was not his first marriage. they finally found each other. thirty-four years. thirty-four years they were together. he told you he depended on her almost like a child sometimes. he did not know what to do without her. he was like a lost puppy dog. she is gone. every night harry goes to bed alone. every night. every morning he gets up alone. she 2542 used to cook for him. he sits in the same kitchen she used to cook in. now he cooks, and he is all alone. he sits at the table where you saw that deposition taking place. same table. he sits there now and eats by himself. he grieves her every single day. let us take a look at the damages in this case. you will get to the damage question on here -- before we get there, i know bill went over -- mr. wichmann went over some of these things. but we contend that the evidence will show -- and mr. wichmann talked about it. he will get a moment to talk to you a little bit more. but was the negligence the legal cause of copd and death? we say yes to that. we think you will see the evidence the same way as we do on that. was the defective and unreasonably dangerous product, dangerous cigarettes, placed on the market by r.j. reynolds a legal cause? remember, it does not have to be the only one. you heard the instructions. it has to be a legal cause, one of the causes. the same with this up here, a legal cause. 2543 we say yes to that. was she reasonably relying? we say absolutely. you saw the documents. that is exactly what they wanted her to do. that was their intent. that was their marketing scheme. that was their plan. she was their best customer. she did exactly what they wanted her to do. so we think that all of those should be yes. you get to the damages. there are damages. loss of his wife's companionship, protection, mental pain, suffering as a result of the copd and death. that is a hard job. we think our job is hard? your job is harder. you have got to look at all this evidence, look at what you have learned from mr. schlenther and you have learned from his doctors and you have learned from him and you have learned from his children -- or not even his own children, but beverly's, and raised them as his own -- he loved them, and they loved him -- as to how devastating that loss has been for him. what we look at is we look at the full loss. and the full loss is his being there with her through the major part of the suffering, her suffering. he suffered being at her side. 2544 i would suggest to you that that began in 2001 and ran to her death in 2010. that is eight-some-odd years right there of him struggling. you heard dr. worth say he would come in and plead with him, please, doctor, you have got to do something about this. he tried everything he could to help her. he was there the whole way through and suffering right along with her. she is passed. it is been almost three years now since her passing. that is three more years. how long is he going to live? you heard the instruction -- and i hate to say this, harry. do not listen to this. as we all know, five years, ten years. you guys figure that out. okay? i would suggest that at a minimum, five more years. that is 16 years. put that in perspective. what does that mean? how long is that? well, we can look back in time. that might help up you a little bit. for me it is easy. i have a 16-year-old daughter, so i can put that right in perspective from when she was born. different events. that is a long time. sometimes we think it goes by in a flash, 2545 but, really, think back sixteen years. let me give you a couple things to think about as to how long that is been. 1996, 16 years ago. remember the o.j. simpson trial? 1996. that seems like forever, does not it? 1996. jonbenet ramsey, the murder. remember that 1996? a long time ago. lance armstrong diagnosed with cancer, 1996. a long time ago. presidential election. bill clinton and al gore are going against bob dole and jack kemp. remember ross perot? remember ross, the little jokes? a long time ago. if we just went back 15 years, princess diana, killed in a car crash. seems like forever. that is a long time to think about passing while grieving over your no. 1 companion, your best friend, your soulmate. he said she made him whole. he is not whole any longer. a gaping hole. if you just look 12 years ago, remember the election with george w. bush. right here in florida, the hanging chad controversy. right? do you remember that? how can we forget? that seems like forever, 12 years. twelves years ago. so i give you these, not as a way to give you a number to put on it, but think about the time. 2546 put that in perspective. how long has this man been forced to not only suffer the pain and the emotional distraught for losing his companion? she is gone now. he lost her. she took care of him. she protected him, the protection. so you can look at these things as separate individual items, loss of his companion, loss of his protection, his pain, his suffering. put them all together and think of a whole loss of this period of time. whatever makes sense. mr. wichmann put up a number. it is kind of weird thinking about separating these out and thinking out what would compensate. he would give up his entire world if he could just bring her back. right now, he would give it all up and bring her back. but we cannot do it. our system only provides that we can give him monetary damage. and we are going to ask that you do that. we think that is a fair range. we leave it up to you, we trust you. we know you have been paying attention and taking notes. we know you have been following the evidence. and, again, we thank you very, very much for your time and service and attentiveness, and ask that you now please give the same courtesy to mr. baringer. give him your 2643 the bailiff: yes, your honor. the court: you may proceed. 2644 mr. wichmann: thank you. thank you, judge. i wanted to be sure that i was paying attention here so that i can -- i can respond. would you put up instruction 31, please? mr. philipson: yes. mr. wichmann: i was taking notes, and i thought i heard mr. baringer say that you could not take into consideration the harm to others if you were to check the box for punitive damages "yes." well, take a look at your instruction pack when you go back. number 31. the judge gave you the law on that. and there it is. and it says, r.j. reynolds must have wantonly or recklessly disregarded the safety and welfare of the public, or the conduct showed such reckless indifference to the rights of others. so you can consider. that is the law. you can consider their conduct as it relates to the health, the safety and welfare of the public and the conduct of others. now, i would like to put to rest this addiction business once and for all. could you put up 7118, please? i would be very brief. i know it is the afternoon. everybody is tired. this document has 2645 been shown to you before, and it will be part of your packet that you take back with you. highlight the top, please, baron. 1995 record from dr. walsh, one of her treating doctors. and look there. number 4. impression, smoking addiction. he wrote it in his chart long before anybody was thinking about suing, long before any lawyers were involved. so who are you going to believe? are you going to believe them when they say she was not addicted, or are you going to believe the man who was taking care of her in 1995? the next one. could you please put up 104, please? again, you will take this back with you. it is in the exhibits. look here at dr. worth's handwritten notes. the fellow came in and testified under oath. and what did he write? quit smoking totally, and in parentheses, cannot. again, he told you that at that point in time she told him, this patient told the doctor she just could not quit. now, mr. baringer, i beg to differ. the modalities, the treatments that she used over the years, it was not until 2001 that she got a 2646 prescription for the nicotine patch. and it was with the technology of the nicotine patch that she finally used in 2001 that she was finally able to quit. you say, well, she could quit at any time. well, there is a doctor's record saying, just cannot do it. now, you can put up 9596, please. this is another record that you will get. i'm sorry to turn my back on you. i did not mean to do that. this is another record that you will get, that you can take back to you -- in the jury room. mr. philipson: it is a big file. okay. mr. wichmann: okay. this is dr. whims-squires who wrote this letter in 2008, four years ago. this is what she said about whether beverly had copd before 1996. if you will see, based upon the severity of the disease. baron, could you please highlight that? right there. go down a little bit lower. based on the severity of her disease, it would be consistent with her having significant copd back in 1994 when she did undergo her 2647 previous pulmonary function testing. you-all can take that back. you all can look at it. she talks up top -- if you could highlight it up top -- she had pulmonary -- in the third line. she had pulmonary function testing, first performed in '94. however, that has been destroyed and not available for review. however, i did have documentation that she had a previous pulmonary function testing in 1994. so she is writing this back in 1998. the lady had copd in '94, according to her treating physicians. now, i was paying attention. mr. baringer came in and started telling a story about he heard a train whistle and that nobody from reynolds ever lured -- lured, i guess is the proper term -- beverly onto the train. she got on the train all by herself. would you put this up? okay. i want to highlight it for you. and you-all can take the numbers down, go back there and look at the evidence. this is 4013. that is one of the letters that we showed you that they were marketing to children. they were sending 2648 their salespeople out in 1928 to market to kids, and then there is the one, 1959, pt1533, youth research institute. 1959, high school students they were targeting. and then there was that famous r.j. reynolds ad right in the middle. and you will get that back there. that is correct, marked pt504. and that is where the girl has a 1952 prom book in her hand, and she is also got the cigarette. and that was all over the country. now, they did not lure her? they did not lure her onto the train? look at the 3872. this is another document that pertains to youth marketing. and then we go down to 1973, pt1040. we must get our share of the youth market. you will have that document back there. and here is the one, the presentation that was made to the r.j. reynolds board of directors. that is pt1641. fourteen-to-24-year-old age group represented 21 percent of the population. they represent tomorrow's cigarette business. that was the marketing plan in the lower right-hand corner that dr. hurt told you about, that they -- that they planned it the year before 2649 and enacted it the following year. if you could put up the next slide. here we go. smoking, pt1479. smoking among the 14-to-17 age group. we talked about that. and then one of the most outrageous internal documents. that is in the lower left-hand corner, pt3400, where they talk about young adult smokers from the age of 14 to 21 are the only source of replacement smokers. okay? and here we have mr. horrigan. i do not know how long that is. we will play that clip. he is the 1984, the ceo of reynolds. ted koppel: r.j. reynolds tobacco company took out this ad in a number of major newspapers and magazines, calling for an open debate about smoking. in brief, the ad contends that medical studies, which show that cigarette smoking causes disease, are ignoring significant evidence to the contrary. cigarette smoking does not cause cancer: yes or no? mr. horrigan: it is not known whether 2650 cigarettes cause cancer. it is not been currently established. ted koppel: cigarette smoking, no causal relationship between cigarette smoking and emphysema? mr. horrigan: despite all of the research to date, there has been no causal link established. ted koppel: no causal relationship between cigarette smoking and heart disease? mr. horrigan: no. as a matter of fact, there are studies that, while we are accused of being associated with heart disease, there have been studies conducted over ten years that would say, again, that science is still puzzled over these forces. ted koppel: if there is doubt, should we not be leading our children in the direction of not smoking? mr. horrigan: yes. in fact, as far as we -- when i say "yes," the cigarette industry's position is that young people should not smoke. as long as it is an open question -- and i say it is an open question -- and as long as science continues independent research to get at the answers, then we believe that people should wait 2651 until they are, let us say, young adults and make that informed decision. ted koppel: all right. mr. horrigan: and that is a very strong position that our industry does take. there it is again. young adults. 1984. we have the documents. we showed you. i read earlier from the 2012 surgeon general's report that they are still marketing and advertising to young adults, because those are their next generation customers. now, you will also get -- if we could put this up, please -- pt1252. that is a letter in 1968 from r.j. reynolds to the geiger school fourth grade class. write the number down. you can take read -- you can take a look at it. and they are telling fourth graders, science has been unable to establish that smoking causes disease. they already knew that back in the labs. okay? here's another one. fifth graders they are writing letters to. 1433. and this was dated january 1st, 1990. they wrote a letter, r.j. reynolds. right there. it is on 2652 r.j. reynolds' letterhead. they wrote a letter to the willow ridge fifth grade class. science does not know the cause or the causes of chronic diseases associated with smoking. please pass this information along to the students. okay. that is their whole campaign. they knew that cigarettes were addictive, they knew that cigarettes caused disease, and they denied it. it took the minnesota trial that dr. hurt told you about for them to finally come clean and finally tell the truth. now, frankly, i'm offended when i hear this business about, well, we are a little bit late into the debate. it took us a while. we maybe dragged our feet before we told the truth. well, think about it. how many american lives would have been saved if they had just come clean back in the fifties, back in the sixties, and said, you know what? our research shows, nicotine is addictive and it causes disease. mr. surgeon general, can we work together and figure out what is going on here? they say, well, we are a little -- we were late to admit it. well, it took the minnesota 2653 trial to admit it. but let me show you again what they were telling the surgeon general the day before the surgeon general released his report linking smoking to health and disease. would you play the dwyer clip, please? a speaker: it was suspect from the start. hew secretary califano launched his anti-smoking campaign a year ago with all the zeal of a reformed sinner. and now in an apparent attempt to bring some science to the side of his new evangelism, the former three-pack-a-day secretary told the surgeon general, prepare a new report. its issuance, an internal hew memo said -- and i quote -- would be a media event, closed quote. turning a significant health question into a publicity stunt is an insult to serious science. america, beware if joe califano ever gives up drinking or other pleasure pursuits, even the most intimate. that is the u.s. surgeon general he is talking about the day before the surgeon general is going to issue the report. you 2654 see all the microphones going to all the major networks. i asked dr. michel. he said, why, you cannot conclude that just because the microphones were there. this is what they were telling the american people about what the u.s. surgeon general was trying to do. he was trying to tell the american folks -- okay? -- cigarettes are bad, they are bad, they are killing people. and what were they doing? trying to block it and spend all this money to create this controversy and create this doubt, because they knew that an addicted smoker, one reason to quit, two reasons to quit, three reasons to quit, the smoker who has lung cancer and still says, i know i have lung cancer, and i know i'm going to die from it, but i'm still going to smoke. that person, as long they hear one, two, three, four, but over here, what do they hear? they get that message: there is no proven link. there is doubt. they see the ads. they see on tv. that is the psychological crutch. that is the campaign of doubt that they spent the $250,000,000 to create over 50 years. that is it right there. 2655 because people who are addicted, they have this conflict. and the doctors all came in and told you. and it is hard for them to quit, but it is hard for them to reconcile quitting when they are hearing this kind of information from the folks that are selling them the product. now, last but not least, i want to talk to you a little bit about the law, two instructions you are going to get. one is no. 19. and that is the instruction on reliance. mr. baringer got up and told you for two hours, she never relied on anything. okay? this is in your packet. this is the law. and again, i ask you, focus, keep your eye on the ball. focus on the law. the judge read it to you: the plaintiff need not provide direct evidence of beverly schlenther's reliance on any specific statement by the defendant. you may, instead, infer beverly schlenther's reliance on such statements if the evidence as a whole supports such an inference. you will get as evidence in the case pt3870k. it is the 1981 ftc federal trade commission report, where the federal government wrote in 2656 1981, cigarette advertising reaches virtually all americans who can either read or understand the spoken word. so pervasive is cigarette advertising that it is virtually impossible for americans of almost any age to avoid cigarette advertising. that is the point. the blast from the industry was out there. and you saw that man cast aspersions on u.s. surgeon general. you saw the ceo, mr. horrigan, on nightline saying, well, there is no proven link, there is still doubt, when they knew otherwise in their labs. and they lied and they misled. and this was the conspiracy to conceal and the actual concealment. one last point i would like to make. and that is that mr. baringer talked about choice and choice and choice and choice, like i told you he would. you will get this instruction in your package. it is instruction after no. 8, no. 9, no. 10, no. 11. if you can put up 8, please. it is what is called the concurrent cause instruction. and it is no. 9 on the bottom. you are going to get it after every major question. in order to be regarded as a legal cause of 2657 copd, addiction need not be the only cause. that means you can go back there and think, well, maybe choice, maybe motivation, maybe there were some other things in the equation. it is not all or nothing. addiction need not be the only cause. it must be a legal cause, even though it operates in combination with the acts of another. so you can go back there and think, well, maybe there was some choice, maybe there was some motivation. but addiction need not be the only cause for you to find for the plaintiff in this case. thank you. it is been a long trial, and we appreciate the attention that you have given. thank you very much.