mr. paige: good morning. jurors: good morning. mr. paige: and i just want to make sure, am i blocking you at all? juror: no. mr. paige: okay. but thank you-all for being here, and i know when i sit down, i'm going to 4603 speak for a while and i'm going to try not to go as long as -- i mean not as fast as the judge went. i'll try to slow it down a little bit, and we will try to go through some of the instructions and some of the evidence and some of the law. and i will say this, that, you know, we have watched each and every one of you and we know that you guys have been paying attention and taking notes and you have been asking questions. and so what i say now and when i get done, what mr. bayuk and ms. henninger say, you probably know most of all this already, and so this is just our opportunity to speak to you, and we thank you so much and we know that -- i know that you remember, the judge has pointed out, we try cases in front of different judges all the time, and i've never been in front of this judge before, but one of the phrases that she uses is that we are on a -- that this has been a journey. and i just remember, you know, it seems like it was yesterday, but it was a long time ago when there was, you know, hundreds of you, and i kind of remember where each of you were sitting, and it has been a journey, and you-all have your own families and your friends and your work, and to be here for 4604 this length of the time and pay attention and really listening is appreciated because, you know, not everybody would do it. and we know that you guys have done it, you have paid attention. and the journey has not only been here in court, but we have been on a journey, we have showed you things, hopefully, that -- well, hopefully some of it was interesting, but hopefully, a lot of it that you have learned something and that you have seen things that you did not know. because i know when we come here and we speak to people and we ask people questions, such as, you know, would you work for a tobacco company or do you have preconceived notions, and everybody comes here starting out even, but now when you hear the truth and you hear what really happened and we know things that we could not have known, that you could not have known, there is no way you would have known it. you are leaving here with a different perspective of when you came here. and, you know, a friend of mine who i know, i'm very good friends with, he does kind of the similar law that i do, he tries tobacco cases, and he told me about a song and i looked it up in a previous trial, but it is from elton john, maybe 4605 some -- everybody knows who elton john is, right? and the song, you probably heard it, it is mona lisa and the mad hatters, and there is a line in the song, and it says, "i thought i knew, but now i know that rose trees never grow in new york city." but the important thing is i thought i knew, but now i know. and we now -- you guys now know so much more than you knew three weeks ago. you know, maybe when you came here, you thought you knew -- mr. bayuk: your honor, i'm sorry to object. i object to this, golden rule. the issue is not what the jury knew, the issue is what mr. schleider knew. the court: no, i did not hear that so i'm going to overrule it. mr. paige: thank you. so, yeah, and i guess i want to be clear that you have learned a lot during this trial, there is certain things that you could not have known, you know, when people come here, before they come here and they know smokers, maybe, you know, maybe before people -- some people do not like smokers, you know. you know, now you know what they go through. 4606 and a lot of people feel sorry for them when they know that they have been targeted as children, they started as teenagers, they live a life of addiction, they try to stop when they can, and a lot of them died painful, horrible deaths, and it is not -- you know, that is what we are really here for. and that is why it is such an important issue. and you guys have so much power, so much responsibility. you know, not everybody gets to do that. so it is a privilege. and it is a privilege for me to be here speaking to you guys. you know, we all had different lives before we were lawyers and i have to cross-examine some of these doctors that went to harvard and, you know, smart guys. and, you know, before i was a lawyer, i worked as a roofer, so for me to be here -- i was the kettle man, the guy behind the kettle. and the last roof i put on, while i was in law school, was on the hilton on griffin road that they just knocked down. and so for me to be here, in front of you people, it is a privilege and it is just so important. mr. philipson: i think we are good to go. mr. paige: so when we talk about now i know, you know, what you thought you knew, but now you 4607 know, we did not know coming in here, a lot of people did not know until they see the evidence that this is what these cases are about. you know, they target kids, that is what their business model is, they go after kids. without youth smoking, there would be no epidemic of proportion -- mr. bayuk: your honor, i object to time frame. it is not in evidence about what we are doing. the court: it is closing argument. it is overruled. mr. paige: okay, i'm talking about the evidence in the case. and we are going to show you the documents that talk about youth marketing that are relevant to this case, okay? but we know andrew schleider, we call him mr. schleider, but andrew was a little boy at one point and he deserved better. and when you target children, you know, we are supposed to protect children. we are supposed to lead them, not mislead them. we are supposed to embrace them. you know, they are our future. and so when you take a child and you target them and you give them a drug and the life of drug addiction and then they get older and you blame 4608 them and call -- and blame the victim, it is a very -- mr. bayuk: your honor, i object, we have a motion in limine on that. the court: uh, no, it is overruled. it will be part of the record. mr. paige: it is very convenient. but we are here today, and that is why we are here, we are going to ask at some point that you -- you know, we are going to ask for fair compensation for mrs. schleider, for what they did to her, her husband. we are going to ask for fair compensation for the daughter, but importantly, we are going to ask that they be punished, that they be punished for what they did. and that is what punitive damages are. you know, you cannot do what they did, andrew schleider was one kid. he was targeted when he was a kid. he was one teen of many, and that is their business model. mr. bayuk: your honor, object, none of this is in evidence. the court: okay. it is closing argument. it is overruled. mr. paige: and so this is andrew, this is 4609 what he went through, this is his life. so when we ask, you know, people, there is a jury instruction that the judge just read to you that corporations have to be treated like people. okay? but when you want to be treated like a person, you have to act like a person. you have to act like a human being. you cannot just do what they did and not be held accountable for that. there is a book, "everything i need to know i learned in kindergarten". maybe some of you have read it or heard about it, but it is be nice to people. do not hurt people. do not lie. you know, you cannot lie and hurt people and target people to get ahead in life and then not be held accountable and ask not to be punished. i have a son who is nine years old. he got in trouble in school and i punished him and i said, look, you need to make this -- mr. bayuk: your honor, i object to -- none of this is in evidence, this is improper closing. it is not in evidence. maybe we can approach, i do not want to make a speaking objection. the court: no, it is overruled. mr. paige: i'm good. i'm going to approach? the court: no, just continue. 4610 mr. paige: it is a basic premise in our society, okay, when a child does something wrong, you tell the child, you need to -- you need to make it right, make it right, and i'm going to punish you because you need to know that you are not going to do it again and your friends need to know that you got punished because you want to deter others from doing it as well. and that is what we are here for today, to be honest with you, that is why it is so important, because these corporations, they cannot do this and get away with it. they cannot do this for 50 years, 450,000 americans die every year, okay? and that is a lot of people. and these are the people who -- who are part of it, who lied. and they lied and they made a lot of money and they lived nice lives and they took advantage of people, and that is what they built their business on, and that is what this case is about. you know, this gentleman, for some reason the other day i was driving down the road and i thought of joe cullman, and it was a day, i think it was last weekend, and i was feeling good, and i was like, oh, i feel peaceful driving down the road. 4611 and i thought to myself i wonder what joe cullman would think of when he would drive down the road knowing that he -- mr. bayuk: excuse me, your honor. i'm sorry to interrupt, i know this is closing, but there is no evidence of this. the court: it is argument. mr. bayuk: this is a summation of the evidence. the court: well, it is -- i understand that. it is argument. i'm going to overrule it. mr. paige: as lawyers, we learn in law school different objections and there is nothing wrong with objecting, and that is fine. and i'm just trying to tell you my -- i represent ms. schleider. i'm trying to tell you why we are here and why we think this is so important. and you have to think about these people. these are the people who, you know, corporations wanted to be treated like people. these are the people who did it, some of them. and these are the people you have to think, what goes through their mind when they drive down the road and they are thinking, hey, or back then when they were thinking we are targeting kids and we know that we are going 4612 to -- ninety percent of -- or three-quarters of them that we can get started will go into adulthood and smoke. and ninety percent of all of our market is based upon teenage smokers. and we know that 50 percent of them are going to grow up and die, and 8.5 million are currently living with smoking-related illnesses, that is the evidence in this case. so when we talk about 450,000 who die every year, it does not seem -- you know, it is a number that maybe you grow numb to, but if you wrap your mind around that number and you think about it, what that means is if there is a plane crash tomorrow and -- mr. bayuk: your honor, there is no evidence, this is totally improper argument. i need to make a motion on this. the court: mr. paige? mr. paige: i -- the court: you know, i do not know where you are going. mr. paige: i mean, i'm going the same place i've been before. the court: yeah, i'm going to -- i'm going to overrule it. 4613 mr. paige: okay. the court: i'll note your objection for the record, mr. bayuk. mr. paige: so if a plane crashed, it would be big news, right? people would be watching it on cnn and we would watch it and we would feel bad for those families and we would mourn with the families and everybody would feel bad, and it would be horrible. 450,000 is the equivalent -- mr. bayuk: your honor, i'm sorry to interrupt. can i just get a continuing objection? the court: yes. mr. bayuk: i need to make a motion, i have a number of objections to this. the court: that is fine. thank you. mr. paige: the number would be the equivalent in terms of number, just so you could wrap your mind around the harm being done, of three plane crashes every day for a year. that would be about 450,000 americans. and that is why i say when you consider what they have done, the harm of what they have done, the fact that andrew schleider was in there, you have to judge him on the reasonable person standard, did he act reasonably, did he do something that was so 4614 un- -- you know, out of the ordinary, was he special. he was no different than anybody else. he was a kid. he got targeted. he got swept up into this thing. he tried to quit and he died. and that is the evidence in the case about how many people have died, and he was just one of them. so this is, you know, class membership, this is one of the things that are going to be on the verdict form. so the first thing we have to prove, there are certain things we have to prove, that we hope we have proven and things that you will have to find for us to get to the point where you can award punitive damages and you can award fair compensation to the family and hold them accountable for everything they did for 50 years and hold them accountable for, you know, one of the things we have talked about is motivation. you know, dr. castro, a nice gentleman, i have no ill will towards him, he is doing the best he can, i guess, but they talk a lot about motivation. but you have to think to yourself what motivated them? what motivated these people to do what they did for so long, all of these companies to get together and do that, who would do that, and what 4615 motivated them, anything else other than greed to put profits over human lives, which they did for 50 years. so to hold them accountable for that greed, for that misplaced motivation, motivation that, you know, andrew -- andrew, they criticized because he did not have enough motivation, he was not motivated enough. well, they had plenty of motivation, they had strong motivations, and to hold him accountable for this motivation that resulted in the death of her husband, we have to first -- you have to first determine if he is a class member. so you probably -- you know a little bit about it, but the class action is when dr. figlar was deposed, or his testimony, you probably -- maybe you do not remember, it was a video, we played it very early on, it was r.j. reynolds' corporate representative, and i talked to him at the end a little bit about the engle class action, but it was a class action from the '90s for smokers like andrew schleider who started smoking in the '40s and '50s, at a different time, a different world than we live in today, and it was a year-long trial and there was, you know, 7,000 exhibits, i think, in evidence. 4616 so here you guys have some exhibits, and we have had a shorter trial, but here, this is what we want to make sure that he is rightfully and lawfully considered to be a member of the engle class action. and so we feel that we have proven beyond -- you know, our burden of proof, i do not know where it is -- oh, there it is. our burden of proof is by the greater weight of the evidence, what is -- what -- you know, what is more likely than not to have occurred. so we think that we have proven -- we do not have to prove beyond a reasonable doubt. we do not have to prove with a hundred percent certainty. there was a lot of talk about, oh, andrew did not have an autopsy. you do not know for a hundred percent if he had this diagnosis or he had that diagnosis. we do not have to prove that. that is not our burden. and we ask, you know, respectfully and we know you will do it, hold us to our burden, hold us to our burden, but this is our burden in a court of law. nobody is going to jail. this is not a criminal trial where it is beyond a reasonable doubt. this is a burden that we have in these types of cases. so the first question is was he addicted to 4617 cigarettes containing nicotine and, if so, was it a legal cause of the cancer that manifested on or before november 21st. and we are going through that. and the second question is the same with the copd. and that is why we went through this, although the only damages that we are claiming is the wrongful death for his lung cancer, he could become a class member if the disease manifested, either one, within the class period, on or before november 21st, 1996. so we think it was clear both, either or, but we are not in your mind, so we do not know what you are going to do, so we tried to put in evidence of both and let you make a decision, it could have been one or both or neither, hopefully not neither, so. but what class membership is not about, the judge just read you the instructions, i think you will be able to get the instructions back with you and the verdict form, it is not about fault of either party. we cannot consider the -- you cannot consider the engle findings and you cannot consider our admission of fault to determine whether or not she is {sic} a class member. 4618 and i'm going to talk about our admission of the fault and why -- you know, what it meant, what exactly she admitted and how we think it should be applied. but from the very first pleading in this case, mrs. schleider admitted partial responsibility for her husband in combination with what they did. and that is what we admitted. but that has nothing to do with class membership. reliance on statements, you know, that has nothing to do with class membership. that has to do with punitive damages that we are going to talk about. whether addicts lose control over their minds or cannot control themselves, you know, that has nothing to do with it. whether addicts can quit. we are not disputing that addicts can quit. all addicts can quit, we have talked about that with dr. drobes and dr. castro, whether you are addicted to cocaine, heroin, alcohol, nicotine, people can quit. if that was the test at being a class member, nobody would ever be a class member. okay? so you are not going to see an instruction anywhere ever in any world, in any courtroom, in any jury room, that says if you find he could have quit, he is not a class member, that is not the law in the 4619 case. whether smokers share some responsibility. that is not at issue for class membership. that has to do with comparative fault. and we will talk about that soon as well. so to be a class member, "in order to be regarded a legal cause of lung cancer and death, addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine need not be the only cause." okay? this is what you are going to be read -- or you were read. "addiction to nicotine -- addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine may be a legal cause of lung cancer and death even if it operates in combination with the acts of another or some other natural cause or some other cause if such other cause occurs at the same time as an addiction to cigarettes and such addiction contributes substantially to producing the lung cancer and death." so this is really the main issue, because it is been confusing. you know, dr. castro at one point said, well, addiction to nicotine does not really cause lung cancer and death. and honestly, i could not understand his explanation. and it was -- it is very well written in the -- in the surgeon 4620 general reports and whatnot that it is recognized that addiction is a serious problem, it is a brain disease, and people who do become addicted do die, become very sick, and they know that. they know it. it is in their own documents. so you have to ask yourself when you are back there did the addiction play an important role, okay, because that is the -- mr. bayuk: your honor, i'm sorry, i object to that as misstating legal instruction, your honor instructed the jury, it is not an important role. mr. paige: substantially -- the court: all right. mr. paige: you all know what substantially means. so substantially is something that is important. mr. bayuk: your honor, it is the same objection. it is not important, it is a but-for cause. the court: all right, you can explain that in your closing. mr. paige: and so whether the addiction contributed substantially, whether it was an important cause that you could say but for the addiction to nicotine, without the addiction to 4621 nicotine, would this man have smoked 40 to 45 years a pack and a half to two packs a day? and the answer is clearly no. and, in fact, ms. henninger talked about how they spent a fortunate trying to sell nicotineless cigarettes to nicotine addicts. and so we know that without the nicotine, there is no addiction, there is no death, and our world would probably -- and mr. schleider would have been far better off, far better off. so but for the addiction, if he was not addicted, would he have smoked two packs a day for 40 to 45 years of their unfiltered cigarettes? was he somebody who was an anomaly, who was just smoking for the taste and the nicotine had no effect? that is what they would want you to believe, they would want you to believe that, and if you believe that, he will be excluded from the class and -- mr. bayuk: your honor, first of all, object as to what we want to believe. and second of all, it is not a matter of excluding him from the class. they have the burden of proof. the court: right. 4622 mr. paige: right, we have the burden of proving it. the court: all right, go ahead. mr. paige: we have the burden of proving it, and if you believe that he would have smoked without the addiction, he will be excluded from the class. and most respectfully, they would like to win the case, and if he is not a class member, they would win the case. so that is what we are -- actually been fighting over for the past three weeks, whether or not he has been a class member. so if you look at their own documents and you see -- and this is why it is important because they -- they now will try to tell you in closing argument that the nicotine addiction was not a cause of his death, that nicotine addiction, dr. castro said it to you under oath -- and that is why i said to dr. castro, because i had asked him at one point a question, and i wanted you to see his -- his -- and i'm going to go through believability of expert witnesses in a minute, but i wanted you to see how truthful dr. castro was going to be, how truthful dr. brooks was going to be with you. 4623 and i asked them to tell you, to look at you and tell you if you really believed that a two-pack-a-day smoker for 40 to 45 years, who is really not addicted, not even for one day, not even mildly addicted, and he looked you right in the eyes and said, "no, i do not believe that." so here -- and that was after meeting with his lawyers for eight hours. and i got criticized for meeting with my -- my expert from moffitt cancer center, you know, there was -- mr. bayuk: your honor, nobody criticized anybody. i object to the characterization about people criticizing mr. paige. the court: i would ask you not to do a speaking objection. just state a legal objection. mr. bayuk: i object that it is improper and it is not in evidence. the court: all right. it is overruled. i'll note your objection for the record. mr. paige: okay, you-all probably remember when dr. castro -- dr. drobes from moffitt cancer center was on the stand and they put up the time records and said, oh, you met with mr. paige for 23 minutes and you met with mr. paige for 15 minutes and it totaled about an hour and 45 minutes that i 4624 met with them. and then when dr. castro was on the stand, they said how come mr. paige had to go to moffitt cancer center and get an expert, one of the world-renowned cancer institutes in the world, he had to fly 45 minutes to get here. meanwhile they are meeting with their experts for 8 hours, 20 hours, and their experts then look you in the eyes and say, oh, he was not even mildly addicted for a day. and to get a pulmonologist to come to court and tell you that this man did not have copd, they had to go all the way to los angeles. he had to fly somebody in six hours away. do you know how many pulmonologists must be in the state of florida? so, you know, i'm welcome -- i welcome to talk about anything. i want to talk about reader's digest. i want to talk about the newspaper articles. i want to talk about the psas. because when you put everything into perspective and see where -- where this family falls, they are not going to run from the truth. they are not going to run from it. because the truth shall set you free. he started as a kid. he was addicted. they 4625 were lying. they were marketing kids. they did manipulate the nicotine. and they -- and they have known about it for decades. and that is the truth. so this is their internal documents. this is now -- now we are here, and nicotine is not that important now. but when they are in their internal documents and they are talking secretly about how they can make more money, they are talking about we are in the business of -- mr. bayuk: your honor, i'm sorry to interrupt. we have a motion on this on defending the case, and i do need to make a motion on that. mr. paige: i'm talking about the tobacco executives were in -- and i'm talking about the documents. the court: all right, if you are talking about the -- mr. paige: yeah. the court: -- executives and the documents, that is fine as long as -- mr. bayuk: well, i just want to make clear i do have a motion on this. the court: well, i think mr. paige understands what he can say, and i'm not going to go sidebar. just thank you. 4626 mr. paige: so in their internal documents, without the lawyers defending the case, i'm talking about what was going on in 1963, 1972, 1972, and 1977, at a time when the andrew schleider was smoking their product when he was still alive, and he was in his 20s and 30s, and we talk about what they were concealing, because it is an engle finding of what they have concealed, what they have lied to the public about, what they have omitted. think about the things you have learned in this trial. arsenic and cyanide in cigarettes. 50 percent of smokers die. you know, it is as addictive as cocaine and heroin. how would andrew schleider have known that? how could any smoker know what they are dealing with? how can you battle an addiction of brain disease if they do not tell you what they know? and so "we are in the business of selling nicotine, an addictive drug." "in designing any cigarette, the dominant specification should be nicotine delivery." "nicotine is a potent drug based upon the sale of attractive dosage forms of nicotine." there is nothing in there about people -- you will not find a document in their -- you will not find 4627 a document that says our smokers are smoking for taste, it is all about choice, they can choose to quit when they want to. that document does not exist. it does not exist. you will not see it when you go back in the jury room. you can look for it. you will not be able to find it. another document, they talk about their -- they compare their customers to rats in a cage. and you may remember this document. but they talk about comparing smoking to how you get a rat to do something in a cage with pushing a lever. and again, in their -- when you talk about free choice, when dr. castro -- yeah, castro was here and he tried to say smoking is a choice, it is a choice behavior and all that stuff, you know, smokers can make a choice and they can make a choice to try to quit, okay. and he did. he tried. and you know what, if a smoker tries six, seven times, he should try eight or nine times, and that is one of the reasons why we admitted partial responsibility, you can always try harder. okay? you get a b in school, as i tell my kids, you can try harder and hopefully you can get an a, maybe not, but just try hard. 4628 you know, you can try as hard as you can. and that is what andrew schleider did, he tried as hard as he could, and had he lived longer, maybe he would have -- probably would have been able to quit at some point in time, but as smokers go, he died pretty young, he got sick pretty young. and so -- but you cannot just choose to say i want to quit. you can choose to say i want to try to quit, and then you have to try. and then you are battling an addiction and then you would better know what you are dealing with and you would better get a lot of help because it is not easy for some people. this is the ftc report. "there is no indication in any advertisement that after a person smokes cigarettes regularly for a while, smoking is no longer a matter of choice, but becomes a matter of need." 1989 surgeon general report, "two factors refute the argument that smoking is a matter of free choice. most smokers start as teenagers and then become addicted." and in their own internal documents from 1980, they knew this and they did not share this with andrew schleider, they did not share it with their customers, they did not share it with 4629 america, they never -- they did not admit this. "cigarette smoking is more addictive than using heroin, hooking two-thirds of the people who ever smoke. we cannot defend continued smoking as free choice if a person was addicted." so they know that. and the surgeon general knows that, it is pretty clear, okay. this is something that was shown to you when dr. -- mr. bayuk: i'm sorry to interrupt. these are not in evidence. these -- we discussed these yesterday. mr. paige: they are not in evidence, your honor. they were shown when the witness was here, and they were published verbally. mr. bayuk: respectfully, that is not the standard, i mean. the court: all right. let us go sidebar. mr. paige: okay, i'll -- if you are inclined to -- the court: just take them off the screen and continue. mr. paige: okay. okay, no problem. but you remember when dr. castro was here 4630 yesterday and we showed the -- we talked about government reports that talked about how highly addictive nicotine was, the cdc, nida, the surgeon general, national institutes of health, world health organization. why in the world would all these organizations, all these government bodies, be hiring all these scientists and spending all this money to battle nicotine addiction if it was not a serious problem and causing so much harm? and -- and if it was just really a matter of free choice, why waste their time? and there are so many smart people still learning more about the genetics of nicotine addiction, things that we did not know, that andrew could not have known, and there is so much going on to help people. and as you have heard in this case, the smoking consumption rate is going down and down, and hopefully it will continue to go down as time goes on. and that, again, is another reason why, when we get to the punishment phase, and i hope we do -- mr. bayuk: your honor, that is an improper use for punitive damages and personal opinion about punitive damages. 4631 the court: i'm going to overrule it. mr. bayuk: okay. i would like to make a motion again. thank you. mr. paige: the -- the -- the -- i forget where i was when -- i'm trying to think now. the -- i was talking about punitive damages. so at some point, i'm going to get to in my outline here about punitive damages, why they are so important, why they should be awarded in this case, and if we do get there, and it would run us into next week, hopefully only a couple days, one or two days, i hope that you-all will have your patience to complete the journey with us, and if they do, dr. figlar i expect will come and i'll be able to talk to him, which i look forward to. but this is a definition from nida where it says, "nicotine addiction is defined as a chronic relapsing brain disease that is characterized by compulsive drug seeking and use, despite harmful consequences." and that is what addiction is. you know, people talk about why do people smoke if they know it is harmful? why do people use cocaine if they know it is harmful? why do people become alcoholics if they know it is harmful? because it is beyond their control. most smokers, i 4632 think even dr. castro admitted seventy percent of smokers say they would like to quit, they do not want to smoke, they wish they did not smoke. and that is why it was interesting when dr. proctor was here and something came up, i do not remember whether it was on direct or redirect, but a question came up and we talked about -- oh, when they were talking about the cigarette that they produced that was nicotineless, that they spent a fortunate doing, that they spent a billion dollars producing some cigarette that did not have nicotine that it failed. and of course it is going to fail in a society where you have 60 million smokers who are smoking nicotineless cigarettes. but think about it, think about it, in 1953 when they their choice, when they had a choice and they could have been not so motivated by money and they all met in the plaza hotel, if they would have conspired and they said they were going to cooperate with the government, think about it, if they would have conspired at that time to say, hey, we are the ones who are making this drug for people, for kids who are smoking it, and we know it is killing them, why do not we all just say forget it, 4633 we are going to make a nicotineless cigarette, we will spend a fortunate, a billion dollars doing that, and then if any teenager starts smoking, he will not become addicted, and then -- because people do not start to smoke for taste, they do not start -- they get sick, they get nauseous because there is a poison, nicotine, your body has to get used to it. so for new smokers, they could have done that if they wanted to, that could have been their choice. they would have made a lot less money, they would have made a lot less money over time, they would have killed a lot less people, but that was their choice not to do that, and that was a bad choice for many american families, including mrs. schleider. so again, whether or not he was addicted, he began smoking between 11 and i think it is really 14 years of age. we know ninety percent of all smokers begin smoking while the brain is developing by age -- it is really 24, the frontal lobes of the brain, anybody who has kids, teenagers know it. i do not think dr. castro would admit it. but that the frontal lobes of the brain, that is, you know, the part of the brain that deals with, you know, thinking about long-term 4634 consequence, you know, evaluating risks. and that is why the teenager is so vulnerable. that is why that is their market. that is their target audience. that is who they get. they get these kids, and that is what they build their business on. mr. bayuk: your honor, i object again as time frame given your ruling in the case. the court: oh, i agree, it is sustained. mr. bayuk: i move to strike it. mr. paige: during -- the court: i'm going to strike the last comment. mr. paige: during mr. schleider's life -- and i'm going to show you the documents that are in evidence about that. you know, he increased his tobacco use, he was getting 300 to 500 hits of nicotine to his brain every single day. he first -- smoked first thing in the morning. he smoked to avoid withdrawal. he tried to quit cold turkey, gum, patch, hypnosis. he smoked dirty cigarettes out of an ashtray when he needed nicotine. and after being diagnosed with copd and lung cancer, he continued getting his nicotine. and if that is not addiction, i do not know what 4635 is. i do not know if i could show you an addicted smoker -- mr. bayuk: your honor, i object to mr. paige's personal opinion about what addiction is. we need to limit ourselves to the evidence in the case. the court: okay, mr. paige, continue your closing. mr. paige: okay. the court: with what -- you know what, i'm going to overrule it. i'll take it -- i'll take your objections up later. mr. paige: thank you, your honor. so -- i forget what i was on. so anyway, so we are going to move to believability of a witness, and i'm going to talk about some of their witnesses. but this is a -- an instruction that the judge just read to you, but you will see it again when you are back in the jury room. so they brought in dr. castro to tell you that he was not addicted, and they brought in dr. brooks to tell you he did not have copd. and so you -- you -- you heard their -- the testimony from those gentlemen, and you could consider the frankness or 4636 the lack of frankness of the witness when you are considering whether or not you believe them, and for expert witnesses, you may accept their opinions or you could reject it. okay? so if you think that those experts were not being truthful with you, were not being frank with you, you do not even have to the consider it, you could take those experts and not -- just throw them out the door and say we are not even going to talk about dr. castro or dr. brooks because we do not believe them, because they were not being frank with us. you know, dr. brooks will talk about how frank he was when he found those -- some record that he found, but he did not tell anybody about it until cross-examination. so these are the gentlemen. and we will talk about dr. castro first. he said that she {sic} was not -- that mr. schleider was not addicted. there was a medical record before the lawsuit was ever filed back in 1997 from one of his treating doctors who was trying to help him, you know, that is -- these are doctors who try to -- there are some people, you know, who try to help people, who try to do the right thing, who go out of their way 4637 to help people, not hurt people. [#deleted objection dialogue#] mr. paige: so these are -- we were talking about dr. castro, who said he was not addicted. this is the evidence of whether the gentleman was addicted or not. it is in the medical records. before a record -- a lawsuit was even filed, his medical doctors who were helping him, who were treating him found that he had a tobacco use disorder. this is the dsm-5 we went through with dr. drobes who is with the moffitt cancer center, who works in research, but he also works -- has treated over a thousand patients at smoking-cessation clinics and he uses this, he teaches doctors how to use the dsm-5 and he went through this with you. i mean, the only -- the only thing -- i knew i would get dr. castro to agree with me on something, and the only thing i got him to agree with was when i conceded that my client probably did not meet those two. but i could not get him to agree with anything, he would not budge. so you saw the 1996 guidelines that were in effect when my client was alive when they have examples of how you meet this criteria, you know, smoke -- use more or longer than intended. you 4642 know, he started as a kid. he never intended to be a lifelong customer of the r.j. reynolds tobacco company, that could not have been his intent at all. he tried, he tried to quit, he tried to cut down. most people tried, you know, three, four, five, seven times. he tried. there is no reason to exclude him from that criteria. great deal of time using, he was smoking up to two, two and a half packs a day. his family members said he constantly had a cigarette. he would light one from another. if we took the amount of time that he smoked one after the other it would take nine and a half to 12 and a half years for him to leave us and come back, that is a lot of time for anybody to be administering drugs to their brain. cravings or strong desires. he would tell people he needed it. he would dig through dirty ashtrays. he would leave church to smoke. you know, he would wake up first thing in the morning and smoke. again, church, restaurants, movies. does not say that you do not go to the movies. it says it could be reduced. smoking in situations that were hazardous, smoking in bed. you know, even 4643 dr. castro, -- it is right there in the dsm, that is an example, smoking in bed. he said, well, maybe, kind of. you know, that was as close as i could get him to admit using -- and he agreed to this, he agreed to this and then withdrawal. and you remember there are two ways you could meet withdrawal. one is by having the symptoms that he had and the other is by smoking to avoid withdrawal. and in the dsm, the example they give is smoking as soon as you wake up because your brain is without nicotine. so this is a gentleman who was not only addicted, but he was severely addicted and there is no question about it. no question. fagerström test, it is a valid and reliable measure of the level of addiction. again, he was very high dependence, the highest you can get. so when you think about dr. castro, who came in here, swore to tell the truth, swore to take an oath, read all the depositions, knew everything that you know, came to conclusion under oath that this gentleman was addicted, i would ask respectfully that you reject his testimony and that you do not consider and you do not give it any weight, because you should not have to waste your 4644 time considering testimony like that in this case. this is a serious case, it is an important case, and the witness should have been more frank with all of us. now, when talking about whether the addiction caused the disease, this is how many exposures he would get in his lifetime, over 4 million inhalations of carcinogens. you know, we know that he is inhaling cyanide, arsenic, polonium-210, 70 different carcinogens. this is what is going on. these are all the things he is inhaling because he is an addicted smoker, that is what is going on with this gentleman. i asked dr. castro about the 2010 surgeon general report when he disagreed with it and i had to impeach him with it when it said nicotine addiction is the fundamental reason why smokers smoke cigarettes, that is in the report, and i had to impeach him with it because he would not agree with it. this is the surgeon general of the united states, you know, who he said in 2004, and dr. castro said that he was aware of this, he was aware of this before he ever met any tobacco company representative, he knew about the link 4645 between smoking and lung cancer, and this is what the surgeon general said at the time. about whether nicotine addiction causes disease. (video clip played as follows:) dr. koop: we should also give priority to the one addiction, tobacco addiction, that is killing more than 300,000 americans each year. (video clip stopped.) mr. paige: so that is right there. there is no dispute. there is no -- it should be no controversy that nicotine addiction causes disease, causes death in our country, and if it does not, then nobody would be an engle class member, not only mr. schleider, but nobody. and this is, again, is just reflective of how important nicotine addiction is, why it is important, why it is substantial, why it is -- why it is so important because it is the most substantial ingredient in their business, because internally, when they are talking about it, they are not talking about helping people, they are not talking about -- about being honest or frank with anybody, okay. when they talk about nicotine addiction, in their private meetings, in their office, knowing at the time that mr. schleider was a kid that ninety percent 4646 of them were going to -- of their customer base was coming from his friends, from his friends, and they knew how many people were dying, this is all they would say, "without the chemical compound, the cigarette market would collapse and we would all lose our jobs and our consulting fees." no -- no -- no -- no expression of any type of concern other than for themselves, other than for themselves. and that is when i go back to the book, "everything you need to know you learned in kindergarten", be nice, be respectful, care about other people, do the right thing, do not lie, do not cheat. mr. bayuk: your honor. objection. there are jury instructions in the case. it is not a kindergarten book. the court: it is overruled. mr. paige: and again, and this is an r.j. reynolds document, "we cannot be ever -- can never be comfortable selling a product which most of our customers would stop using if they could. that is to say, if the exit gate from our market, the exit gate would suddenly open," meaning smoking-cessation aids, nicotineless cigarettes, things like that, they would be out of business 4647 overnight. so those -- when you look at their documents, those are the pt numbers, all the documents have numbers on them in the folders that are going to come back into evidence, there is a couple documents that are really significant and i'll tell you which ones they may be. they are all important, they are all interesting reading, this one actually is a very interesting document, but it talks about what they are really concerned with. so again, "addiction is a legal cause if it directly and in natural and continuous sequence produces or contributes substantially to producing such loss or injury or damage so that it can be said but for the addiction, the loss, injury, or damage would not have occurred." did the addiction play an important role? but for the addiction, if he was not addicted to nicotine, would he have a smoked a pack, two packs a day for 40, 45 years, developed copd, lung cancer, and died? so i think clearly, that part of the case is -- hopefully is crystal clear to you and i'm spending a lot of time on it and i wish i did not have to, but i have to address these issues. 4648 the next one is manifestation, "in order to prevail on their claims, the plaintiff must prove that andrew schleider had a disease or a medical condition that was caused by an addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine that manifested on or before november 21st. the critical event is not when an illness was actually diagnosed." so even though if he was diagnosed by the radiologist back in '95 or '96, you do not have to actually be diagnosed with cancer at the time. that is the law. so just because there was not a pulmonary function test to give him the diagnosis yet, just because there was not a biopsy on that date that would have shown the cancer that it manifested, that does not exclude him or mean we have not met our burden of proof on class membership. this is the law. and again, respectfully, if you follow the law when you see the medical records, it is crystal clear, with the lung cancer that it manifested, there was signs of lung cancer at the latest november 21st, which happens to be the last day of the class period, and that is when a diagnosis or medical condition manifests, when it becomes diagnosable through the evaluation. 4649 so symptoms of primary lung cancer can be chest pain, chronic cough, fatigue. this is dr. brooks. and this is a note from december 13th. there has been perhaps a one-year history of fatigue, left chest discomfort for four to eight weeks. usual chronic cough. chronic cough means he is been having it a long time. acute i think the doctor said ten days, chronic has been going on for months or years. so, and -- so, you know, was the weight loss from the cancer, i think the doctor said probably not. was the chest pain, you know, who knows. but the fatigue, that is the issue in the case because he had lung cancer, it says chest discomfort four to eight weeks, history of increased fatigue, so we know it is now more, and we asked dr. brooks you know it is a symptom of metastatic disease to the liver, because if somebody has cancer in their body and there is genetic mutation changes and all that stuff that was on the chart where the cancer is now going through your bloodstream and now is in other organs of your body like the liver, it would be pretty -- you know, maybe somebody goes to the doctor and says i have fatigue, they are not going to say, hey, that is lung cancer. but that is a symptom of lung 4650 cancer, metastasizing to the liver, there is no dispute about that. increased fatigue and otherwise you would just have this cancer, you would have to -- if you believed them, he would have this cancer that is now going through his body, going through his blood, going through his liver, there is seven spots on his liver, he is having fatigue. and even dr. brooks says, "i will agree in general, fatigue could be associated with metastatic cancer, you know, to the liver." and then dr. villa who came here, in this complaint -- in this case, "i know fatigue is a general -- generic complaint, but you have the benefit of reviewing the medical records in this case. was the fatigue in this case a symptom of the metastatic cancer that this patient had? "it is definitely consistent with it and quite likely secondary to the metastatic disease." and now this is talking about the films. and this is important because it talks about, they asked him how long had the mass been in his chest. and he says there is two ways of looking on it -- at it. "one is how long has it been there radiologically. this is a very rapid, proliferating tumor. so it is highly likely that if 4651 you have done a chest x-ray three, four months before, possibly six months before, you could have seen a mass. if you had done a ct scan surely six months before, you would have seen a mass. so radiologically it is been there four to six months. could be more, but four to six months." but we know on november 21st, even according to dr. brooks, we know that the abnormality that showed up on november 21st was lung cancer. okay? so on november 21st, was the lung cancer diagnosed? was it diagnosed? no. nobody said he had lung cancer on that date. was it diagnosable? if they had done the biopsy they had done three months later or two months later or whatever it was, a month later, had they done that biopsy on november 21st, 1996, was it diagnosable? did he have cancer that manifested in his body on november 21st, 1996? according to them, no. according to dr. brooks, no. mr. bayuk: your honor, sorry to interrupt mr. paige. object, that is a misstatement of the jury instructions. it requires symptoms, that is what your honor read to the jury. the court: well, whatever because -- mr. paige: a symptom -- 4652 the court: -- whatever is in the instructions is what the jury -- mr. paige: okay. a symptom of -- the court: -- has to follow. mr. paige: -- of lung cancer, somebody who has lung cancer, a symptom of lung cancer is they will get a mass. that is a symptom of lung cancer. okay? so he is having fatigue, he is having symptoms of the cancer, it is presenting itself, it is showing itself, it is in his body and it is diagnosable. and that has manifested on the date, the last date at the latest, dr. villa said it is been there for months, he is having fatigue for months, so we do not even have to wait for the last day, but by the last day we know with a hundred percent certainty, 100 percent certainty, not by the greater weight of the evidence, that he had diagnosable symptoms of lung cancer. and again, this is dr. brooks within a reasonable degree of medical probability you agree -- and you know, again, there is no question now, after dr. villa testified, not dr. brooks testified, there is no longer -- there is no issue anymore was this not lung cancer, did this start somewhere else and metastasize to the lung, was it 4653 not small cell. we established that with a hundred percent certainty. this gentleman had a smoking-related lung cancer in his lung that was primary that went to the liver and killed him. and it was caused by smoking their cigarettes that they targeted to him when he was a kid and manipulated the nicotine. and so, no, i agree that he had lung cancer on that date. and here is the record november 21st. 1.2 -- this is a clear symptom of lung cancer, poorly defined focal density lateral left hilum. definitely diagnosable. fatigue, spot in his lung. if anybody had done that test on that day, he had had -- they would have known. mr. bayuk: i object, there is zero evidence in the record to support that. the court: all right. mr. bayuk: that is not even in the record. the court: mr. paige, i do not -- mr. paige: i do not even know what that means. the court: is this part of the record? mr. paige: this is not in the records? mr. bayuk: no, no, what mr. paige just argued is not in evidence. the court: you know what, please -- you know 4654 what, i'm going to overrule it. i'll take up the objections later. mr. paige: this is the lung cancer. the evidence in the case is this was the lung cancer. we know when they did the biopsy, it came up as a lung cancer. it is for you to determine if you think that they would have done a biopsy, i guess, on november 21st, if it would have showed something else. clearly, it would have diagnosed lung cancer. so was he addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine and, if so, was it a legal cause of cancer that manifested itself on or before november 21st? yes. now i want to talk about the copd. this is records that were used with dr. brooks from the defense. and some of the records, they said, and i want to move over to whether he had the copd, symptoms of copd that were diagnosable as well. and so what brooks says is that he did not have, you know, there is three types of copd, if you recall. there is asthma, which he did not have, emphysema, which he probably did not have because they did not have -- we do not know he had it, because of the blebs on the ct scan or who knows 4655 and then chronic bronchitis. so chronic bronchitis is a form of copd. there is a nurse, i guess, who filled these out who said there was no wheezing, asthma, or emphysema -- mr. bayuk: your honor. the court: yeah. mr. bayuk: i'm sorry to interrupt again. the court: that is okay. mr. bayuk: there is -- i object that there is no evidence of what mr. paige is saying in the record. mr. paige: i'm going to show who filled it out in a second. the court: well, if it is not in the record -- you know what, i'm going to sustain it. but this is in the -- mr. paige: yeah, this is. the court: this is not part of it. mr. bayuk: i think the records are evidence, but i think what mr. paige is saying is not evidence. mr. paige: okay, we will see in a second. the court: that is fine. i'm going to sustain the objection. 4656 mr. paige: we will see who filled it out in one second. so the -- this was an anesthesia record, as you recall. but these are records that were done, you know, months into this, four months later when they were concentrating on the lung cancer and what the doctor or nurse might have put in the record, but here is where when they -- when they said mr. schleider denied copd in the medical records, this is the form that goes with this, which it was not signed, this was a form that was not signed by the patient, but was signed by a nurse, this is a form that was never signed by mr. schleider, and this is a form that was not signed by the patient, but they noted shortness of breath, congested or persistent cough, and smoking. so those are in the records, and those are -- i want you to see the entire forms so you understand what they show. but there are other records. and the other records are -- and this was interesting because when dr. brooks took the stand and he was under oath and he told you that all these medications, none of them were for copd, remember that? remember when he was saying that? and he was telling you, hey, none of those records -- and an 4657 expert could say what he wants, he is under oath, though, and he is got to tell the truth. i do not know what those records -- what those medications mean. so he tells me that. generally, i've got to believe him. mr. bayuk: your honor, i object to mr. paige's personal opinions about this. the court: sustained. mr. paige: but anyway, we were fortunate enough that we were able to look it up and figure out that that was not true, that that was not true what he said on direct examination. and then i asked him on cross-examination, "do you agree that" -- i cannot even pronounce that word, "methylprednisolone can improve airway in patients with chronic bronchitis? "yes, it can, it is an antiinflammatory. "this is a medication that can be used to treat people with copd, you know that, you have learned that, have not you? "of course. "and of course, you never said that on direct? "well, it did not come up," he said. he was telling you that none of those medications were to treat copd. that is what he 4658 told you? mr. bayuk: your honor, i object, that is not evidence. he said in the record the medications were not used to treat copd in mr. schleider. the court: okay. mr. paige? mr. paige: i did not really understand his objection, your honor. the court: i did not either. mr. bayuk: my objection is he is misrepresenting the evidence. mr. paige: i'm -- the court: just state what it is, all right? and continue with your closing argument. mr. paige: you all heard the evidence. if you think that dr. brooks said on direct examination that this was to treat copd, then i'm mistaken and i did not hear him correctly. i doubt seriously because he said in the next question that it never came up on direct examination. then the x-ray that was done in '95 from a dr. eisenberg shows hyperinflation with flattening of both diaphragms, impression, copd. mr. philipson: it comes out. click it. mr. paige: oh, there you go. okay, so i've got to speed up. but i'm going 4659 to request more time, your honor, respectfully. the court: all right. i'll consider it. mr. paige: thank you. so here is some of the x-ray reports. this is another one in '96. so now we are trying to figure out did he have copd that manifested. you know, we went over all this with dr. brooks, hyperinflated lungs, flattening of the diaphragms, that is from inhaling the smoke, the carbon monoxide, the poisons into the lung, causes the lungs to expand and causes anatomical changes in someone's body. and this was on -- this is -- these are signs and symptoms and proof that he had copd in '95 and '96. and then there was a medical record that he did not bring up on direct examination, if you recall, and i asked him about it and i said, but you have this -- this was the record that he did not bring up, and this was a record that was significant because it says, "no significant review of symptoms except for chronic cough with occasional yellow sputum." and we know from what he said that that is copd, people that have chronic cough with yellow sputum is a definition of copd. and an increased ap diameter, showing that he is like barrel chested. 4660 and those are also signs of copd. and when i asked him about this, i said, "the fact that this gentleman had an x-ray in '95 with complaints of bronchitis and was having chronic cough with sputum and an increased ap diameter at sloan-kettering, did you talk about that during the eight hours of meetings with the lawyers or not? "i did not. "nobody brought that up? "did not. "you did not tell them that you knew about it? "i read it actually this morning and i then -- and then i recalled it. "and when you read it this morning for the first time, did you say anything to anybody about it?" and this has to go to the credibility of this witness, okay, of this witness who is coming to court, who knows of a record, he knows that an issue -- the court: i'm sorry. excuse me. please. mr. edson: i'm sorry, your honor. the court: it is distracting. mr. paige: he knows better. he knows better. okay? this is a serious case for the parties, for 4661 both parties, and that is not fair. and he came to court and he says -- i said, well, why did not you say anything about it, and he says, well, nobody was here to say anything, they were all here in court, so just he did not bring it up. and here is a record that shows that this gentleman had copd long before november 21st, 1996, and he knew about it. then i asked him, after he finally admitted that, that he had this record that he concealed and did not tell anybody about, i asked him, "you could see how reasonable people, based upon the records of complaints of bronchitis, yellow sputum, hyperinflated lungs, increased ap diameter, you can see how people may disagree with you, reasonable people, and find that he did have copd?" and he admitted, "reasonable people might conclude that, yes." and if reasonable people find that he did have copd that manifested itself on or before november 21st, 1996, he is a class member twice over. the lung cancer and copd. he is a double class member. and again, this is a gentleman who you will have to consider his frankness, and, again, when he 4662 said that this gentleman did not have copd, when he tells you that it did not manifest itself and that that is the evidence that they are going to rely upon, i would ask you again to reject his testimony, as you are entitled to do, because of his lack of frankness and his dishonesty with the court. so was he addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine? if so, was it a legal cause that manifested before that date? yes. and then once you get that, you get to the engle findings, okay? and i'm going to try to move faster now. i do not -- your honor, may i approach momentarily, please? i want to ask you a question. the court: i'm sorry, what? mr. paige: could i approach for one second so i could ask you a question? the court: all right. do you need nancy? mr. paige: no. [#deleted sidebar#] [#deleted recess#] mr. paige: thank you, your honor. so i'm going to try to move along a little quicker, if i can, but i still have a lot to go over in terms of i want to talk about some of the other issues with punitive damages still and 4672 apportionment of fault and so forth. so let me move along. but once you determine that mr. schleider -- is this -- mr. philipson: it is not going. mr. paige: is a class member -- mr. philipson: right now. mr. paige: okay. once you determine that he is a class member, then you have to accept these findings. and these are the findings from the engle trial. this is stuff that was disputed in the engle trial that the engle jury found in that case. and one of them was that cigarettes cause copd and lung cancer. that is a finding you have to accept. the other one is nicotine is addictive. the third one is that they placed cigarettes on the market that were defective and unreasonably dangerous. this gentleman smoked unfiltered lucky strikes. if you smoke unfiltered lucky strikes and you use them as intended, you will become addicted and you most likely will die. they concealed or omitted material information not otherwise known or available knowing that the 4673 material was false, so they did not tell people things that they knew. you have seen their documents about what they knew, and they did not reveal that, that it was false and misleading, and failed to disclose material facts, important facts. mr. bayuk: your honor, i'm sorry to object, this finding speaks for itself and mr. paige cannot interpret them. it is in the instructions. the court: it is by the instructions. why do not you continue. mr. paige: okay. the court: i agree. mr. paige: so a material fact, so the material was false or misleading, failed to disclose, and it says a material fact. you all know what a material fact means, right? so that is what they failed to disclose. a material fact. it does not say an insignificant fact, it says a material fact about the health effects or addictive nature of smoking or both. they also entered into an agreement with other companies and industry organizations to conceal or omit information regarding the health effects of cigarettes or their addictive nature with the intent, that was their intention, was that smokers 4674 and the public would rely upon that information to their detriment. okay. to their detriment. not to their benefit, but to their detriment. they wanted people to rely on this stuff. they wanted people to rely on their -- mr. bayuk: your honor, i object to the interpretation of the engle finding, it speaks for itself. that is in the instructions. mr. paige: your honor, it is closing argument, number one. number two, i'm allowed to use facts that dr. -- i mean i do not want to -- the court: yeah, i agree. and this part i agree, it is overruled. mr. paige: thank you. mr. bayuk: and i would renew another -- i'm sorry. i would renew a motion. the court: all right. mr. paige: anyway, so -- excuse me, i apologize. so the finding was in that trial that you must, the findings may not be denied or questioned. they cannot be denied or questioned. okay. and they must carry the same weight as if you would have determined them yourselves. so this is what they did, they met with other companies. and dr. proctor told you about this. 4675 and when i ask for punitive damages, by the way, you cannot rely upon the findings for entitlement to punitive damages. so you are going to remember that dr. proctor told you about, forget these findings, that dr. proctor told you about how all these companies met, how they all got together in a lie, that they wanted people to rely upon it to their detriment, and they knew that. they knew that. there is nothing worse than that type of behavior. and those companies that they conspired with are philip morris, lorillard, brown & williamson, american tobacco, and the organizations were part of this fraud. that was -- that was told to you by dr. proctor. the ctr, the tobacco institute, all these doctors that they were telling the public were legitimate were not, they were not legitimate. and they were negligent, meaning they were careless. they did not act like a reasonable, prudent -- mr. bayuk: your honor, it is the same objection about interpreting the engle findings. the court: the findings speak for themselves, but. mr. paige: i believe there is a jury instruction defining negligence so. 4676 the court: all right. go ahead. mr. paige: negligence is not being what a reasonable, careful, prudent company would do with similar information with similar concerns for people. mr. bayuk: your honor, object, that is an improper statement of the jury instructions. the court: okay, that is overruled. mr. paige: so legal cause, then there is going to be a question, before you get to comparative fault, because you must find that the addiction to cigarettes manufactured by r.j. reynolds, there is no dispute, that it was lucky strikes, that they made those, was a cause of his lung cancer and death. and then you get to apportion fault between the parties. okay? and that is what we are talking about, that mrs. schleider at some point admitting -- admitted that she bore some responsibility in combination with their negligence and their defective product, but she is not sharing responsibility for their lies, because that is different. somebody lies with the intention of hurting people, she is not sharing with them. but for their negligence, for their strict liability, she is asking that you apportion 4677 fault. and i just want to be clear, we are talking about a gentleman who was addicted to nicotine who tried as hard as he could to stop, and we ask you to compare that to the actions of these corporations. you know, it is not just r.j. reynolds, it is brown & williamson, american tobacco, all their power, all their money. mr. bayuk: your honor, i object and maybe we need to approach to make a motion. that is totally contrary to the jury instructions. the court: okay, please do not make a speaking objection. mr. bayuk: well, can we approach? the court: (nods head affirmatively.) mr. paige: your honor, i have no idea what he is even talking about. the court: all right, well, let us go sidebar. before the court at the bench and out of the hearing of the jury.) mr. bayuk: your honor, my objection is, number one, we have a motion in limine on this your honor granted preventing the plaintiff from commenting on the wealth or resources or financial being of the company. 4678 the court: um-hum (affirmative). mr. bayuk: mr. paige has just done that and said -- compared my client to all the power and the money these companies had. and he is doing it in the context of comparative fault, when the comparative fault issue asks about only harm to mr. schleider, not about company conduct in general. it is a violation of a motion in limine, a violation of what the instructions say about this. i would make another motion for mistrial based on this, completely improper. mr. paige: your honor, the evidence is that these companies spent $250 billion advertising this as a safe and healthful product, number one. mr. bayuk: shhh. mr. paige: number two, there is evidence that they lobbied congress and gave misinformation to members of congress, okay, it is in the evidence, there is documents, i'm getting to it. so i think -- i do not even know what he is talking about. so maybe there is something i am not allowed to say, but this is the evidence in the case, they spent $250 billion marketing their product. the court: shhh. mr. paige: $250 billion marketing their 4679 product. it is obvious. and they spent -- they spent a lot of time even in their own documents. the court: if you put it that way, i agree with you, i do not think there is an objection. mr. paige: well, that is what i'm trying to get to it. the court: say it that way. mr. bayuk: that is not how it was phrased. the court: all right, so just rephrase it. mr. paige: okay. the court: all right. so i took the sidebar. make your correction and move on. mr. paige: okay. in open court before the court and jury.) mr. paige: so the evidence in the case, and i'm going to get to it and we will talk about it, when i'm talking about the wealth of the corporations, you remember when it talked about the $250 billion they spent promoting their product, $250 billion, and talk about their power, we are going to talk about, i'm going to show you the documents of all their lobbying efforts that they went through that were in their internal documents. so they were -- they had enough money and spent 4680 $250 billion promoting their product as healthy and they had enough power to reach members of congress that mr. schleider did not have. so when you apportion fault, i would ask you to compare the actions of a youth smoker who became a drug addict to the actions of brown & williamson, american tobacco, and r.j. reynolds. this is andrew schleider and this is what we are talking about because when you are comparing fault, you have got to remember that he was just a kid, okay, because that is who he was when he started. and this is their documents. when you are talking about comparing fault from him to them, this is what their documents say. "school days are here. line up the most popular students." this is in evidence. "line up these students." "let us induce a pre-smoker or nonsmoker to become a habituated smoker." that is a confidential document from r.j. reynolds. it is in evidence, okay? hank aaron, he was a home-run leader at the time. he is the one who broke babe ruth's record, he was somebody that people look up to him. this is school prom, flintstones, frank gifford, beautiful woman. that is how they would induce teenagers, kids, like andrew schleider, and they 4681 knew it, they knew it. in their internal documents, "we have deliberately played down the role of nicotine, hence the nonsmoker has little or no knowledge of the satisfactions," nicotine addiction, "that it may offer him and no desire to try it. instead, we must convince him with wholly irrational reasons that he should try smoking in the hopes" -- "in the hopes that he will find himself the true real satisfaction obtainable," which dr. proctor told you meant nicotine addiction, okay? so that is their business model. they know that they are going to convince kids, because ninety percent of their market start as kids, they know that, they know how addictive their product is and they are going to go after kids in society -- mr. bayuk: your honor. mr. paige: like andrew schleider -- mr. bayuk: i object as to time frame, move to strike. the court: all right. mr. paige: i'm going to clarify it. the court: clarify it. mr. paige: any time i talk about kids, because we are talking about andrew schleider, i 4682 want you to think about it and i'll try to make it clear, that when andrew schleider was a kid this is what they did to him. okay? it is not fair to do it to anybody, and they did it to him, they did it to her husband when he was a kid. and people -- when he was around, that is what they would do to teenagers who would later grow up to be fathers and hopefully grandfathers. and andrew schleider never made it to be a grandfather. never made it. never made it. so back from the 1940s and 1950s, these are the parents and grandparents of our world today that have survived. that is the world that andrew schleider lived in. i hope i made that clear. this is in their internal documents, where they talk about how important youth smokers are as replacement smokers. that is their own words. they are studying replacement smokers and how important they were and looking back 50 years and how important replacement smokers are to their business. okay? that is in evidence. it is not a secret, it was not a secret to them, it was secret to andrew schleider, but it was no secret to them, they would been doing it for a long time way back when andrew schleider was a kid. 4683 and this is in the ftc reports, it is in evidence in this -- oh, the 1989 surgeon general report. it is in evidence. and this was read to you during dr. figlar's deposition, their corporate representative, it was published then and maybe another time. "if the adult rate of smoking were to continue at the present level, the impact of smoking on the future health, welfare of today's children would be enormous. research has shown that one-fourth or more of all regular cigarette smokers die of a smoking-related disease. if 20 million of the 70 million children now living in the united states smoke as adults, about 29 percent of them, or 5 million of them, will die of smoking-related diseases. this figure should alarm anyone who is concerned with the future health of today's children." this is -- this is what andrew schleider went through. and so now we can get to the fraud of the frank statement and the meeting of the -- at the plaza hotel, because this is when their fraud started in 1953 where they got together, they had opportunities, they had choices to make, they had their own motivations of what they did and why they 4684 did it, when you hear about choice, when i sit down, mr. alvarez will have a few words and then mr. bayuk will. and i just want you to remember when you hear the word "choice", when you hear the word "motivation", when you heard hear the word "opportunities", when you hear those words, i want you to remember all the choices, all the opportunities, all the things that they could have done differently if they wanted to. and this is the first big time where they really had an opportunity to help people and save lives. and reynolds is -- this is a jury instruction. "reynolds is legally responsible for the acts of each co-conspirator as long as those acts were in the course and in furtherance of the conspiracy to conceal or omit material information regarding the health effects or the addictive nature of smoking." so they were at the meeting, they did not speak up, they did not have the courage, nobody in that meeting had the courage to speak up. mr. bayuk: objection, there is no evidence of this. i move to strike it from the record. the court: it is not in the record, mr. paige. mr. paige: okay. nobody from the -- the court: sustained. 4685 mr. paige: nobody from the meeting left the meeting and told the truth, okay? when you are involved or have an opportunity to be involved in that, you have to have the courage to do the right thing. and, you know, there is a movie that probably -- mr. bayuk: your honor, it is the same objection, you just sustained it. the court: i do not know what he is about to say. mr. paige: i do not even know -- the court: why do not you continue, let me hear it before i decide whether or not to sustain or overrule the objection. mr. paige: well, we are talking about their negligence right now. so one of the things that we are claiming that they could have done was when they went to the meeting, they had an opportunity to do the right thing, they had an opportunity to speak up, right, to help people. that is what we are claiming in this case, as part of their carelessness, their negligence. there is a movie that you probably, most of you have seen it, not all of you, a few good men, it is not the line where it says, you know, you cannot handle the truth, but 4686 you probably know that line with jack nicholson and tom cruise where you cannot handle -- that is not that line. but there was a part in the movie where dawson and downey you remember was, dawson and downey, the big guy and the little guy. mr. bayuk: your honor, i like that movie, but i'm sorry, i object, this is not in evidence, it is improper closing. the court: no, i think it is fine. it is overruled. mr. paige: okay. okay. you will probably -- maybe you will not even like this story. but there is a part in the movie where dawson and downey where at the end they were getting in trouble for what they had done and it is at the very end of the movie, and downey was a little guy and he says to dawson, "i do not understand why we are getting in trouble, we did not do anything, what did we do, we did nothing wrong." and he said, "we did not speak up, we did not help people who needed to be helped, we did not speak up when we should have." and that is the problem here. you have all these companies, nobody is -- 4687 mr. bayuk: your honor. the court: okay. mr. bayuk: it is the same objection. mr. paige: it is closing argument. mr. bayuk: and i need a motion on it. the court: it is overruled. mr. paige: so that is the problem. that is why they are careless, that is why they are negligent, that is why we are here. we are seeking justice today. we want, quite frankly, we want there to be one hundred percent justice here today and we are going to ask for it, and alex is going to tell you what the family is seeking. but i want you to know the magnitude of what they did, how negligent they were, and how it affected this family in their life. and you saw the daughter, she was in here, everybody is different, you know. and obviously, people are affected differently, and you are going to measure the damages of what these people went through and the harms that they caused her and especially when we ask for them to be punished, for punitive damages. and so in the memo, they knew how bad it was, they knew how bad it was, and when they published the statement, the frank statement, they told 4688 everybody together, nobody came forward and told the truth. there is no proof. "we are going to accept people's interest in health as our responsibility paramount to every other consideration in our business." and i asked dr. figlar does that mean more important than dividends, more important than money, and he said yes. you decide, do you think they really kept the public's health paramount to money and their interests. "we believe the products we make are not" -- and that is their -- that they make a promise, they did not do that, they saw the harm that was going on, and they intended for people to rely upon their misstatements, and that was what they planned, and that was what they carried out. "we believe the products we make are not injurious" and we will cooperate with the public health officials and so forth. that was a promise they made and that was a lie. they never did that. they knew they were not going to do that. inside their documents they talk about how they know smoking causes cancer in individuals. "the individuals we met," remember, that was a meeting with all the tirc, all the tobacco 4689 companies from 1958, the british american tobacco company came here and interviewed everybody. everybody believed smoking causes cancer. carcinogens are found in every class of smoke. the overwhelming evidence is cigarettes cause cancer. cigarettes cause a certain unattractive side effect, lung cancer. that is how they refer to lung cancer, an unattractive side effect. people are dying, families are suffering, wives are crying, kids are crying. mr. bayuk: your honor, there is no evidence. this is totally prejudicial. i make a motion -- the court: mr. paige. mr. paige: you have heard from mrs. schleider, you saw how they were affected by this, she is a wife and a mother. you saw the daughter, you saw how she reacted to all this. she is a daughter, that was her father, okay? this is not a certain unattractive side effect. this is real cancer and real people, and this is a real family, and this is the result of what happens. this is a classic example of what happens when you do this. this is just one family, one example, and we are here seeking justice for this family. the tirc, how important the tirc was, this is 4690 just more of their documents about their doubt and confusion, how successful the tirc has been, that they are going to provide smokers with psychological crutches and rationales to continue smoking. the key word is "confusion". doubt is our product. the most important story is one to cast doubt. and here are some statements from some of the tobacco company executives or representatives. (video clip played as follows:) dr. dupuis: if we do find any that we consider harmful, and so far, we have not, we will remove these from smoke and still retain the pleasure of your favorite cigarette. speaker: dr. elmer hess of erie, pennsylvania, becomes president of the american medical association. speaker: how do you account for the rise in lung cancer? dr. hess: well, i think -- i do not think smoking cigarettes particularly has anything much to do with it. mr. cullman: we want to be the detective just as much as the surgeon general or the ama. we will cooperate in every way. i do not think the industry admits there are any bad elements. if there are 4691 bad elements, through our laboratories, through the surgeon general, through the ama, through acts of god and luck, we hope we may find them. and if they are found, they will be removed. we -- we do talk to the question of whether or not cigarettes are hazardous. we do not believe that cigarettes are hazardous. we do not accept that. because when, as, and if any ingredient in cigarette smoke is identified as being injurious to human health, we are confident that we can eliminate that ingredient. speaker: do you believe that cigarettes are safe? have they been proved to be safe, mr. cullman? mr. cullman: i believe they have not been proved to be unsafe. (video clip stopped.) mr. paige: and that is some of the information they knew was false, they knew they were lying, they wanted people to rely upon it, they knew if people relied upon it they would buy more cigarettes, i'm going to show you the charts about how people were buying more cigarettes, and they knew if people bought more cigarettes like mr. schleider, more people would get sick and die 4692 like mr. schleider did. more internal documents where they talk about for 20 years, so this is 20 years after the meeting in the plaza, for 20 years we have employed a single strategy to defend itself on three major fronts. so they are talking about this, 1972, and looking back at what they have done. and they said, "we have employed a single strategy for litigation, politics, and public opinion. and while the strategy was brilliantly conceived," that is where they are congratulating themselves how brilliant they are, how brilliant they are, while -- like people like mr. schleider are addicted to their product, started as a teenager, and they are calling that brilliant, it was brilliantly conceived and executed, "we have won important battles because it is always been a holding strategy to create doubt without actually denying it." the tirc, which was one of the co-conspirators the judge read to you, is an industry shield. the ctr has acted as a front. in their handwritten records, they are talking about "tobacco money ain't so dirty anymore. ctr is the cheapest insurance that we could by. without it, we would be dead." so the ctr was that front they were telling people 4693 were legitimate scientists. they were telling people, politicians, the public, mr. schleider, we have these legitimate doctors out there, and they knew it was a -- they knew it was a front, a shield, you know, and that is what they used their dirty money for. and that is a dirty secret that nobody knows about. nobody knows all their little dirty secrets except for you-all now because you are seeing their documents and you are seeing what they did and you know the harm that they caused. mr. bayuk: your honor, object. objection on 403 grounds, dirty secrets, and golden rule issues, i move to strike it. mr. paige: it is closing argument, your honor. the court: it is overruled. mr. paige: okay. so -- and so that is what we are asking you to consider when you look at the documents and you look at what they call their money, their dirty money and you look at their dirty secrets and you see the harm they caused, we ask and we know you will take it very seriously and we know you will. that is the money they spent, half a billion dollars, in today's money who knows how much that is. they did polls, 50 million smokers, they knew 4694 people were believing them. 23 million smokers did not even believe that smoking caused lung cancer in 1964, that is a lot of people, 23 1/2 billion -- million people, and the other 25 million are ones that they would give their psychological crutches and rationales if they failed in their smoking efforts, if somebody tried to quit and they failed, there was always that doubt, that doubt that maybe it is not going to hurt me, maybe the filters will keep me safe, maybe if i -- if i -- it will not happen to me because the cigarette companies and all these famous doctors are saying that it has not been proven. so that is the doubt that they want to instill in the people who believe it, that maybe it will not hurt them. they used their power and influence, and this is what i was talking about before. they talked about "who ain't for more money? who ain't for more money? do we really want to tout the cigarette smoke as a drug? it is, of course, but there are dangerous fda implications." 1972 document, this is a very interesting document, if you have time it is 2050, but it says a lot. but in it it talks about the cigarette controversy, the public especially, those who are 4695 presented, and they are talking about tobacco state congressmen, heavy smokers, that is who they want to convince, must perceive, understand, and believe in evidence to sustain their opinions that smoking may not be the causal factor. that is what they are using their power and influence on. and in another memo in 1998, "our contacts with congress which have always been good are now even better. through a systematic program of hill coverage we can now count nearly 300 representatives and 75 senators as up to grade a contacts, which means that we know them, but more importantly they know us." what chance did andrew schleider have against that such power? what chance did he have to go against them to find out the truth of what they were dealing with? and here is more statements. (video clip played as follows:) mr. bowling: i think i'm a fairly reasonable human being and not -- or i would not be in the business if i thought cigarettes were harmful to people. i think it is important that there be a lot of us around who are trying to keep the research honest and open. i think the real dishonesty is 4696 telling people things that are not so. speaker: take the controversy about cigarettes. in the 91st congress, a house committee heard testimony from leading experts on smoking and health. the record shows that many of the country's most respected doctors openly challenged anti-cigarette claims. ms. browder: and i have to disagree with you in that we do not know what causes the ailments that have been attributed to cigarette smoking. mr. koppel: cigarette smoking does not cause cancer, yes or no? mr. horrigan: it is not known whether cigarettes cause cancer. mr. koppel: all right, sir. mr. horrigan: has not been causally established. mr. koppel: cigarette smoking, no causal relationship between cigarette smoking and emphysema? mr. horrigan: despite all of the research to date, there has been no causal link established. ms. browder: the case is still open. the jury has not come in. speaker: it may not be harmful, you are not 4697 convinced? ms. browder: it may be or it may not be, we do not know. speaker: do cigarettes cause cancer? mr. merryman: i do not know if they do or not. ms. banks: i am not in a position to give you a does or does not answer. dr. wakeham: none of the things which has been found in tobacco smoke are at concentrations which can be considered harmful. mr. taylor: but the components themselves can be considered harmful, can they not? dr. wakeham: anything can be considered harmful. applesauce is harmful if you get too much of it. as a whole believed cigarettes were really harmful, we would not have been in the business. we are a very moralistic company. (video clip stopped.) mr. bayuk: your honor, we need to approach on this. i think there has been misrepresentation of evidence, so i do need to make a motion. the court: all right. mr. bayuk: that is not an r.j. reynolds document, so i'm not quite sure. the court: okay, whoa, whoa, whoa. all 4698 right, let us approach. before the court at the bench and out of the hearing of the jury.) mr. bayuk: your honor, my objection is, number one, -- the court: what is this, first of all? mr. bayuk: this is a philip morris video that they used in evidence. so to attribute it to r.j. reynolds, number one, is -- the court: is this in evidence? mr. bayuk: the video is in evidence. to attribute it to r.j. reynolds, number one, is false, but more importantly the caption now, they say r.j. reynolds now claims andrew schleider should have known what they claim they did not. that was a direct comment on our defense of the case. we have a motion on this, it is clear reversible error under 3rd district law to criticize or comment on someone defending a case or defending themselves in litigation. your honor granted a motion in this case. there are at least five cases i can cite off the top -- the court: okay. mr. bayuk: -- of my head. i move for a mistrial right now, your honor. 4699 mr. paige: your honor, we are not attacking their defense. the court: shhh. mr. paige: we are not attacking their defense. i'm not saying that he should not do this, that he is a bad question for doing this. the court: see this is why i like reading my instructions after the closings. you know what, i should -- i did it this time, but i'm going to go back to what i was doing. i think it is better just to read the instructions at the end of both sides' closings, but separate and apart from that, let me hear what you are -- mr. paige: your honor, we can attack the lawyers for doing something -- the court: shhh. mr. paige: -- unethical and -- accusing him of doing something unethical. he is going to get up, obviously, after me and talk about what we are claiming -- the court: what about this? mr. paige: well, what is wrong that? their defense is that he should have known and they are saying that -- they are saying that they did not know. so if they did not know, how does my client 4700 know? mr. bayuk: shhh. your honor, it is the use of an internal document mr. schleider could have never seen to criticize our position in the case right now. mr. paige: your honor -- the court: but is this -- i'm sorry to cut you off. i'm sorry, are you done? mr. bayuk: no, i'm saying i think it is a direct commentary on what we claim now in the courtroom versus the fraud, this has been reversed in other tobacco cases, this type of conduct. mr. paige: it has not. the court: okay. mr. paige: it has not. the court: all right, well. mr. paige: this is all in evidence, it is all in evidence. all these videos -- the court: okay, i mean i'm glad i called sidebar. yeah. i do not know. i mean, i understand your point. mr. paige: your honor, they are going to claim -- they have all these executives saying they did not know. now they are going to put up all these reader's digest articles and say my client 4701 should have known. what he is saying is i cannot talk about that. the court: shhh. yes, no, i -- how much more do you have? mr. paige: your honor, i'm timing with my sidebars now, so i have -- i have a little bit more. the court: what is? mr. paige: probably 20 minutes. 15 minutes. we have been at sidebar at least five minutes since we have got back from break. the court: there may be sidebars like this. mr. bayuk: there may be. and the thing is i should not be -- the court: i know, i'm not -- i'm not doing that, with all due respect. i mean, he is entitled to make his objection -- mr. paige: okay, fine. i'll do the same then. the court: -- and it is proper for me -- mr. paige: i'm going to do the same then. the court: it is proper for me, when appropriate, is to bring it up sidebar. i happen -- a lot of times i think it is just closing and it is -- you know, that is why i overrule it, i 4702 do not think it may be some -- now, for the most part -- i mean, totality, it is harmless error what i sustained. yeah, i'm fine with it. you know what, i'll note your objection for the record. mr. paige: thank you. the court: finish up. but i'm not giving you an extension because of the sidebar. i gave it to you during the break and that is it. mr. paige: okay. i'm going to do my best. the court: that is it. in open court before the court and jury.) mr. paige: so they have repeatedly stated in public that they the did not know smoking caused lung cancer, not only r.j. reynolds representatives -- that was their representative on nightline with ted koppel, that was their representative, but other representatives that were in the conspiracy with them. and their defense is, and we are going to get to it now, about even though they are saying that they did not know, that andrew schleider with his background should have known what they are claiming that they did not know. there are some more manipulations, i'll just run through these, these are proctor, they talk 4703 about nicotine manipulation. i would like to spend more time doing it with you, but i'm running out of time. this is an important document where dr. abood was researching back in 1977 when andrew schleider was smoking, other people were smoking, and he was researching how to come up with smoking aids that they did not have yet, medications they did not have yet, and they were concerned because they would be digging their own grave and cut off his funding. and they cut off his funding. and that is again when we talked about carelessness, what is the wrong thing to do versus the right thing to do, helping people like andrew schleider or not. that is not what a reasonable corporation should do in those circumstances knowing the harm they were causing. so 50 years they wasted opportunity after opportunity to help people, to tell the truth, to help families to come forward and do the right thing. and so andrew schleider, when you judge his actions, you have got to remember, he was living in a time that smoking was perceived as normal, sports figures were smoking. reader's digest, they are going to tell you, they are going to come here and i 4704 can tell you, i could spend two hours if i wanted showing you reader's digest after reader's digest, newspaper article after newspaper article if i wanted to do that, and i could make it look like there is a lot, because there is 36 reader's digest articles on smoking and health over a 40-year period of time, over four decades, and they are going to tell you and they have claimed with dr. proctor that because of these reader's digests, he should have known more than they knew. he should have known so much more than these reader's digest -- these reader's digest articles because over 40 years, there was some 36 articles. and that does not compare, it pales in comparison to the message that they were putting out there. i'm your best friend, i'm your lucky strike. try me, i'll never let you down. again, top athletes, willie mays, yogi berra, roger maris, joe louis, jackie robinson. and here are some of the commercials that he saw. so this is when you are judging if he did anything wrong, what was his negligence, this is the society he lived in. mr. bayuk: sorry, object, mr. paige said he saw these commercials. there is no evidence of that. move to strike it. 4705 mr. paige: these are commercials. the court: all right, sustained. mr. paige: these are commercials that were available, that were on tv. these are a few of them. i do not know if these are the exact commercials he saw. dr. proctor said you would have to be living in the woods to miss this advertising campaign that was going on during his lifetime. (video clip played as follows:) singing: light up the lucky, it is light-up time, be happy go lucky, it is light-up time. speaker: what cigarette do you smoke? you will be interested to know how the doctors of america answered that question. doctors in every branch of medicine were asked "what cigarette do you smoke?" speaker: mild. speaker: too fine to filter. speaker: what i would not give, i just wanna -- speaker: ooohhh, he is got luckies. singers: tobacco and taste and too fine to filter, yours in every lucky strike. remember how great cigarettes used to taste. luckies still do. singer: do not miss the fun of smoking. do not 4706 miss the fun of smoking, mildness is a flavor with pall mall. singers: do not miss the fun of smoking. do not miss the fun of smoking. speaker: do you inhale? then you are better off smoking philip morris. and here is how you can prove it. light up a philip morris. take a puff. get a good mouthful of smoke. speaker: friends, here is a wonderful christmas gift for anyone who smokes, because it says merry christmas and happy smoking 200 times. (video clip stopped.) mr. paige: and they spent 2 -- $250 billion, and this is in evidence, the industry spent more in one day than the national clearinghouse spent in one year. in one year. and they talked about psas. and again, i could stand up here and show you 50 psas, one after the other, oh, smoking, this and that, smoking. but you got to put it in perspective. you got to put it in perspective with all the advertising, all the money they spent, and dr. proctor told you it was four to one. so i'm going to show you, if you play it four to one and you play it fairly, what it would look like. (video clip played as follows:) 4707 speaker: here is something else you ought to try, and soon, lucky strike. why? because if you like taste in your cigarette, you will get it with lucky strikes. this is all the taste -- granny: pearl, winston is good smoking. sure wish you could taste it. pearl: i am tasting it, granny. speaker: like father, like son? ms. london: you get a lot to like with a marlboro. barney rubble: hey, i've got a better idea. let us take a winston break. fred flintstone: that is it, winston is the one filter cigarette that delivers flavor 20 times a pack. winston's got that filter flavor. barney rubble: yeah, fred. (video clip stopped.) mr. paige: the us department of health and human services. "philip morris is spending billions of dollars marketing death. we are spending a few hundred thousand marketing life." that is how effective those psas were. that is what the evidence is, that is what they knew, they studied these government reports. so again, we are not scared to discuss the reader's digest or the 4708 psas, but you have to take it in perspective, in the proper perspective in the $250 billion that they were spending, in the youth marketing they were doing when andrew schleider was a kid, the fact that nicotine was addictive and you have to consider all of that, all of that, fairly. and so -- and while all this was going on, you know, smoking was going up and more people were dying. here is andrew. he eventually started trying to quit when he got into his 40s. he loved his daughter. he loved his wife. you know. and he could not quit. and he was -- he was doing the best he could. and that is why i say we admit some responsibility. his failures were failures of an addict, failures of weakness. he was not strong enough. maybe he should have beat his addiction. maybe he should have tried harder. everybody should try harder. he lived in a time when he did not know what he was battling. he did not have medications that they have now to help people who are highly addicted. their failures were failures of greed, failures of intent, and failure of doing things that they should not have done in the first place. so when you compare the fault, you have to look at 4709 andrew and compare that fairly to what they did. it is not a free choice. and you have seen this. and so when you apportion fault, this is what i would consider. again, i'm going to give you a consideration for fault and this is the way i would like you to consider it, but you do not have to. you can do a totally different calculation than i'm going to tell you because it is -- you can just pick a number if you wanted, but i would ask you to kind of base it on something. and what i would say to you is, he was born in 1940. the first 30 years to about 1970 when that first warning went on the pack, which incidentally they read the same warning, but until 1966, it was like a caution, it may be harmful, in 1970, it said cigarettes are dangerous, for the first 30 years when they targeted him as a kid, when he was addicted, when he did not really know anything at all, i would say that they are one hundred percent at fault, that they have to bear full responsibility for that. i would say for the next 30 years, the next half of his life, from 1970 to about 1997, that you have to compare the actions of him, an addict who could have tried harder, who maybe have should have tried harder, who did not understand his addiction, 4710 who failed because of his weakness, not because he did not love his family enough, but because he was not a strong enough addict, and you compare that against these companies, their failures, they are making an addictive product that they know, if they market it to children like andrew schleider, that they will inhale it into their lungs, they will become addicted, it is as addictive as cocaine and heroin, and they will most likely die. and you have to compare those fault -- and there is really three companies, it is brown & williamson, american tobacco, and r.j. reynolds, they are all here, but they are just together. so if you put the four parties together and you divided it equally, 25 percent for the last half of his life, i would ask you then if you do the math, r.j. reynolds is the 87 1/2 percent at fault and andrew schleider is 12 1/2 percent at fall. that is what we suggest to you is fair. you can decide that it is more or less, different, whatever you want, but that is our -- respectfully, what we suggest what could possibly make sense to you-all. there is a concealment claim. and i just want to talk about this quickly. this is a video. mr. philipson: play it? that. 4711 mr. paige: yeah. (video deposition of robert heimann played as follows:) q. throughout your tenure with american, it was not only american's position, but your position that cigarettes were not injurious to health; is that accurate? a. through my tenure? q. yes. a. yes, that is so. q. that is something american tobacco wanted the public to believe; is that correct? a. yes. q. it is a statement that american tobacco placed great dependence on -- a. we issued that statement. of course, we wanted them to believe it. q. as far as you are concerned, a person is justified on relying on that statement? a. yes. (video deposition stopped.) (video clip played a follows:) speaker: truck driver dennis gaines, a grandfather, says he is been smoking for 30 years and is still not convinced cigarettes are 4712 dangerous. speaker: you know they say it causes cancer and heart disease. do you believe that? mr. gaines: no, i do not. i -- i -- not in my heart, i cannot believe it. speaker: you cannot believe that it is bad for you? mr. gaines: no. (video clip stopped.) mr. paige: that was 1987 as you recall. so their statements, they knew people were relying upon them. they were concealing material information with the intent that people would not know what they needed to know. here are things andrew schleider could not have known after -- before and after 1982. 1982 is an important date. does not mean anything to you-all. does not mean anything in the case, it just has legal significance. okay? so when you consider what was omitted from him, what was concealed from him, you have to decide when did he learn this, did he ever learn this, did he learn this before '82 or after '82? i submit to you respectfully he never knew any of this. he never knew, he could not have known that they were manipulating nicotine and 4713 adding chemicals like ammonia and diammonium phosphate. he did not know that it was not a choice, that smoking was not a choice, but it was as addictive as cocaine and heroin or that there were 70 carcinogens. this was all concealed from him that he was inhaling cyanide and arsenic. by smoking he had a fifty percent chance of dying. he probably did not know that until 1997. the statements of these scientists, were giving psychological crutches, doubt, rationales, were all people that were fakes, they were paid for by the tobacco industry to keep addicted smokers smoking their deadly product just like andrew. he did not know those people were frauds. tobacco companies expected him to rely upon their lies to continue smoking their addictive, cancer-causing cigarettes and that all their efforts were planned out carefully and according to their own documents were successful. all that was concealed from them. those were their dirty secret they never let andrew know about. he never knew what he was battling, he never knew. so when you ask whether or not there was a concealment or omission of material information not otherwise known, that he reasonably relied upon, 4714 that was a legal cause of his death, i would respectfully ask that you say yes. you know, andrew schleider, he -- he was addicted. one thing he was not, he was not a liar. he tried to quit, he tried as hard as he could. he believed them and they lied to him. and so we ask that you check that yes. and whether he reasonably relied and it continued after 1982, he lived for another 15 years and did not know what he was battling. and so we ask that you check both of those yes. and the same with the conspiracy, the conspiracy, the lies within the companies, that is important too. all these questions are just as important. there is no question that is not important on this verdict form. they are all important. and now this is the one that we really, really think is important -- well, i just said none are more important than the others. but this one, this is one where we get to claim punitive damages, where we get to punish them for their actions and without this, you know, you have seen the evidence. and you know what happened in this case. and you know that they took advantage of this gentleman 4715 when he was a boy, they concealed stuff from him, and that that is wrong, that the companies should not do that. that is one of the most -- you know, they spent all that money, all that money on advertisements, all that power in congress, when they could have been helping people, helping -- mr. bayuk: your honor, i object, that is not a standard for punitive damages. i move to strike it. the court: it is sustained. mr. paige: okay, so. the court: finish up your closing, mr. paige. mr. paige: was there clear and convincing evidence that punitive damages are warranted? and they may be warranted as punishment to reynolds and as deterrent to others. so you need to see whether or not they need to be punished and whether the other companies who were in on it with them need to see that this is what is going to happen when they act like this. clear and convincing evidence, this is a description, it is more than the greater weight of the evidence, but i would submit to you the evidence has been overwhelming, overwhelming, without a hundred percent certainty that what they 4716 did was wrong, was improper, he relied upon it and it was damaging to him. who ain't for more money? "our basic position in the cigarette controversy is subject to the charge and may be subject to the finding that we are making false or misleading statements to promote the sale of cigarettes." that is what they knew. they knew that all along and they continued to lie, they continued to lie, and they knew the harm they were causing families just like this one. mr. philipson: go ahead and play it? mr. paige: um-hum (affirmative). (video clip played as follows:) speaker: i would like you to rise and those who will be testifying as well with you to rise. would you raise your right hand. do you swear that the testimony you are about to give is the truth, the whole truth, and nothing, but the truth? the witnesses: i do. speaker: please consider yourself to be under oath. mr. waxman: do you or do you not agree with the surgeon general's estimate of over 400,000 smokers dying each year? mr. johnston: i do not agree. 4717 mr. waxman: okay. do you know how many die each year? mr. johnston: i do not know. mr. waxman: okay. they agree that smoking causes lung cancer. do you agree? mr. johnston: it may. mr. waxman: do you know whether it does? mr. johnston: i do not. mr. waxman: the medical experts agree that smoking causes emphysema. do you agree? mr. johnston: it may. mr. waxman: they agree that smoking causes bladder cancer, stroke, and low birth weight. do you agree? mr. johnston: it may be. mr. waxman: mr. tisch, i want to move to you for a moment. in a deposition last year, you were asked whether cigarette smoking causes cancer. your answer was, quote, "i do not believe so." do you stand by that answer today? mr. tisch: i do, sir. mr. waxman: you are the head of a manufacturer of a product that is been accused by the overwhelming scientific community to cause cancer. you do not know? do you have an interest 4718 in finding out? mr. tisch: i do, sir. yes. mr. waxman: and what have you done to pursue that interest? mr. tisch: well, we -- we have looked at the data, and the data that we have been able to see has all been statistical data that has not convinced me that smoking causes death. mr. waxman: mr. campbell, you were also deposed, and you said, quote, "to my knowledge, it has not been proven that cigarette smoking causes cancer." will you ever be convinced? and what evidence are you waiting for? and let us have the microphone passed over. mr. campbell: yes, i may be convinced. we do not know what causes cancer in general right now, so i think that we may find out what causes cancer and we may find out some relationship which has yet to be proven. mr. wyden: let me just begin my questioning on the matter of whether or not nicotine is addictive. let me ask you first, and i'd like to just go down the row, whether each of you believes that nicotine is not addictive. i heard virtually all of you touch on it and just yes or no, do you 4719 believe nicotine is not addictive? mr. campbell: i believe nicotine is not addictive, yes. mr. wyden: mr. johnston? mr. james johnston: congressman, cigarettes and nicotine clearly do not meet the classic definitions of addiction. there is no intoxication. mr. wyden: we will take that as a no. and again, time is short. if you could just -- i think each of you believe nicotine is not addictive. we just would like to have this for the record. mr. taddeo: i do not believe that nicotine or our products are addictive. mr. tisch: i believe nicotine is not addictive. mr. horrigan: i believe that nicotine is not addictive. mr. sandefur: i believe that nicotine is not addictive. mr. donald johnston: and i too believe that nicotine is not addictive. (video clip stopped.) mr. paige: all right. so that pretty much wraps up my part of the closing arguments. and i 4720 do appreciate your patience and your listening to me. and i know that you-all take your job seriously, and we know that you will, and i'm very proud to represent, or it is been my privilege to represent diane and the family who has accepted some responsibility for her husband's addiction to nicotine, and we hope that you will hold r.j. reynolds accountable for their bad acts and award fair compensation and punitive damages. and alex has a couple of things he is going to talk about. thank you very much. mr. alvarez: good morning. the court: no. closing for the defense. mr. alvarez: no, we are breaking up our closing. the court: okay. so -- i'm sorry, i was -- all right. can we go sidebar? mr. alvarez: sure. the court: all right, maybe i understood. before the court at the bench and out of the hearing of the jury.) mr. alvarez: he has rebuttal, but we are breaking up ours. not even ten minutes. 4721 mr. bayuk: i have 13 minutes left of their total time for two hours. the court: he said about ten minutes. mr. alvarez: you added -- you added some time to him for rebuttal -- for this; right? mr. bayuk: we agreed on two hours. you added an extra ten minutes to mr. paige. the court: i did. mr. bayuk: that is two hours and ten minutes. mr. paige has gone 117 minutes, i believe it is 13 minutes total. mr. alvarez: well, i need to do what i've got to do, so we will ask for more time. the court: well, i do not know. let me take that up. why do not you, i mean if you can do it in, you know, just five minutes, if you can close it up. do your best and then i'll -- mr. alvarez: okay. the court: we will give you rebuttal time. mr. bayuk: are we going to break when he is done? the court: no, we are going to go straight through. mr. alvarez: okay. in open 4722 court before the court and jury.) the court: okay, mr. alvarez. mr. alvarez: may it please the court. the court: um-hum (affirmative). mr. alvarez: well, first of all, i hope that this experience is a positive experience. i hope that your jury service is something that you are going to think about as positive, because, you know, it is important for us, we have put a lot of effort into presenting a case and so did they. and one of the things that i think is very, very important is what you learned. and he talked about -- a little bit about that, but we have brought in world-class experts. okay. we just did not pull guys from the street and says, you know, talk about tobacco and health. we brought robert proctor, who is one of the leading authorities on the tobacco industry who made it his life work to study this. we brought in dr. drobes, who is from a major cancer institute here in florida who is an expert in nicotine addiction, who studied it, he is made it his life work. we have brought in dr. villa, who has six board certifications, who treats cancer patients, he is made his life's work. do you see the theme going through there? we 4723 brought you three people whose life work and what they are passionate about, they are an expert in, and that is what we brought. i want to talk to you a little bit about the journey that this family went through because to understand and evaluate their loss, ms. schleider and her daughter's loss, you have got to understand this family, okay? when they were -- in 1966, when they were young people, you know, people who got divorced in 1966, you know, that was a big deal. you know, today it is not a big deal. but, you know, back then, it was a big deal. they started a -- they started a new life together. she was a divorced woman with a small child and he adopted that child and made his child -- loved him as his own. okay? and this is a family that went through some difficult times. some adversity. they overcame that adversity. and think about all the things that they overcame. they overcame an injury where he had to stop working and they had to switch roles and she became the breadwinner and he stayed home with the family. okay? and then they had another adversity, right, and what was that adversity? he became an 4724 alcoholic. and as a family they dealt with it and they overcame that adversity. okay? and what happens when you keep overcoming and overcoming and overcoming things as a couple? what happens? you get closer. you end up getting closer and closer and closer because you have gone through trying experiences together. so let us put that in proper context of what this family was like. and there is a time and there is a place for everything in life. and people live through different stages in their life. when they are a young couple, they are bringing up their kids. they want to make sure that their kids go to school and can they provide for their kids, and they make the focus of their life what? their children. okay. because that is what you are supposed to do. okay? and then kids start to grow up, they start moving out, they go to college, they start making their own lives, right? and what ends up happening to couples at that time, when they start turning 50 years old, what is it? they rekindle, they refocus, they remember what it was that brought them together in the first place. okay? that moment in time when they connected, okay, 4725 they spend more time together. and their plan was to continue to spend time together. and so what did they do? they moved to south florida in 1994 in their 50s. because that is what they wanted to do, they wanted to retire, they wanted to live together, they wanted to enjoy life. diane had plans to grow old with her husband, okay? they wanted to have grandkids. and the -- and spoil their grandkids. and the arguments they wanted to have at that age, at that time, is who loves their grandkids more. that is the arguments that they want to have at that age. and true love is about getting closer as you get older. and there is nothing more beautiful to watch an older couple walking down the street holding each other's hands as they walk down the street. nothing more beautiful than that. and that is part of the fundamental purpose of life that she will never have. because at 55, when they got to that point in life, the next chapter, the glory chapter, her husband was taken away. let us talk about suzanne. i'm sorry, we should -- and that is -- i think that picture encapsulates them. and let us talk a little bit 4726 about suzanne. you know, suzanne had a special relationship with -- with her dad. you know, there is nothing more -- you know, there is -- there is a special bond between a daughter and her dad. okay? there is something about that relationship that is hard to put into words. okay? very hard to put into words. but this one was particularly close because he became mr. mom. and they grew closer than maybe a normal father and daughter would. so i do not think it is unusual that when she got married, she did not want anyone, anyone walking down the aisle with her because that action was a statement saying i miss my dad. the only person that has a right to grab me by the arm and walk me down the aisle is that man. and she will never have the joy, she will never have the joy of watching her grandkids when they see their grandfather come running to him, hugging them, and watching the grandfather caress the grandchild and close his eyes, and that expression of love she will never see. so there is no book where you can go to, there is no law that the judge is going to read you to 4727 say, you know, what is it worth, what is the value of that. you have to decide that. and we are not making a claim for andrew schleider's pain and suffering. that is not the issue here. and that is not what we are claiming. what we are claiming is the loss -- can you put up the -- this is what it is, "what is the total amount of any damages sustained by diane schleider for the loss of companionship and protection and for the mental pain and suffering as a result of andrew schleider's death? and what is the total amount of any damage sustained by suzanne met-" -- sorry, i cannot even pronounce her last name, "for loss of parental companionship, instruction, and guidance and for mental pain and suffering as a result of andrew j. schleider's death?" so there is no -- there is no book, there is no measurement, it is up to you what you think is fair and reasonable, but this was a big loss to this family, to this particular family, to this particularly close family that had to overcome so many things. okay? and so we respectfully -- and by the way, whatever the number is that i suggest to you, you 4728 do not have to agree with it. you could go lower or you can go higher, it is completely within your province to do. so we would suggest that for diane schleider it is 11 million and for the daughter suzanne, it is 7 million. and we think that is fair in light of the evidence and the tremendous loss that this family has suffered. and this is just a suggestion. you can go higher or you can go lower. thank you. mr. paige: okay, thank you, your honor. hello. last time. i know everybody is tired and i apologize and i'm not going to say too much, and i do believe whatever i do say you probably already know, so i'm going to do my best. i have a lot to respond to. if you can just put up the first slide. and i'm going to try to go through some of this if i can, because they said a lot of things. and i do feel that some of the things they said, and i'll 4835 try to be nice about it, was maybe attacks on what we did with our case. i'm not going to raise my voice, i'm not going to get excited like they did, i'm just going to talk to you, but punitive damages are important in this case, it is important that mrs. schleider be recognized as a class member, be compensated, and punitive damages are important and they serve a very important purpose, and we all know that. and you know what, it is true that the damages only go to the plaintiff. that is true. and that is the law. and it is true that in addition to damages that fully compensate the plaintiff, we have to ask for punitive damages. that is the law. and i wish -- you know, she got very excited, as did mr. bayuk. ms. henninger: objection, your honor, to characterizing my closing statement and excitement. the court: i agree, mr. paige. finish up. mr. paige: okay. the 18 million that mr. alvarez asked for for two survivors of somebody who died from a fraud when he was marketed as a child, i wish that we could ask you for more. i wish that i could ask you for 50 million or 100 million or 200 million from an industry that has -- 4836 ms. henninger: objection to -- mr. paige: -- the resources, but we cannot do that. ms. henninger: -- asking from the industry. there is one defendant in this case, your honor. mr. paige: i'm saying we cannot do that. the court: that is fine. mr. paige: we cannot do that. there are laws that we have to abide by, there are parameters that we have to go by, and 11 million and 7 million is fair compensation for what they did to this family, and if we could ask for more for compensatory damages, i assure you that we would have. ms. henninger: objection, your honor, there is no limit on what they can ask for. mr. paige: well, there actually is, your honor. the court: can you clarify it for them? and finish up. mr. paige: there are certain -- well, just -- we can go on. you know, it is funny that they get up here and they -- no, the one with all of the scientists, you do not have that one? 4837 she just got up here and she showed you all the scientists who did all this research, the 6,000 studies, and it is amazing that they are still proud of it, that they are still bragging about all the research that all this money paid for when the judge is going to instruct you that the engle trial, the ctr, funded that research and they were found liable for the fraud. so they still have not -- ms. henninger: objection, misstating the instruction, your honor. mr. paige: well, she will read the instruction to you. the court: okay, i already read that in jury instructions. continue to finish up your closing. mr. paige: you heard from dr. proctor about that research, what the dirty money was used for, how people did not know what it was being used for, the ctr, the tirc, they were all in on it together, they were all part of the fraud. so the fact that they are still, still, to this day, trying to pretend like they -- ms. henninger: objection, to characterizing our defense of the case, your honor. mr. paige: okay, i'll move on. 4838 ms. henninger: motion -- the court: move on, mr. paige. mr. paige: again, they criticize because we brought in evidence, how can i prove to you entitlement to punitive damages if i do not show you the evidence? how can i prove to you how you are going to compare fault if we do not show you the evidence? if we do not show you what they did, if i just read a couple findings to you, would you know what they did? would you know the extent of their fraud? would you be able to compare fault between an addicted smoker and what they did? they know that we have to give you that evidence. ms. henninger: objection, your honor, characterizing what i know or not know. the court: okay, it is overruled, finish up. mr. paige: okay. it was mentioned at least five times that they could not believe -- to you they are telling, oh, i cannot believe they showed you the evidence. we have to, we have a job to do, we would not be doing our job if we did not show you the evidence. real quick, the chest x-rays on the -- they are now telling you that there is no lung cancer, it is not lung cancer, we have not proven it is lung 4839 cancer. these are all the doctors that say it is lung cancer. it is not easy bringing a lawsuit, but these are the doctors who told you, who you have seen the records of, and who have said under oath that they believe it was lung cancer more likely than not. we cannot do anything more than that. the fact whether or not the copd manifested itself, because that is an important issue, there are chest x-rays from 1995 and 1996 that clearly show that he had hyperinflated lungs, flattening of the diaphragm, impressions from the radiologist, the radiologist who -- who testified in this case by deposition said that radiologists do make diagnosis from x-rays. so that is in the record. that is the evidence. and then the next record, this was the record with dr. brooks, significant review of -- chronic cough with occasional yellow sputum. chest x-ray revealed an increased ap diameter. that is in the record. he had symptoms of this. he had signs of it, it was clearly diagnosable. if you get to that question, this whole thing with the lung cancer, whether or not a mass, a mass in the lung is a symptom. a symptom. 4840 ms. henninger: your honor, i -- mr. bayuk: your honor, i object. there is no evidence of that. mr. paige: now they are both objecting. the court: who am i hearing the objection from ms. henninger or? mr. bayuk: well -- the court: i'm sorry, with all due respect. ms. henninger: same objection, your honor, there is no evidence. the court: i'm sorry, because first you were making your -- the objection, i just want to hear from one person. mr. paige: whether -- the court: what is the objection for the record. ms. henninger: there is no evidence that a mass is a symptom of lung cancer in this case. mr. paige: well, we said it was. ms. henninger: we need an expert to say that. the court: if it is part of the testimony, you have got five more minutes, mr. paige. mr. paige: thank you, your honor.