mr. bayuk: okay. please the court, counsel, ms. schleider. good morning, ladies and gentlemen. jurors: good morning. mr. bayuk: i've been up here a few times in front of you now. i guess dating back to about two weeks ago when i gave you the opening statement on behalf of r.j. reynolds. it is my privilege to give you the closing argument on behalf of reynolds 4729 today. i'm going to talk for a little bit and then my partner, ms. henninger, is going to get up and talk to you a little bit more about the various aspects of the verdict form. so i'm pleased to be up here. i have a lot of ground to cover, both in terms of initially some of the stuff that mr. paige talked to you about and then what i think the evidence is going to be or the evidence is that is going to help you answer the questions that y'all are here to decide. very similar to what i told you in opening statement, i made a prediction in opening statement about what type of evidence the plaintiff was going to put on in their case and whether it would be helpful for you in answering the questions that you are going to have to decide when you go back to the jury room. and so i'm going to talk to you a little bit about what the plaintiff has done over the last two weeks in terms of putting on that evidence. but i want to make clear -- before i do that, i want to make sure that we are all clear what this case is about. i told you this in opening statement, it has not changed in the last two weeks. the case is 4730 about mr. schleider, it is about one smoker and one brand of cigarettes, his unfiltered lucky strike cigarettes. it is not about smokers in general. it is not about smokers other than mr. schleider. it is not about historical tobacco company conduct in general. it is about one smoker and one brand of cigarettes, and that is mr. schleider. and you do not have to take my word for it. i told you in opening you would need look no further than the verdict form that you are going to take back to the deliberation room to see, you are not asking -- you are not answering questions about how you feel about tobacco companies or what you think about documents or smokers other than mr. schleider. if i can -- i'm not sure who has got control of this. mr. philipson: i do. mr. bayuk: i think mr. paige showed you some of these verdict form questions on the screen, but you can see, and you will have this when you go back to the verdict -- to the jury room, every question on the verdict form has mr. schleider's made on it. every question except the last one deals with andrew j. schleider. and so that tells you you are answering 4731 questions about mr. schleider. you are answering questions of a very specific, a narrow legal framework, all that has to do with what the evidence has been about mr. schleider. judge zabel read you jury instructions before we started closings. you are going to get a copy of those when you go back to the jury room. they are numbered. and so as i walk through the evidence, walk through some of these issues, i want to give you some instruction numbers that i think are going to help you review the evidence and answer the questions that you-all are here to decide. and so i would encourage you to take notes, i would encourage you to write the instruction numbers down because i think this is what is going to help you. so i want to cover two of the preliminary instructions briefly, kind of set the framework for our walk through the evidence. the first thing i want to show you, i want to remind us, is that the plaintiff is the party with the burden of proof. that is something you have heard since jury selection. it has not changed. every issue on the verdict form is something that the plaintiff bears the burden of proof on. they bear 4732 the burden to bring you evidence to prove their claims. so how it works, if they do not meet their burden, we do not even have an obligation to stand up and do anything, an obligation to cross-examine their witnesses, an obligation to put on evidence. if they do not carry their burden, they lose, that is how the law works, because they brought the lawsuit. so we know they have the burden of proof. this is instruction number 11. you will see in instruction number 2 what they need to do in order to try to meet their burden of proof. and this tells you, "the evidence in the case consists of testimony, exhibits, and facts that may be admitted." that means you have to base your decision on the evidence. you have to rely on the evidence that you heard in trial. you see at the moment, you should not guess about things. you cannot base your decision on guesswork, you cannot base it on speculation. and when i get into what mr. paige talked to you about, you cannot base your decision on attorney argument. you cannot base it on rhetoric to help plaintiff meet their burden. they can only meet it with evidence. 4733 and so what we have as we walk through the verdict form is kind of a very specific framework where you have every question dealing with mr. schleider, the plaintiff bears the burden on every issue and they have to prove that burden, carry that burden with evidence. now, before i get into discussing what mr. paige did -- can i go back to the slide? mr. philipson: sure. mr. bayuk: i want to talk to you about what the evidence does show. and it is really not a close call. i'm going to talk to you for the remainder of my time about class membership issues. and, you know, i'll show you the hurdles we used in opening, but i'm going to focus on the first three questions of the verdict form, and then ms. henninger is going to talk to you about the remainder of the verdict form. but the evidence does show, the evidence when you all go back into the jury room, is that there has been a complete failure by the plaintiff to carry their burden of proof on class membership, on every issue. and so what do i mean. first, there is no 4734 dispute in the evidence that the plaintiff's claims are barred under the rule of law that governs engle cases because they have not proved mr. schleider had copd or lung cancer that manifested by november 21st, 1996. and we are going to walk through that evidence in detail on both copd and lung cancer. second, the plaintiff has brought you no credible expert testimony or evidence to prove that mr. schleider was addicted to nicotine. we are going to discuss dr. drobes. we are going to discuss the testimony from the stand of people like ms. schleider and her daughter and the son's deposition that was read to you and discuss what the plaintiff needs to do to prove addiction and why they have not done that. and then finally, we are going to walk through the evidence on addiction causation. because that is something, if you check your notes, i know all of you took notes during the trial and when you go back there, you will be able to look at those notes. and i would encourage you to look for anyone that the plaintiff put on the stand or they cross-examined that told you that addiction caused mr. schleider's disease or death. please look for 4735 that in your notes. it will not be there because it did not happen during the course of the trial. they have completely failed to carry their burden of proving that to you. so check your notes, please. if you get past class membership, and i submit to you, the evidence, i do not think you will, but we need to cover the other issues in the verdict form. you are going to deal with these issues of concealment and agreement to conceal and so on, and so you need to look at what evidence you have there. this is what ms. henninger is going to talk to you about. but here you cannot rely on generic evidence. that does not help you answer the questions you are here to decide. you need specific evidence about mr. schleider. and the only evidence about that came from people like mrs. schleider and the daughter and the son chris's deposition, which was read to you. and i submit to you, that evidence is inconsistent, it does not make any sense in terms of linking anything up to what the plaintiffs spent the bulk of their time talking about in this trial, which is generic evidence in the case. and so ms. henninger is going to talk to you 4736 more about that. i want to first -- well, i want to briefly, before i get into the specific evidence that will help you, i want to discuss what mr. paige talked to you about in his closing. and i think a good way to think about this is why did the plaintiff take two weeks to try the case? why have we been here for two weeks since opening? i told you in opening much of the evidence that they are going to put on is not going to help you. and they have spent the better part of two weeks re-proving the engle findings. you have been instructed if they meet their burden on class membership, they get the engle findings. they are binding in the case if they meet their burden of proof. they do not have to re-prove them, that is the point of the findings. and so despite that, they have spent most of their time bringing you generic evidence. you heard it in mr. paige's closing because there were a number of documents shown, a number of internal documents, and then mr. paige would follow up with "and andrew schleider was affected by this." that is the evidence that is lacking in the case. that is the evidence they hope that you will overlook that they do not have. 4737 so they try to put on generic evidence to try to make you overlook them not meeting their burden of needing specific evidence to prove their claim. so they spent most of your time bringing you evidence that will not help you. some more specific examples. it was an hour into the plaintiff's opening statement, i told you, before they even mentioned andrew schleider. it was a week into this trial before you heard any evidence -- mr. alvarez: excuse me, judge, i object to them attacking the way we tried our case. the court: well, it is sustained. mr. bayuk: okay. you waited a week before you heard a witness who knew anything about andrew schleider. dr. proctor was on the stand on four different days. you can see just in terms of length of testimony 877 minutes, more than 14 hours of testimony for someone who said i know nothing about mr. schleider, i do not know what he smoked, i do not know what he saw, i do not know where he lived, i do not know what he relied on. i had the opportunity to learn about him. i could have talked to mrs. schleider, i could have read the 4738 depositions in the case, i could have learned whether what i'm here to talk about had any connection or relevance to him, but i did not do that, because that is not what i do. i'm not a biographer of the plaintiff or the smoker. and so they brought someone, and he is a well-credentialed man, he works at stanford, but 14 plus hours of testimony to know nothing about mr. schleider. this is not a generic case. that is generic evidence. and so that is what i mean when i say much of what they did is not going to help you today. more specifically, you know, mr. paige showed you examples about advertising, he said 250 billion dollars in advertising, showed you ads for brands and companies that mr. schleider never smoked. the real story in advertising came from dr. proctor, and it comes from the jury instructions as well. you are going to get an instruction, advertising and marketing of cigarettes was and is legal. cigarettes are advertised like other products, like alcohol, and so on. other product advertising is legal. more specific to this case, there is no evidence mr. schleider started or 4739 continued smoking because of advertising. no evidence he ever chose a brand of cigarettes because of ads. the evidence from dr. proctor is while mr. schleider was smoking, most smokers switched to filtered cigarettes. eventually ninety percent of people were smoking filtered cigarettes. those were the only cigarettes that were being advertised. mr. schleider never switched. in fact, the brands of cigarettes he smoked, unfiltered lucky strikes, they stopped advertising the year that mr. and mrs. schleider got married. he could not have relied on advertising for the brand he was smoking because there were no ads. that is the plaintiff's advertising case in context. the bottom line, you have heard 60 million people quit. advertising did not prevent that. advertising did not prevent people from quitting. that is what the evidence is in the case. the jury instruction you are going to get, this is instruction number 17, this tells you, manufacture, sale, and advertising is legal for cigarettes. you heard a lot from mr. paige about youth marketing. what is the story with youth marketing 4740 in terms of the specific evidence in this case? well, there is no evidence about why mr. schleider started smoking. you-all have heard the testimony from witnesses, there is not even clear evidence of when he started smoking and when he became a regular smoker. there is no evidence, as far as what we know, that he was a regular smoker before he got out of the navy. there is no evidence about what brand he smoked before he was an adult, before he was 24 years old. there is no evidence that he ever saw or relied on any advertising or marketing by r.j. reynolds or anyone else. there is just no evidence of it. that is what you have to work on in this case. you heard some stuff from mr. paige about cigarette design, making cigarettes more addictive. this comes from dr. proctor. cigarettes were inhalable decades before reynolds even made a cigarette in 1913. inhalability was not a secret. cigarettes were all -- have been known to be dangerous and addictive before reynolds ever made a cigarette, back into the 1800s. dr. proctor also told you there is less nicotine in cigarette tobacco than in the nicotine 4741 plant growing in the field and in natural tobacco. nicotine is actually removed from commercial cigarettes, there is less nicotine in those. additives that -- mr. paige discussed additives and ammonia. dr. proctor told you there is no evidence that those make cigarettes more dangerous or more addictive than cigarettes without additives or roll-your-own cigarettes. this is the plaintiff's cigarette design case in context. it just does not -- what mr. paige told you does not add up with what their witness said on the stand. mr. paige has said a lot in this trial about things like polonium-210, arsenic, cyanide, formaldehyde. he said it in closing today. there is no evidence from dr. proctor, the evidence y'all have, there is no evidence those things are added to cigarettes. the evidence is those are either naturally occurring in the environment and go on the tobacco plant or it is a natural process from when you burn anything. if you burn lettuce, you will produce formaldehyde. it is the natural burning of organic material. it is not added by companies, it is there by nature, not by design or manufacturing. moreover, these ingredients or these 4742 carcinogens have been long reported, long known in the public, and been reported by reynolds to the surgeon general back in the '60s and '70s. they were not a secret. that is what dr. proctor admitted on the stand and that is what dr. figlar admitted when the plaintiff played his deposition for you-all. the bottom line, the presence of carcinogens in cigarette smoking and cigarettes has not been a secret. that is what the real story is. important because you heard about the engle findings. we know the plaintiff has the burden of proof. they cannot meet their burden of proof by re-proving the engle finding. this is another way to say they need to bring you specific evidence that helps you answer the claims you are here to decide. and so i'm going to talk to you about the specific evidence that will help you. the first thing i want to show you is something i showed you in opening, it is a board. thank you. it is a board that i -- may i set up the easel, your honor? a board that i told you in opening statement 4743 that i expected the evidence would show and would be all of the information that you would need to answer every question on the verdict form. and this evidence has come in. and what i told you in opening is still true. each of those four facts are uncontroverted, they are in evidence, and they will answer every question when you go back to the jury room that you need to decide. i'm going to talk to you for the rest of my time about the third and fourth points. mr. schleider had the ability to quit smoking and prevent his own death, and that his claims are legally barred because they did not manifest in time, because he did not have diseases caused by smoking that manifested under the black letter rule that we have governing engle, the prerequisite that the plaintiff must prove, his claims are barred. ms. henninger is going to talk to you about points 1 and 2 when she gets up. so this is the evidence that is going to be helpful for you. we are going to get into more detail. you have seen this slide, i showed this to you in opening, you have heard a number of times that mrs. schleider has admitted fault for her husband. and more simply broken down, she said he 4744 did not try hard enough or often enough to quit. now, mr. paige told you during his closing he tried as hard as he could, and then he said but he admits fault because he did not try as hard as he could. this is what the evidence is. this comes from the plaintiff in the case, it comes from mrs. schleider. this is key evidence that will help you answer every question in class membership and the other questions on the verdict form. mr. paige says it does not come into class membership, it does not relate. that is actually not right. you can use it to answer every question in class membership and every other question if you get there. so this is key evidence. i'm going to discuss it as we walk through the class membership issues. one thing that is very important, these engle findings, you have to put them out of your mind while we consider class membership. you have been told the findings, but you cannot consider them. this is instruction number 14 in your instructions. you have to basically forget about them when you are deciding class membership. they cannot be used to meet plaintiff's burden on that issue. and so these questions, the first three 4745 questions on the verdict form are the class membership questions. the first one deals with lung cancer. the second one copd. and then the third one is lung cancer in relation to a death. all of them have addiction and addiction causation components. i'm going to discuss them in order and then i will explain the order in which you answer them before. but these are the questions i'm going to talk about. i discussed these with you in opening. these illustrate the burden that the plaintiff has to prove class membership. there are multiple components they have to bring you evidence on in order to even be a member of the engle class. they deal with medical issues, they deal with addiction and addiction causation. and i think when you see the evidence that we are going to walk through, the only conclusion, you can draw from that evidence is they have failed to carry their burden. and i'm going to show you why, it is not just me saying it, i'm going to tell you what the evidence is that is come in. so i want to start with the first hurdle, medical causation, the plaintiff must prove that mr. schleider had lung cancer caused by smoking, 4746 that it was a legal cause of his death. you heard expert testimony on this. you heard from dr. villa. you heard from dr. brooks. you have a number of medical records in evidence, you have seen some of the records multiple times. i'm sure you have those in your notes. the plaintiff carries the burden to prove these issues. they have to prove to you that mr. schleider had lung cancer caused by smoking and it caused his death. what did the experts tell you about that? the experts told you, first of all, we do not have a lot of information. we are missing a lot of information that could help decide this issue. that is something you have to determine, whether you think plaintiff has enough evidence to meet their burden on this issue. they told you we do not have x-rays, we do not have cts or mris, we do not have any pathology tissue from mr. schleider's lung. there is no pathology slides, no autopsy, no test done to determine the cause of mr. schleider's cancer, and no determination by any of his treaters that his cancer was caused by smoking. now, plaintiff told you in their closing, you know, dr. brooks said i think more likely than not 4747 the cancer was caused by smoking, and that is fine. dr. brooks did say that. he told you a lot of stuff from the stand. but he told you that in context of there are a number of other small cell cancers that it could have been. there are a number of other small cell lung cancers that are not causing by smoking. we do not have any tissue from the lung and so we make an assumption that this is a lung cancer. dr. villa basically corroborated that, said a very similar thing, you cannot diagnose lung cancer without tissue from the tumor in the lung. so you have admissions from the experts, you all are the ones that decide whether the plaintiff met their burden. you all are the ones that have to weigh that evidence. that is up to you, it is not up to an expert, that is your decision when you go back there. but what did dr. villa tell you on this issue? he told you on the appearance on that chest x-ray, that 11/21/96 chest x-ray, there are many things that can appear on x-ray or ct to be cancer, but you cannot say it is cancer until you actually look at it under a microscope, look at it pathologically. he told you just because there is 4748 a nodule in the lung, there is no definitive diagnosis of lung cancer until there is tissue confirmation, and unless you have that tissue, you cannot diagnose it correctly. this question and answer from my cross-examination of him, "because we do not have any tissue from mr. schleider's nodule in his lung, you cannot diagnose pathologically that nodule as lung cancer, can you?" and he said, "that is true." that is true. this is the plaintiff's witness, the plaintiff's first medical -- their only medical expert who came and talked to you a week ago. this is what he said from the stand i think last monday. there was also, i said you will have medical records in evidence. mr. paige said the medical records, the pathology reports prove that this was lung cancer. this is what the pathology reports show. small cell carcinoma. the only pathology that was taken was from the liver. none of them say lung cancer. dr. villa admitted it. dr. brooks admitted it. that is just the evidence you-all have. and so you have to decide whether the plaintiff has met their burden of proof on that 4749 issue. i want to focus a lot of time on another component of the medicine, manifestation. this is a key issue in the case. you have heard this issue described over the last two weeks. you have heard examinations and crosses discussing symptoms mr. schleider may have had. you have heard this date, november 21st, 1996, and you have heard the legal significance or you have heard that it does have legal significance. this is, as i said, a black-letter, absolute rule of law that the plaintiff has to prove with evidence in order to prove class membership. there is no dispute about that. the instructions tell you. this is instruction number 7 in your instructions. this is the first time that you-all are instructed what the term "manifest" means. you have heard some objections and some debate about it. you-all have a definition now of what it means. you have a legal instruction of what manifested means. and this is that instruction. this is -- may be the most important instruction in the packet you are going to get, it is number 10. number 10, the manifestation instruction. they have to prove it manifested by november 21st, 4750 '96. i want to highlight the third sentence or the third paragraph. "a disease or medical condition manifests when it becomes diagnosable through evaluation of the smoker's symptoms." symptoms. now, it was suggested to you that a 1 centimeter nodule in the lung is a symptom. does that make any sense to you? is that a symptom? you have to think about that. think about the argument that you heard from the plaintiff in closing to try to satisfy this standard. i'm going to show you what the evidence is. i'm going to show you what the evidence is because that is what you have to base your decision on. the manifestation issue relates to two conditions, copd or lung cancer. i'm going to focus on copd first and then walk through lung cancer. the first thing i want to point out, the plaintiff is making no claim for lung cancer {sic}. that is clear in your instructions. that is instruction number 13. ms. henninger: copd. mr. bayuk: no claim -- ms. henninger: copd. you said lung cancer. 4751 mr. bayuk: i'm sorry. copd. the plaintiff is not claiming damages for copd. they are not -- you are not going to be asked to award damages for copd. now, you know what the evidence is. only dr. brooks is the doctor that came here and talked about copd. he talked to you about it from the stand. and we are going to talk about what he said. and i think that you will find, i submit that you will find the evidence is that mr. schleider more likely than not did not have copd. and we are going to look at that evidence. but think about the fact that plaintiff is not claiming anything for this. do not you think if mr. schleider actually had copd, they would claim damages for it? mr. alvarez: objection, judge, inappropriate. the court: well. it is sustained. mr. bayuk: when you look at the evidence on copd, think about the fact that plaintiff is not claiming any damages for it. mr. alvarez: judge, you just sustained my objection. he did it again. mr. bayuk: it is a jury instruction. the court: well, show the jury instruction. 4752 mr. bayuk: the jury instruction -- the jury instruction is as i stated, the plaintiff is not seeking damages for copd. so what was the evidence on that? can we go back to the projector? what was the evidence. you heard from dr. brooks. and he had a board over there like where that board is now with various reasons that he walked through, what he looked at in the records, explained to you why mr. schleider did not have copd. he walked through each of these. the first thing was no symptoms, and he told you he reviewed the record to look for symptoms of copd, and he did not find anything that was attributable to mr. schleider having copd. now, mr. paige, during his closing, said that dr. brooks on cross-examination withheld a record and disclosed for the first time that there was a second medical record that said chronic cough. he showed you some parts of testimony about that and said it was not disclosed at all until cross-examination. i want to show you just one part of the direct examination. this is before mr. paige's cross. can i have the elmo again, please? 4753 i was asking him about a december 13th record that said usual chronic cough? he said, "yes, i know that record." i asked him, "did you see any symptoms before that record evidencing copd?" he said, "no." then i asked him at line 7, "did you see any records after this that note a usual chronic cough?" and he said, "i believe it was mentioned in a second opinion oncology report somewhere, yes." and then he told me he did not relate that to copd. so the insinuation that he did not -- he hid a medical record until cross-examination is simply not true. now, this is very similar, you remember when dr. castro was on the stand yesterday and mr. paige was asking him did not this son report this, did not dennis schleider say this, that his dad said he could not quit, without showing a deposition, and i had to show dr. castro the deposition where dennis schleider was asked about that and gave the real answer. so you have to think about these representations that are being made to you about what people said. this is the evidence. there is 4754 no hiding of a record from y'all. dr. brooks scoured the record and explained to you why he did not find anything symptom-wise that would be consistent with copd. then he went to another line of evidence. i'm sorry, can i have the slides back? mr. philipson: sure. mr. bayuk: he went to another line of evidence and explained to you the gold standard, the only standard for diagnosing copd, pulmonary function testing. it is the standard now, and in response to one of y'all's questions, it was the standard back in 1995, same time mr. schleider is alleged to have had copd, that was the standard back then, the only way to diagnose. the plaintiff's only evidence, you have all the medical records, the only records that say copd, say impression, copd, two chest x-rays. you are going to have a lot of records. i encourage you to look through them and see if you find any record that says copd or any symptoms consistent with copd, because you will not find them. you have two records. and so dr. brooks scoured the record looking for evidence of a pft or any evidence that one was 4755 even considered or ordered for mr. schleider. and he told you there was none, he told you there was no evidence. so no pft. the next line of evidence, he was never treated for copd. and that makes sense because dr. brooks told you he never had any symptoms of copd. so if you do not have any symptoms of copd, you would never be treated for copd. this came from mrs. schleider on the witness stand before you-all. he was never treated, never had any medications, inhalers for copd. that is what the evidence is. and so dr. brooks explained this line of evidence to you. and i do want to make a point, on the prior slide you heard from dr. raiford. dr. raiford was a radiologist, he is somebody who was also incidentally an engle plaintiff himself. he is the guy who said i did the 11/21/96 chest x-ray, and i put impression, copd, because of this hyperinflation of the lungs. now, dr. raiford told you he never saw mr. schleider. he was in a different part of florida when he reviewed the medical record. he never saw mr. schleider, did not know anything about him, did not even know he was a smoker. in fact, he 4756 was asked do you have any opinions on the cause of mr. schleider, if he had copd the cause of that? he said i do not know anything about it. i have no opinion on cause because i do not even know mr. schleider. he is never been in front of me. i was not even in the keys when i read the medical record, when i read the chest x-ray. that is the testimony you have. it is undisputed by both this radiologist, this non-board certified radiologist, and dr. brooks that you cannot diagnose copd based on a chest x-ray. that is undisputed. the plaintiffs have never refuted it, they have no contrary evidence in the case. check your notes, you will not find it. the only evidence is you can only have copd based on a pft. so we know mr. schleider was not treated. we know that mr. paige showed you some of these records, showed you the full -- i encourage you to find these records in evidence, please. please. and look through them to see if there are any symptoms noted for copd, any report of copd, because you will not find it. and dr. brooks explained to you the particular significance of this anesthesia preop form. because it is critical 4757 if you are going to undergo surgery to clear a patient to make sure their lungs are healthy enough to undergo anesthesia. that is critical as a pulmonologist. as a pulmonary physician he has cleared patients for anesthesiologists a number of times and you have to assess things like copd. there was no report on this record when mr. schleider underwent anesthesia of any problem in his lungs, ever. the next line of evidence, he explained to you copd is defined as two conditions, chronic bronchitis and emphysema. neither of those terms are found in any record or any deposition in the case. you will not find them. there was never a diagnosis of either of those conditions. then maybe the most telling, because the plaintiff's case on copd is based, as i said, on two chest x-rays, two chest x-rays. and there, not surprisingly, are a number of subsequent chest x-rays and ct scans. and dr. brooks walked you through each one of those chronologically later in 1996, throughout 1997, and explained each one to you that every single one found no abnormality, no lung disease that would be consistent with copd, not even the 4758 symptoms, the hyperinflation, the flattening of the diaphragm, nothing was ever found or reported. and that is unusual, because dr. brooks said copd is a progressive disease, it gets worse over time. it does not reverse, it gets worse. so if you can see it in 1995, in 1996 changes consistent with it, you are going to see it in 1997. that is what he told you. and this is the evidence you have. please find these records and see if there is anything that leads you to believe copd on any of these dates because you will not find it. that is simply the evidence in the case. it is undisputed. dr. brooks, as a pulmonologist board certified for 25 years, the only person you heard from who specializes in diagnosing and treating copd. the only person. there was some discussion about mr. schleider's pharmacy log and methylprednisolone. and actually the question i'm directing you to and maybe you have it in your notes, was any of those medications used in mr. schleider's case for copd. not whether they can be used. were they prescribed to him for copd. and dr. brooks said no, they were prescribed for his back pain. remember he walked through the issue from the 4759 cleveland clinic with the leg weakness and the fatigue and the bedrest and joint pain and all the pain medications and muscle relaxers, dr. brooks said in my experience, methylprednisolone can be prescribed for a thousand things. in this case, with copd it is not even used as a first line treatment, it is used down the road only after bronchodilators are used. you would never confuse it in this case for being used for copd. that is what the actual testimony was. that is what the evidence was. so putting all this together, the plaintiff has two x-ray reports. they do not even note that mr. schleider is a smoker on those reports. they do not know of any symptoms on those reports. you have all of the rest of this in evidence. and you have dr. brooks' testimony, unrefuted, even on cross-examination by mr. paige, that in his opinion and based on the evidence, mr. schleider did not have copd. you cannot say that he had it. that is the evidence before you and there is no dispute about it. there is no contrary evidence. so that alone should answer your question. if you find that he does have copd, if you were to find that, then there is still an issue 4760 with manifestation. because remember the jury instruction, it has to be diagnosable through symptoms. there is no evidence in the record that mr. schleider ever had any symptoms. he was never treated. there are no symptoms ever linked up with copd at any time. so even if you found that he had it, there is no evidence that it manifested. but even if you find that he had it and that it manifested in time, the plaintiff has no evidence that it was caused by smoking. they did not put on any witness to talk about copd and smoking. i told you dr. raiford said i did not know mr. schleider, i have no idea what he did, i cannot tell you whether it was caused by smoking or not because i do not even know if he was a smoker. that is the evidence that you have before you. so for those three reasons, he did not have it, that it did not manifest by november 21st because there were never symptoms of it, and then even if you find that, the plaintiff has not carried their burden of showing that it was caused by smoking. the plaintiff has failed to carry their burden of proof on copd, they have overwhelmingly failed to carry the burden of proof. 4761 you heard a lot about dr. stegall. dr. stegall was one of mr. schleider's primary care physicians, family practice doctors, practiced down in the keys, this is something we read to you-all yesterday, an interrogatory response served by the plaintiff under oath where the plaintiff was asked tell us every person you know of that can speak to the manifestation and diagnosis of both copd and emphysema -- or copd and lung cancer. tell us every person. and the only person the plaintiff told us about was this physician, dr. stegall, down in the keys, they said she diagnosed both the copd and the lung cancer, they give the date of diagnosis for copd of 8/28/95, but they did not bring her here to testify to you. mr. alvarez: objection, judge, commenting on witnesses that did not testify. they could have called whoever they wanted to testify too. the court: sustained. mr. bayuk: you are not going to have any evidence from dr. stegall, you do not have any of her medical records, you do not have her saying he did have copd. this is someone who is in the control of the plaintiff not of the -- mr. alvarez: objection, judge, that a doctor 4762 is under the control of the plaintiffs. mr. bayuk: that is -- the court: all right. yeah, no, i'm going to overrule it. mr. bayuk: think about what evidence you have and what evidence you do not have. and i submit to you the plaintiff cannot carry their burden on copd and it is not even close. now, you see they also listed dr. stegall as having knowledge of lung cancer. that is the second issue i want to talk about. because lung cancer manifestation is also critical for the plaintiff to prove to you in order to move forward in the case. and i submit to you they cannot do it. so we start with dr. stegall. they said she is the only person who can speak to diagnosis and manifestation of lung cancer. and you have not heard from her. mr. alvarez: objection, that is not what it says. it does not say she is the only person. the court: all right. mr. bayuk: all right, it says -- the court: sustained. mr. bayuk: -- state all people, the date -- state all smoking-related injuries, illnesses, 4763 diseases, or conditions from which the decedent has ever suffered, the date that each such alleged smoking-related illness, injury, disease, or medical condition first manifested itself, the day it was first diagnosed, state the name and address of the persons who will testify as to such manifestation and the physicians or healthcare providers who made such diagnosis. it asked about everyone who knows anything about these conditions. this is the only person that they listed and you have not heard from her, that is the evidence. that is the evidence you do not have. and so moving beyond this, the evidence is clear, like the copd, they have completely failed to carry their burden of proof on lung cancer. and it is not close. dr. brooks and dr. villa testified. dr. villa actually destroys the plaintiff's case on this, their own expert. and i'm going to show you the testimony, like mr. paige. i'm not going to summarize it for you, i'm going to show you the transcript, i'm going to show you what he says. mr. alvarez: excuse me, i object to him continuous attacking us on how we presented our case. 4764 the court: all right. sustained. mr. bayuk: i'm going to show you the transcript cites, i'm going to show you the actual testimony from dr. villa, but first i want to remind you the manifestation instruction. they have to prove that mr. schleider had symptoms of lung cancer that made the lung cancer diagnosable as of november 21st, 1996. they had to prove that he had symptoms that would make a doctor say you have lung cancer on that date, by that date. that is what they have to prove. and so what did -- what did the evidence show? well, both physicians, dr. villa and dr. brooks spoke about this and said all of the records reviewed, there were no symptoms of lung cancer or liver metastases as of november 21st, 1996. undisputed by both experts. but it gets -- it gets clearer than that. dr. villa puts the exclamation point on this. this is one of the plaintiff's slides they used in opening to show the symptoms that they were going to prove. dr. villa shot every single symptom down, said they are nonspecific, you would not worry about it, not high on the differential diagnosis for lung cancer. it gets better. he said, on cross-examination, "there are no specific symptoms 4765 that could be related to lung cancer." based on all of the records he reviewed, no symptoms. it gets better than that. "none of the symptoms were suggestive or consistent with a 1 centimeter lesion." none. no symptoms. "he was asymptomatic for liver lesions as well?" "more likely than not, that is correct." now, you saw, mr. paige told you, dr. villa said oh, fatigue, fatigue was a symptom. this is what dr. villa admitted on cross-examination. asymptomatic for liver lesions. and then it gets better than that. because this is the actual jury instruction y'all have to decide the case on. and look at the question. "you did not see any support in any of the records, did you, sir, for having any symptoms related to either the lung nodule or the liver lesions?" he said, "that is true. no symptoms." then i asked him, "you certainly did not see any symptoms that would have allowed mr. schleider's doctors to diagnose cancer based on the symptoms; right?" and he said, "that is correct." no symptoms that could have been used to 4766 diagnose cancer. look at the jury instruction. a disease or medical condition manifests when it becomes diagnosable through the smoker's symptoms. dr. villa essentially answered the jury instruction by telling you they do not have that evidence. this alone bars the plaintiff's case. this alone prevents them from meeting their burden of proof through their own expert. dr. villa went on, because mr. paige said fatigue is the issue. okay, you throw out weight loss, throw out the cough. dr. villa latched onto fatigue. so i asked him about fatigue on cross-examination, this is what he said, "not to lose the point of the question, though, dr. villa, when someone tells you they are fatigued, the first ten things that you would think of would not be lung cancer." he said, "that is true." i said "maybe more; right?" he said, "it is not high on the differential diagnosis." he is already told you there is no symptoms at all. he is already told you no doctor could ever diagnose it based on what is reported. now, he is telling you even with fatigue, you would not even 4767 think about lung cancer. that is what his testimony was on fatigue. you do not need to get any further than this. this is their expert who they brought to satisfy their burden tanking their case on manifestation. clear admissions that match up exactly with the jury instruction. that is all you need to consider. then dr. brooks went on to talk about fatigue and he actually explained to you what the fatigue would have been related to, to mr. schleider's chronic pain, to his use of pain medication for his legs and back pain injury. dr. villa did not even make an effort to do that. so that is the evidence that you have before you and i submit to you it is overwhelming, it is undisputed. it is undisputed evidence that the plaintiff cannot get around. there is a complete failure to prove their medical case. and that ends the case. i'm going to discuss if you get further, i do not think you will based on the evidence, but i need to discuss it just to do my job so i want to discuss the next hurdle, addiction. you heard testimony about addiction from dr. drobes and dr. castro. both experts agreed, as mr. paige said, any smoker can quit. both experts agree that 4768 even half, half of people that smoke every day, like mr. schleider, would not even be addicted under the dsm. you know, the presentation you heard earlier may have made you think everyone is addicted, nobody can quit, every smoker who smokes regularly is addicted. but this is the testimony from the witness stand. even dr. drobes admitted it. this is on cross-examination. there are a number of other reasons why people that smoke smoke other than nicotine addiction. this is the plaintiff's witness. people can smoke for social reasons or because the taste -- they enjoy the taste or the smell, it relieves stress and so on. this is the plaintiff's witness telling you this. dr. castro agreed with it because this is what is -- this is what is known in science. this is the evidence that is before you. not that everybody is addicted, not that people cannot quit. that is not the evidence in the case. you have to base your verdict on evidence, not argument that you hear in closing. that is what you will have back in the jury room. the first time that anyone diagnosed mr. schleider as addicted was in this courtroom 17 4769 years after he passed away. now, i know mr. paige showed you a medical record that said tobacco use disorder. and, you know, dr. -- both doctors that came and talked to you, dr. castro and drobes, said they used the dsm-5, they talked to you about that. and they said it came out in may of 2013 that is the first time that term came out, tobacco use disorder, that is what the evidence is. there was no term, the medical record he showed you, that was not even a diagnosis back in 1996 or '97 when that record was from. that term did not even exist in the dsm. and do not you think that they thought if that was evidence of addiction, they would have had their expert talk about that record or they would have cross-examined dr. castro on that record? now because they know how dr. castro went and they know how dr. drobes went, now they are showing it to you in closing to try to prove addiction that way. mr. alvarez: objection, judge, he continues to attack the attorneys and the way that we presented our case. mr. bayuk: i can discuss what the evidence is. the court: right. 4770 mr. alvarez: he can attack what the evidence is, he just cannot attack us. the court: all right, continue with your closing. mr. bayuk: thank you. so you saw that record for the first time in closing. you did not even see it during the case. you saw it during closing and then after dr. drobes got off the stand, then they put on the daughter, suzanne, then mrs. schleider testified, and they resorted to asking the family members if they would think mr. schleider was addicted. well, why would they do that? why would they ask the family members? mr. alvarez: objection, judge, again, he cannot attack us like that, why would we do something. that is inappropriate. the court: thank you. as i said to mr. bayuk -- mr. bayuk: i'll move on. the court: -- let us avoid the speaking objections, just give me a legal objection. you can move on. mr. bayuk: thank you. so let us get to dr. drobes, because mr. paige, 4771 i was going to read it to you, but he read it for me, there is an instruction on the believability of witnesses, both lay witnesses and experts. and so that is something, it is instruction number 3 in your instructions. i encourage you to read it when you go back to the jury room. they said they found a world-renowned nicotine scientist. well, what did dr. drobes tell you? he does not have a clinical practice, he is a researcher in tampa. he does not treat patients. he has -- does not diagnose anyone with addiction. he does not use the dsm outside of the courtroom. and he said much of what he did in court he does not do as a matter of what he does outside. this is not what he does for a living. this is who they brought you to diagnose addiction. they asked dr. castro a lot of questions about university of miami smoking cessation clinic, how good it is, who works there, how they help smokers. dr. castro told you that is five miles down the road, that is ten minutes away. they did not bring anyone from there. they brought dr. drobes from his research lab where he does not diagnose anyone and tried to come in and have him use the dsm with you all. 4772 and you wonder why they brought him because as you saw yesterday, the plaintiffs served a sworn interrogatory, a sworn response saying i'm not qualified to diagnose addiction, i'm not qualified to give an opinion on addiction, it is a medical condition. they asked her from the stand anyway if she thought he was addicted, so we had to publish this yesterday to say under oath her answer was i cannot say if someone is addicted or not. you need an expert to say that. and she said you need an expert doctor, a medical doctor. there is no medical doctor that testified for the plaintiff. that is what you have to consider when you are weighing whether they met their burden on this hurdle, on the addiction hurdle. dr. drobes also told you his definition of addiction changes daily. it changes depending on what day you ask him. and then he said, although he purported to use the dsm, spent time with you-all walking through the criteria, ultimately he said i just need to know if they smoked ten cigarettes a day for two years. and then when he was talking about mr. schleider he said all i need to know is that he smoked daily. he diagnosed mr. schleider as 4773 addicted before mr. schleider turned 20 when we know nothing about him. he said i presume he was smoking daily, i do not have any evidence of that, but i presume he was and so he would have been addicted at that time. so they tried to use the dsm, then ultimately it came out all he needs to know is if you smoke every day. that is not the science, that is not what the evidence is in front of you. that is who they brought you. on cross-examination, he told you the dsm-5 was the gold standard. remember i said do not you agree with that. he said i've never used the term "gold standard" and then we had to break out the deposition, the impeachment. and the first line was it is the gold standard. we had to impeach him a number of times. you know, that is something you can consider when you are weighing the believability of witnesses, did the plaintiff have to impeach our experts? did they have to trot back and forth with deposition and trial transcripts for their changed testimony or did you see that more often from us? that is something you can consider when you think about that instruction, that changed testimony. 4774 more to the point about dr. drobes's use of the dsm, you remember these discussions where he had these meetings with plaintiff's lawyers, i do not care if they were 20 minutes or 30 minutes, mr. paige told dr. drobes he had to use some criteria, he could not just come in and pull an opinion out of his hat. if he was going to come in and testify and have it admissible, he actually had to try to use scientific criteria and so he was told he had to use the dsm-5. and then he was told that the dsm-5 requires you to have six or more criteria in order to meet addiction. that is what the plaintiff's lawyers told him he had to do to come testify. so he used a book he never uses in a way he never uses it and came in and tried to cobble together an explanation for you and then ultimately said i just need to know that they smoke every day, that is all i need to know. so you have to think about that. and then you have to wonder if he really applied it correctly. you are going to have it in evidence, the criteria. dr. castro explained this threshold criteria to you, the threshold -- not part of the 11, but the first sentence that said 4775 you need a clinically-significant impairment or distress. it is not enough to check off the 1 through 11, it has to be significant and apparent. dr. drobes ignored that criteria. it is not surprising because he does not use the book outside the courtroom. now, think about that when you have it in evidence if you want to look at it. think about whether he applied it the right way. you know, say what you want about dr. castro, mr. paige i guess does not like him. mr. alvarez: objection, judge. mr. bayuk: i'll withdraw it. the court: all right. mr. bayuk: mr. paige, this was the only cross-examination in the whole trial that lasted longer than the direct exam. the whole trial, any witness, lasted longer than my direct examination. you know, dr. castro is local, he came from miami. he works at the medical school. he works in the department of psychiatry. he treats patients for smoking every week. he is someone who does use the dsm-5 in his day job and assesses nicotine addiction in his day job. he is a clinician. and he told you these things. he did not meet the criteria. he did not lose control 4776 over his behavior. the evidence on that is overwhelming again, if we are going to define ourselves to what is evidence and what -- even the plaintiff told their expert you have to use scientific criteria, the only evidence in front of you is as it was correctly applied, mr. schleider did not meet the criteria. that is up to you to see whether the plaintiff carried their burden. final hurdle of class membership, addiction causation. this is -- even if mrs. schleider was addicted, did addiction drive him to smoke until he got a disease and died. that is how you can think about this. was mr. schleider rendered powerless. could he not change the outcome. mr. alvarez: objection, that is not the standard. that is not the standard. mr. bayuk: this is argument. this is argument. the court: it is overruled. mr. bayuk: you are going to get an instruction, it is going to tell you that addiction had to be the but-for cause of mr. schleider's death, the but-for cause. without the addiction, he would not have smoked for some other reason or 4777 some reason absent addiction and got a disease, if his disease was caused by smoking, if you find that. that is what the plaintiff has to prove. and so let us look at the evidence on that. first, this is the legal cause instruction. it has to be a but-for cause. both experts, anyone can quit. addicted or not addicted, heavy smoker, light smoker, anyone can change their behavior. that is what we know from the science. dr. drobes on cross-examination, millions and millions of people, addicted, heavily addicted people have quit, of course. of course, they have. you have heard more quit stats from all three of the experts. millions of people quitting at the same time mr. schleider is continuing to smoke, through the '50s, '60s, '70s. ninety percent of them with no assistance at all, no chantix or medication. 90 percent quit on their own, 5,000 people every day quitting, the same time mr. schleider is smoking. the same time that dr. proctor's testimony about these documents, and the campaign of doubt, and the conspiracy is going on, 5,000 people quitting every day, tens of millions of people quitting in a span of years. millions of people quitting. dr. proctor, more quitting by the millions. 4778 so is mr. schleider different? was he different than the 60 million people that quit? well, his cigarettes were not more addictive, dr. proctor told you that. his brain was not affected any differently. he was not exposed to any different advertising than the people who quit. not exposed to tobacco company statements different than people who quit. he had not smoked more than the people who quit and he did not start earlier than people who quit. so why was he different? what do we know about him? well, first we know the plaintiff admits he could have quit, he did not try hard enough to quit, he did not try often enough to quit, and those failures to quit were a cause of his death. that is the plaintiff's admission. that is what it means. what more can it mean? he had the ability to quit. he had the responsibility to quit. he could have been successful in a time to prevent his own death. why would you ever admit that he is at fault if he could not quit, if he could not change the outcome? why would you ever admit that? you would not. you would not admit that if you did not have control over your behavior. 4779 and what do we know from the testimony in the case? dr. castro said these are the traits that he looks for in people when he is going to motivate them, he is going to use these traits for people to change their behavior, decisive, strong-willed, methodical, made up his own mind. how he related to his family about issues. and it was clear from the description from the family he was someone who made up his own mind. no one was going to tell him what to do. mrs. schleider said we did not have that kind of relationship. i could not tell him what to do. in terms of quitting she said, he had to quit on his own, it was up to him. dr. castro and dr. drobes both said motivation is key if you are going to quit smoking. it is key when you are looking at someone's behavior change. you do not need to look any further than mr. schleider's ability to quit another addictive behavior and contrast it with his efforts to quit. this has come in clearly, it is all in evidence through testimony, you have medical records discussing alcohol use issues. i mean, look at the contrast. dr. castro laid out this contrast, and then i expected with the length of the cross of him, there would be some discussion of this. 4780 and remember when i got up, my last question to him on the redirect yesterday was mr. paige asked you a lot of questions about addiction. he did not ask you any questions about addiction causing this man's disease or death, and your opinions about smoking versus drinking. now, you think about why -- there were no questions about that. because what can they say? this is the clearest evidence through the records and the evidence we have that when he wanted to change his behavior and was motivated to change his behavior, he could. dr. castro told you alcohol addiction is more severe than nicotine, that is what he sees in his patients, and someone who can quit drinking can quit drinking {sic} and we know again, the plaintiff acknowledged he could have quit smoking, acknowledged it. and so you have to think about what the evidence is when you decide whether the plaintiff has carried their burden of proof on addiction causation. this is his son, dennis schleider. what was the difference, what was the difference between the two things? just motivation, not addiction, motivation. motivation for one behavior, not for 4781 the other behavior. that is the evidence before you. that is why i asked you, when you go back, please look at your notepads. please see where the plaintiff put on any evidence that addiction caused mr. schleider's disease or death because i submit you will not find it. you will not find it. just look. please. bottom line, addiction did not cause mr. schleider's injuries and death. that is what the evidence shows in the case. that is unrefuted evidence, that is all the evidence you have. so when you answer the verdict form on these issues, i told you that there are three questions to class membership. the first one asks you about -- the first one, i'm sorry to block you, the first one asks about whether mr. schleider was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine, if so, was his addiction a legal cause of his lung cancer that manifested itself on or before november 21st, 1996? we have discussed all the components of that. that has the medical causation issue, the manifestation issue, the addiction issue, and the addiction causation issue. all four hurdles that we just went through. and i showed you why the plaintiff has not carried their burden on any of them. so i 4782 submit respectfully your answer to that has to be no under the evidence and the jury instructions that guide you in the case, so your answer there should be no. and you see there is instructions below that. if you answered the question no, then you should go to question 2. question 2 is the same question but for copd. the same question but for copd. so it is the same issue. you know the evidence on that. i submit to you the answer there has to be no. and finally question 3 -- well, you will not get to question 3 if you answer both those no, but if you get to question 3 because you find one of those questions yes, did he have lung cancer caused by addiction and, if so, was that a legal cause of his death? you know the answer to that, it is the same hurdles. the answer to that has to be no. and so i submit to you that is what the evidence will show, that is the evidence that you have. ms. henninger is going to get up and talk to you. thank you so much for your time. you have been very attentive. thank you. ms. henninger: well, i'm lucky enough to be in the lunch hour, so i'm going to start by first saying the first good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen. jurors: good afternoon. ms. henninger: it is been a long morning. it is been a long couple weeks. and so let me start by thanking you. because as we -- as you figured out, we are all under some time constraints, so if at the end i run out of time, i want to make sure that i do the most important thing and thank you for your patience, for your diligence, and your attention. and as mr. bayuk said, i'm going to walk through some of the remaining issues for you on the verdict form. but i submit to you that for all of the reasons that mr. bayuk just outlined to you, hopefully you will not get to any of the issues 4784 that i have to address with you because mr. schleider is not a member of the engle class. but to the extent that you find otherwise, i'm going to walk through the rest of the verdict form. and you see that he stopped at question number 3. there is a question number 4. i'm skipping it for now, but i will be back, i promise, to question number 4. i want to start with question 5, and there is one in between, 6, 7, and 8. and these are "did andrew j. schleider reasonably rely on r.j. reynolds tobacco company's concealment or omission of material information not otherwise known or available concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes and, if so, was such reliance a legal cause of andrew j. schleider's lung cancer and death." that is the question number 5. and number 7 is "did andrew j. schleider reasonably rely on any act or omission taken in furtherance of r.j. reynolds tobacco company's agreement with other tobacco companies or organizations to conceal or omit material information not otherwise known or available concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes and, if so" -- can you see 4785 okay? juror: yes. ms. henninger: "was such reliance a legal cause of mr. schleider's lung cancer and death?" now, a lot of the argument you heard this morning from mr. paige talked about general tobacco company conduct. and that is a lot of the evidence that you have heard the last two weeks. and i'm going to talk to you about what the plaintiff has to prove. remember, it is their burden of proof. and they have to prove to you, if he is a member of the engle class, you get the findings on concealment and agreement to conceal, you have all of this general information that they have talked to you about for hours and for weeks here at trial, but they have to provide, like mr. bayuk told you in opening statement, they have to provide the links between the concealment or agreement to conceal and mr. schleider's death. this is not engle. that case has been tried. this is mr. schleider's case. and they have to prove the connection between any conduct and mr. schleider's death, and they have not done that. there is no link here. plaintiff did not prove that mr. schleider 4786 died because the dangers of smoking were unknown to him. and there is a key component to this. not only were they not unknown, they were not unavailable to him. and we are going to talk about that because this is all in your jury instructions. but i want to stop and talk a little bit because today and the last two weeks we have heard a lot about company documents. there is a lot of documents you saw from lorillard tobacco company, american tobacco company, brown & williamson, r.j. reynolds, philip morris, you name it, tobacco institute, ctr, you have seen them all. lots of internal company documents, they like to call them secret documents. you have seen little bits of pieces here and there, some of them were in evidence. but the important part and what you have to focus on is, sure, there might be some things in there that sound odd and we cannot defend them, but at the same time, they have to prove that all of those things that they showed you link to mr. schleider, and that is what they cannot do in this case. the issue in this case for you to decide, and when you get to the verdict form, is not whether or not there was concealment in general, it is whether 4787 or not the concealment or the agreement to conceal had any impact on mr. schleider and caused his death. and the answer is clearly no. so let us talk about the evidence that is specific to mr. schleider. because we have heard the general conduct evidence. the only witness, the only witness who came into court and testified either live or by deposition that tried to link any conduct to mr. schleider was the plaintiff in this lawsuit, mrs. schleider. and i want to talk about what she said, because as mr. bayuk pointed out in his statements just a moment ago, plaintiff cannot meet their burden of proof with inconsistent evidence. and mrs. schleider came in here, and she provided testimony on the stand. and i want to talk a little bit about what she talked about, because she told you on cross-examination that she first learned, first learned that cigarettes were harmful to one's health in 1996. that is what she told you. she also told you that she started to believe, however, that in the 1980s, cigarette smoking was harmful. now, she said she never saw any publicity, either in magazines or newspapers, about 4788 the health hazards of smoking, on television, anywhere. but then she also told you that her and mr. schleider saw those public service announcements or psas, and they discussed them. she said, "i never read a warning on a pack of cigarettes until after my husband passed away." but yet when i asked her, do you recall hearing the language of the warnings, caution, cigarette smoking may be hazardous to your health in 1966, she recalls that language. she recalled the language from the 1970 through 1985 warnings as well. she told mr. alvarez that she had conversations with mr. schleider all the time about the cigarette controversy beginning in the 1960s, but she does not remember mr. schleider ever telling her what he saw or read about this controversy until 1985 or forward. there is no accusations that she is giving any mistruths or anything, but there is just a lot of inconsistencies, a lot of inconsistencies, and those inconsistencies do not provide the link that plaintiff needs to prove their case. now, i want to talk about jury instruction number 21, because this is very important. we 4789 heard a lot of about general things and we -- you know, mr. paige said, i'm not scared of reader's digest. i could show you hundreds and thousands of newspaper articles about the dangers of smoking, et cetera. and tried to say that that was not important. but they are important for this very reason. there is an instruction. and on the claim for fraudulent concealment, the issue for your determination is whether andrew schleider reasonably relied, and we are going to talk about that in a second, reasonably relied to his detriment on the defendant's concealment of material information, and we are going to talk about what material information means as well, which was not otherwise known or available. they have to show that the information was not known or available. they do not have -- we do not have to prove that he knew. all we are showing you is that the information was out there, and it was available to him, and that defeats their claims. so that is why we showed you all of those newspaper articles, all of the reader's digests, and that is why with dr. proctor i spent so much 4790 time on cross-examination proving this point. the dangers and addictiveness of smoking were not a secret. dr. proctor came in here and told you all sorts of things about the conspiracy, but then he also told you very plainly and clearly that the dangers and addictiveness of smoking were not a secret, and they have not been a secret for a number of years, hundreds of years. so was the information about the dangers and addictiveness unavailable, unknowable? clearly, you have heard in this case, that is not true. the dangers and addictive nature of tobacco has been public knowledge for centuries. dr. proctor told you for hundreds of years people have known that smoking causes cancer and can be life threatening. there have been written in discussions, articles and discussions about tobacco and smoking being addictive and bad for you for hundreds of years. "addicted to smoking," that term, that phrase, shows up commonly starting in the 1850s. smokers cancer, now that was mouth cancer at the time, but smokers cancer showed up as an official cause of death over a hundred years ago. 4791 and one of you asked about schoolbooks and when schools started teaching this information, and he told you that the dangers of smoking have been taught in schools for over a hundred years. this was his answer. he said, "i'm sure some schools did well over a hundred years ago. of course, you have to distinguish between some schools and all schools. so if you mean some schools, a hundred years ago or maybe even more." but what is important is we also showed you, when i was cross-examining dr. proctor, that there were new york laws mandating that this information be taught in new york state. and these are just some of the textbooks that we showed you with dr. proctor during the time period that -- before mr. schleider was in school and while he was in elementary school, and we showed you the laws during cross-examination as well. now, it is important to keep in context where mr. schleider was raised, where he lived, and the information environment around him. and people in new york city, in the greater new york city area knew about the dangers and addictiveness of smoking before mr. schleider ever smoked a cigarette, before he was ever born. 4792 dr. proctor told you that the greater new york area was one of the most informed areas on smoking and health in the country. the newspapers carried some of the most sophisticated presentation. there were thousands of articles published in new york newspapers between the 1920s and the 1950s. and the american cancer society and other organizations were very, very active in the new york area. now, mr. alvarez when he was asking mrs. schleider some questions on the stand, he was trying to say that, you know, they did not live in this greater new york area, that they had some rural -- they were in, like, a -- i think a farming community, but they lived in long island. you heard that testimony, and you also heard testimony about how mr. schleider worked. when he was working, he worked in manhattan, and that is where he worked as a carpenter. but more importantly, you do not have to figure out where he lived or what he was exposed to because we have that evidence. we know exactly what media mr. schleider was listening to, watching, and reading, because there is testimony on it. and you have heard that he was intelligent, 4793 and he reads all of these newspapers. not only does he read the new york times every day, he reads the new york post, newsday, he watches tv, the nightly news. so we also know from mrs. schleider's answers to interrogatories, remember we showed those yesterday, her sworn answers to interrogatories tell you that he -- the question was state the name and dates of things that the decedent, that is mr. schleider, subscribed to, purchased, reviewed, or read, including newspapers, newsletters, journals, et cetera. she listed a ton of magazines that we read to you, but importantly, let us look at reader's digest, time magazine, newsweek, new york post, new york times, and daily news. we have showed you lots of articles from all of those publications. do not have time to do them all again today, but dr. proctor told you there were thousands and thousands of articles about smoking and health, the addictive nature and all of those complications. so i want to go through just briefly and talk about before he was born, before he was a smoker, there were warnings in the newspapers that he read. and those warnings continued during the time that 4794 he read them. the dangers of smoking, including lung cancer, were not a secret, not a secret even before he started smoking. now, the information clearly was known or available to mr. schleider. and that started before he was even smoking. and not just on lung cancer. not just on danger, but addiction as well. there were newspaper articles, and this is just some of the reader's digest articles, and i'm sure you guys will never want to see another reader's digest again after this trial because everybody has shown them, but let me just back up and explain again why reader's digest is being shown to you again and again, because as dr. proctor told you, this was perhaps one of the most important publications of its time. one in four households got it, and it contained some very -- very significant articles on smoking and health that the surgeon general, the american cancer society, all of these organizations have said that the reader's digest was perhaps one of the most important, most influential magazines to convey to the lay public, people like you and me, the dangers and addictiveness of smoking. they did not take cigarette advertisements. 4795 so that is why you see a lot of reader's digests in these types of cases, but one of the main reasons, perhaps, that you see it in this case is because it was listed by mrs. schleider. not only did she read it, because she told you on the stand, but mr. schleider did. now, one of the other things she listed, newsweek. do not have to go through the article in total, but newsweek was also publishing about the dangers of smoking in the 1950s. and one more reader's digest, because this is a really significant one, as dr. proctor told you, remember the "cancer by the carton". and this was before all of the mouse skin painting studies, the surgeon general's report. and dr. proctor told you that this article, he said, "no single article that had more impact on starting people to quit, alerting the public, than this one issue." and why is that? he told you it is because the title itself. it said everything you needed to know. if you buy another pack of cigarettes, you are buying a carton of cancer risks. this was all in the information environment, known and available, and this information was causing smokers to quit. and you 4796 heard from mr. bayuk, by the millions. dr. proctor told you that, dr. drobes told you that, and dr. castro told you that. now, one thing we did not see yet, we heard a lot about with dr. proctor, so i'm not going to spend a lot of time on it, but you heard a lot about this 1953 survey of cancer research by dr. teague at r.j. reynolds. i just want to remind you that dr. teague was summarizing published -- published literature. he surveyed the literature, that is why it is called a cancer -- i mean, the survey of cancer research is sort of a no-brainer, right, but he goes to the medical library, he surveys the research. he writes a memorandum. whoops. sorry. whoops. did i go too far? that is why they should not give me the clicker, right? and anyway, it was no secret. there is nothing secret in the survey of cancer research, there is nothing hidden, there is not even a conclusion that smoking causes lung cancer. it is a survey of cancer research. so the title speaks for itself. [#deleted motion for mistrial#] ms. henninger: so after dr. teague's survey of cancer research, something happened, something very important happened, and that was the wynder and graham mouse skin painting studies, and you have heard, dr. proctor talked about them on direct, we talked about them on cross, but the fact of the matter is is that when this study came out, this 4801 animal study came out, remember he talked about epidemiology, the animal studies, there were chemical studies. this was an animal study that came out in 1953, and this information published in life magazine, published elsewhere, all over, even newspapers, it caused concern for smokers and the information caused millions and millions of smokers to quit smoking. and these studies did not stop. tens of thousands of articles were written after 1953 finding that smoking was dangerous. and this exchange with dr. proctor was very interesting because i -- my question was, well, there were a lot of studies and he said, yeah, throughout time, there is a lot of studies, and i said there is probably hundreds, and he said thousands. and i said okay, thousands and he said, what did he say? tens of thousands. tens of thousands of articles after 1953 found that smoking was dangerous, it could harm your health, it could cause lung cancer, and a number of other diseases, but mrs. schleider claims that they heard nothing about the dangers of smoking until the 1980s. the information has to be known or available. 4802 ask yourself what makes sense. not only did you have public health officials, national public health officials talking about the dangers of smoking, you had state and local public health officials talking about the dangers of smoking. and in new york specifically, there was a very famous commissioner of health, dr. hilleboe, and he said, he was very outspoken on his beliefs that smoking could cause disease, and one of the things he said, and this is in the new york post, "those who deny that tobacco is a causal factor in lung cancer just will not face the facts." this is in 1958, after the mouse skin painting studies, before the surgeon general's report, his statements were being picked up in newspapers in the new york city area, newspapers that mr. schleider read. more reader's digest, because in the 1960s you saw that there were a number of articles in reader's digest about lung cancer and addiction, and what is important here is that the schleider family got these reader's digests. you heard she got them from a relative and they were in their household, and despite that, there was a claim that they never saw any of these articles about smoking 4803 and health in reader's digest. and that is something that is important because it is information that is known or available. so what happens after this. in 1964, you heard about the -- perhaps the biggest news story in the history of the united states on health issues, and that was the 1964 surgeon general's report. that was the first report that found that cigarette smoking is causally related to lung cancer in men. and dr. proctor talked to you about how that was on the news, you saw news clips from not only plaintiff, but defense counsel, everybody showed you television news, they showed you newspaper articles, it was just big news. it was covered everywhere, radio, tv, newspapers, military newspapers. and we showed you not just a sampling, it was front-page news, new york times, new york post, magazines, and newspapers that mr. schleider read. now, mrs. schleider cannot say that mr. schleider did not hear about this. she says she never heard about the '64 surgeon general's report, but we do not know about mr. schleider because they were not together at the time. she was married to her first husband at the time, and he was in the 4804 navy. but it was everywhere. dr. proctor talked to you about the coverage of the 1964 surgeon general's report. and following that report, what also started to be covered were quitting smoking, smoking clinics where people could go to get help to quit their smoking, they could go to, you know, self-help programs, and there were programs modeled after alcoholics anonymous that people -- that were publicized that people could go to that were free, and they were in the newspapers throughout the time that mr. schleider was reading these, in the newspapers that he was reading. but despite this information, he never went to one of those self-help groups to try to quit smoking. so we follow up and go to 1966. you heard that the first warning goes on the pack of cigarettes, and it was the, "caution: cigarette smoking may be hazardous to your health." now, dr. proctor talked to you about congress mandating this warning label on the packs of cigarettes, they mandated where it was located, what the font was, what it said, and how big the lettering is, et cetera. and one of the things 4805 that is important to note is that this was on every pack of cigarettes that mr. schleider smoked from 1966 to 1970. and if you use a conservative estimate of one and a half packs a day, that means during that time he saw this warning when he picked up a pack of cigarettes 40,000 times. in every pack of cigarettes during their married life that mrs. schleider, who was married to mr. schleider, every pack of cigarettes had a warning label on them. every pack of cigarettes during their marriage had one. and this was the one from 1966 to 1970. and in 1968, you had daniel horn, plaintiff actually showed you this in their direct examination of dr. proctor, and daniel horn, he was in charge of getting the information out to the american public at the time, and he made a statement in 1968 that "you could stand on a rooftop and shout 'smoking is dangerous' at the top of your lungs and you would not be telling anyone anything they did not already know." is the information known or available in 1968? so 1970, the warnings change, and it becomes "warning: the surgeon general has determined that cigarette smoking is dangerous to your health." 4806 this is on every pack of cigarettes from 1970 to 1985. importantly, starting in 1971, surgeon general warnings are on every cigarette advertisement. 1971 forward. this -- if he -- again, using the conservative estimate of one and a half packs a day, if he smoked from 1970 to 1985, he would have picked up a pack of cigarettes 160,000 times with this warning on it. so reader's digest, i just want to talk about them briefly in the 1970s because the schleiders were receiving reader's digest in the 1970s. there were articles that continued to appear in the 1970s about the dangers and addictiveness of smoking, yet there is a claim that there was never any information available. you also heard a lot, and there were polls shown to you even in the closing arguments today, that despite all of this information, that smokers did not really know or believe, but the simple fact is is in 1980 -- i believe it is 1980 surgeon general's report, i would have to check, but one of the surgeon general's reports there is a graph where there was a poll from the surgeon general that said, the question was, "cigarette smoking is 4807 harmful to health." and the percentage of smokers who agreed or percentage of nonsmokers who agreed increased. throughout this time, from 1964 to 1975, people were agreeing, they got the information, the information was out there, it was known, it was available, and people were believing it. this was all during this time that dr. proctor talked to you about, this campaign of doubt, that the tobacco industry, he spent hours and hours talking about the campaign of doubt, all during this time, the information was getting out there, people were believing it, and guess what else they were doing? they were quitting, and they were quitting by the millions. now, i'm going to briefly talk about public service announcements only because the schleiders saw them together, they talked about them, and that was another source of warnings that were out there that mr. schleider received, and that is one we know he received because she testified about it. so known or available. (video clip played as follows:) speaker: ladies and gentlemen, the late yul brynner. 4808 yul brynner: i really wanted to make a commercial when i discovered i was that sick and my time was so limited. i wanted to make a commercial that says simply now that i'm gone, i tell you do not smoke. whatever you do, just do not smoke. if i could take back that smoking, we would not be talking about any cancer, i'm convinced about that. (video clip stopped.) ms. henninger: these psas, dr. proctor told you ran through the '60s, '70s, and '80s and continued, and the schleiders saw them and talked about them. more warnings, 1985, the congress mandated different warnings on the packs of cigarettes. there is rotating warnings. i'm not going to read them all, but importantly there is a warning that says, "surgeon general's warning: smoking causes lung cancer, heart disease, emphysema, may complicate pregnancy" and the one under it is very important, we are going to talk to you about it in a second, "quitting smoking now greatly reduces serious risks to your health." now, before i leave the warnings, there is an instruction, number 18, and this is very important, because there is an instruction that says, "the 4809 warning labels placed on cigarette packs and advertisements by reynolds complied with federal law and reynolds had no obligation to place additional warnings on its cigarette packs and advertisements after july 1st, 1969." and to be clear, "plaintiff is not making any claim that the warning labels placed on cigarette packs and advertisements after 1969 were inadequate." known or available. so mr. schleider did not die because the information about the dangers and addictiveness of smoking were known -- unknown or unavailable to him. now, all of the information, we have talked about it all, i'm not going to go through it all, one box i have not talked about and that is warnings from his family. and this is important because he was receiving personalized warnings from the people he loved the most. you heard his daughter, suzanne, get on the stand and she talked about how when she was in middle school, she started learning in school about the dangers of smoking and would constantly ask her father to quit. sometimes he would put his 4810 cigarette out, but she also described something very important to you, which is the look. the look that dads give when they say do not question me, i do not want to hear it. and she said, she told you that she thought that her father knew, the reason she was asking him to quit was because she wanted him to live longer because of his health. that is a personalized warning that he received from his daughter. and mrs. schleider talked about the information, new information she would bring him that she saw in newspapers and magazines. now, mr. paige asked y'all if you knew what a material fact is, and i think maybe some of you nodded your heads you knew what a material fact is, but that is actually defined for you in instruction 22, and that is what your definition you have to use, is "a material fact is one of such importance that mr. schleider would not have acted but for the concealment or omission of that fact." now, "reasonably relied," i want to define that for you because that is in instruction 21, and that is very important, because they have to prove that mr. schleider relied to his detriment on the defendant rjr's concealment of material information 4811 not otherwise known or available. so ask yourself this. whatever they are claiming was concealed or withheld from mr. schleider, whatever information in those documents that they liked to talk about, those secret documents, was it of such importance that but for that information, mr. schleider would have acted differently? do you think that -- does it defy common sense that he knows or the information is out there that smoking can cause lung cancer and kill you, but yet he would have stopped smoking if he only knew arsenic was in cigarette smoke? you take your common sense to the jury room and imply -- apply the instructions to the facts you have before you. that is what the law is. and there is something else i want to point out briefly. the instruction says the determination is whether andrew schleider reasonably relied, not people in general. they have to prove that he reasonably relied, and that is what they cannot do. so one more instruction, and this is number 23, and i say one more, it is really not the last one, but i'm going to be quick, it is the 4812 instruction on causation. "reasonable reliance on the concealment of a material fact is a legal cause of loss, injury, or damage if it directly and in natural and continuous sequence produces or contributes substantially to producing such loss, injury, or damage, so that it can be reasonably said that but for, but for the reasonable reliance on the concealment, the loss, injury, or damage would not have occurred." but for the concealment, mr. schleider would not have developed lung cancer and died. that is the connection they cannot prove. and what did they do to try to prove that? they tried to prove that with generic testimony. dr. proctor came in here, as mr. bayuk told you, what, 14 hours i think he said, no connection, no connection at all between the conduct he talked about and mr. schleider. that is the missing link. that is what they cannot do. that is why their claims fail. they want you to infer reliance. they want you to infer reliance. they want you to connect the dots for them. but they have to provide you evidence, and they have not done that. now, dr. proctor, highly credentialed. we heard it. but he is also highly paid. we heard 4813 that in the last three months testifying in engle cases just like this, he is made $240,000. over 2 million in the last several years from testifying in these cases. and what is amazing is he said, you know, he went from one case straight to this case, and i said, well, where did you leave yesterday, you were on the stand yesterday, name the smoker in that case, and he could not do it. because it does not matter to him because he provides generic testimony. and what does that generic testimony do? it does nothing except prove and reprove the engle findings. remember i asked him, i said, okay, so remember, your opinion, your opinion is what? he said my opinion is basically that r.j. reynolds and others conspired to conceal the health effects and addictive nature of smoking from the american public, he said yep, that is my opinion. read the engle finding. that is the engle finding. he came in here and just reproved the engle finding. not only that, he did it again for concealing information about the health effects and addictive nature of smoking from the public. same 4814 opinion, engle finding. generic evidence, no link, no causation, nothing to tie that testimony to mr. schleider or his actions. so there is no evidence that he relied on anything the tobacco industry, reynolds, or anyone else said or did. you heard from mrs. schleider, she never heard of the frank statement. she did not know if mr. schleider ever heard of the frank statement. but importantly, she had never heard of tobacco institute, ctr, ti, any of those members of the alleged arms of the conspiracy that dr. proctor drew out on that chart one day, never heard of those. all of that testimony, no link to mr. schleider. now, i forgot to point out instruction number 14, and this is simply that the engle findings do not establish liability. if he is a class member, you get the engle findings, but they still have to tie those findings to mr. schleider, and that is what you see on instruction number 14, and that is what they cannot do. no evidence that there is any connection. and this is an important point because mrs. schleider on the stand, remember when i was cross-examining her, she was talking about he kept 4815 saying that it had not been proven, that he believed the tobacco companies, he believed the controversy, and i asked her tell me what, can you tell me anything specific that he believed or that caused him to believe that. and she could not. and that is understandably. but then she went on to say that all of those statements were from 1985 forward. well, mr. schleider started to quit, according to the testimony, in 1985. so it does not make sense, because if he is trying to quit all the time, and remember the evidence was he was trying to quit because he wanted to be healthier and wanted to live longer, and he starts trying to quit in 1985. how is he relying on this controversy that cigarette smoking had not been proven to be harmful? he is trying to quit because he wants to be healthier, but yet somehow he is believing a story that it is not proven? her admission, her testimony defeats their reliance claim. now, generic evidence, no tie, no link to mr. schleider. and what is important, i'm just going to point out just briefly, that there is a lot of advertisements we have seen in this case. and 4816 they want you to infer, to connect the dots between all of those advertisements and mr. schleider's conduct. but remember, the brand he smoked, the only brand you have heard that he smoked, was lucky strike unfiltered, and that stopped being advertised in 1966. so how is he relying on advertising from 1966 forward when it does not exist for the brand he smoked? and let us look back in time, because you saw these healthcare professionals, brands he did not smoke. you saw tv commercials. even today in closing argument you saw tv commercials for advertisements for cigarettes he never smoked. and one important thing that has got to be pointed out because on those television ads there was a heading that said, the co-conspirators conspired to make cigarettes seem attractive in their advertising, or something to that effect. dr. proctor said that there was no conspiracy for anything related to advertising or marketing or anything like that. but these were not brands he smoked. famous athletes, showed you lots of those. brands he did not smoke. 4817 doctors or movie stars, celebrities, again, brands he did not smoke. cigarettes for the holidays, a lot of ads for those for brands he did not smoke. there were brands {sic} for lucky strikes, but there were lots of others they showed you, hours of testimony on brands he did not smoke. famous athletes. the fact of the matter is the evidence in this case from mrs. schleider was that mr. schleider made his own choice about the cigarettes he chose to smoke. there is no evidence of any ad he ever saw from mrs. schleider, from any of the children, from suzanne, christopher, anybody you have heard from in this case, nobody can tell you about a specific ad he saw that he relied on or even that he saw. so one last point on the brands that mrs. schleider talked about, because all the evidence in this case is about lucky strike unfiltered. and you will recall when she was on the stand, we went over this sworn answer to an interrogatory that listed brands that mr. schleider smoked, according to mrs. schleider in her interrogatories, for 40-some years, brands with filters, menthol brands, all sorts of brands. 4818 she could not even tell you that she ever saw him smoke one of those, but yet she swore under oath that he had smoked some of these brands for 40 and 30 years. you have got instructions in front of you. you have to assess what is credible and what is not. the only link in this case that is even attempted between the conduct and mr. schleider is provided by mrs. schleider, and it is inconsistent at best. and for those reasons -- can i have the elmo, please? i submit to you question 5, you would answer, reasonably rely, you would answer no. there is a question number 6 asking about 1982. since you have answered no to number 5, you would answer that no as well on number 6. number 7 is: "did mr. schleider reasonably rely on any act or omission taken in furtherance of r.j. reynolds's agreement with the other tobacco companies to conceal or omit material information not otherwise known or available," et cetera. you would answer that no based on the evidence. and, of course, if you answered that no, question number 8 would be no as well. so you have answered those questions. i told 4819 you i would go back to number 4, and that is what i'm going to do right now, and that is the comparative fault -- i'm sorry, can i have the -- mr. philipson: sure. ms. henninger: thank you. this is the comparative fault question, number 4. the assignment of fault, some important points on this, the assignment of fault relates only to the actions that were a legal cause of mr. schleider's death. and r.j. reynolds cannot be assigned fault for actions that were not a legal cause of mr. schleider's death. and you heard argument today, which surprised me, because you heard a comparison in this section when talking about comparative fault, they asked you to compare the wealth and power of r.j. reynolds with the actions of mr. schleider. and that is just not the standard. you do not do that. you do not look at that. you look at the relative fault that was a legal cause of mr. schleider's death. it is not about wealth, it is not about power, it is not about the fact that he was a carpenter union or a boat mechanic or at-home mr. mom because 4820 he was disabled. it is about the actions and the reasonableness of the actions, that is what you focus on. now, i want to talk about -- okay. the admission. the admission of fault plays a role in this comparative fault question because as you have heard over and over again, mrs. schleider admits that he did not try hard enough, he did not try often enough to quit. and that means he was a legal cause of his death. and importantly she explained that to the jury when she said, the question was: "but you agree that he had some responsibility and your husband can only be partially responsible for the injuries you are alleging in this lawsuit because he can control, he can control the frequency and duration of his efforts to quit?" and she said, "yes." now, if he controlled it, if he was persistent, if he was motivated and he quit, he could have prevented his death, because dr. proctor told you, that there were studies in 1977 that said that if a person quit smoking, the risk for developing lung cancer goes back to that of a nonsmoker. 4821 he was aware of that on the historical record. now, r.j. reynolds could not have done anything that would have prevented mr. schleider's death. mr. schleider is the only one who had the ability to prevent his own death by quitting. and he is a hundred percent responsible for the choices he made. and for that reason, when you get to the verdict form on question 4 -- mr. alvarez: objection, judge. we heard argument about this yesterday, about assigning a hundred percent. the court: why do not you just finish up how much -- because i -- you know, i probably should have given my clerk -- to tell me when you are done. how much more time do you have? ms. henninger: i've got a couple more questions to answer on the verdict form, probably 15 minutes. the court: all right. finish up. ms. henninger: okay. can i have the elmo, please, robert? mr. philipson: sure. ms. henninger: so when you get to this question, remember, mr. schleider has admitted 4822 fault, so you have to allocate fault toward him. the answer would be a hundred percent to mr. schleider. mr. alvarez: objection. excuse me, judge. did you rule my objection? i object. the court: i guess it depends. i think this is something we have to take up at sidebar. all right, let us come up for a minute. let me -- i know it is 1 o'clock and everybody is hungry. iramis has pizza for everybody. i'm trying -- instead of taking a break, i'm just trying to get through this. they are going to be done in about -- they are going to be done in a half an hour. all right? if not less. then i'm just going to read you some quick deliberation instruction and i'm going to send you right in, instead of taking a break. is everybody already with that? okay. before the court at the bench and out of the hearing of the jury.) mr. alvarez: i object. i object. what she is doing is asking the jury to return an inconsistent verdict. once -- under douglas, once they establish i am a class -- my client is a class 4823 member, they apportion fault. it is not -- ms. henninger: can you keep it -- mr. alvarez: it is not a hundred percent. there is clear case law in florida that you cannot do that. ms. henninger: we argued this last night, your honor, and your honor said that you were going to allow me to argue this because i specifically asked if i could argue this and you said i could and that if he wants to argue it is inconsistent later, we would deal with it at the time. i talked to you about the case where i had this allocation. there was never a -- i mean, we talked about it and i was left with the impression that we ruled that i could do this. and i do not understand why we are now having this discussion again. mr. alvarez: we are having this discussion because this can happen in the case. there is no appellate review of that case, number one. but there is plenty of case law that says you cannot do this, you cannot ask for an inconsistent verdict like that. and once there is a finding, okay, that you are entitled to damages, okay, that you are 4824 entitled to damages -- the court: shhh. mr. alvarez: -- it cannot be a hundred percent on the plaintiff. ms. henninger: they could come back and say zero damages. i've had cases like that too. mr. alvarez: fine. they -- the court: that is true. i think that was the discussion. i think that is -- maybe it was not -- mr. alvarez: no. the court: maybe it was not completed afterwards. mr. alvarez: well, i'm just telling you, we are going down a bad path here. they cannot argue that, and i'm objecting to it. the court: can you move on? ms. henninger: i'm done with it. i'm going to move on. the court: do not bring it back up again. okay? ms. henninger: okay. the court: i'm telling you right now, because between the two of you, you have got to be done by 1:30. ms. henninger: okay. 4825 mr. alvarez: all right. in open court before the court and jury.) ms. henninger: may i have the projector, please, while i'm walking back? mr. philipson: the elmo or projector? ms. henninger: projector. can i skip the video? ms. schneider: (nods head affirmatively.) ms. henninger: let us move on to verdict form questions 9 and 10. i'm not going to read them to you, but it is the damages question for both mrs. schleider and their daughter, suzanne lemehaute. i believe it is lemehaute is how she pronounced it when she got on the stand. i'm doing my best, at least i've tried, right? so let us talk about the damages. because mr. alvarez spent some time talking about that. and the damages must be fair and just in light of the evidence. there is going to be instructions, you are going to get those, you can take them back with you. and i want you to ask yourself to remember those things -- those instructions because number 40 -- remember in voir dire i talked to you all 4826 about sympathy and whether or not sympathy would play a role and you had to put that aside, and everybody agreed that they could. and there is going to be some sympathy toward both of these ladies. they have lost a father and a husband. that is understandable. but that is not part of the deliberation. what is, is based on the evidence that you have heard in this case. and let us be clear. plaintiff is not claiming damages related to any lost wages, financial support, medical expenses, funeral expenses, no damages for copd, and no damages for mr. schleider's pain and suffering, all right? no medical expenses, no funeral expenses. it is the loss of companionship. and you heard both of the women testify and they described their losses for you. and then i heard mr. alvarez get up here this after- -- this morning and talk to you and ask you for $18 million; $11 million for mrs. schleider and 7 for suzanne. and what i also heard, for the first time, was a description of the relationship that neither of those ladies provided. nobody talked about the desire to -- to raise grandchildren. i mean, 4827 that is natural, do not get me wrong, but that is not evidence in this case, that is argument. and you never heard anybody talk about that that was under oath that talked to you about those types of things that mr. alvarez did today. so the damages, that is up to you. we would submit that you never get there. and if you do, you have to use your common sense and put sympathy aside. now, i'm going to pause for a second -- oh. pause for a second on the last question. because mr. paige actually told you this morning that this is why we are here. this is why we are here, punitive damages. well, i thought we were here because they wanted to prove that mr. schleider was a member of the engle class and this was mr. schleider's case. but you were told that this is why they are here and that this is important. he made a lot of inflammatory arguments. he showed pictures of teenagers, he talked about plane crashes and thousands of people dying, all in an effort to make you angry, all in an effort to distract you from the issues in this case. we have talked about the issues. the issues 4828 involve mr. schleider. it is not about engle or re-proving engle. it is about whether any of that conduct that was tried, as mr. paige told you, for over a year here in miami in the engle case, whether any of that conduct that led to those findings applied or harmed mr. schleider. and they brought you no evidence that it did. but you heard all of this about plane crashes and thousands of people dying. every question mr. paige asked you in this case, i mean, when he asked a witness, you know, was this all during when thousands and thousands of people were dying, all in an effort to distract you from the fact that they do not have anything to connect the findings to their client, to mr. schleider. well, if this is why we are here, let us talk about it, because it is a very important question to us, too. punitive damages. these are all instructions you will get. you will go back to the punitive damages can only be awarded for conduct that was a legal cause of mr. schleider's death. they can only go to mrs. schleider. punitive damages would be in addition to any 4829 damages that you find compensate her for her loss of companionship, for suzanne's loss of companionship. these would be in addition to it, and it would go to mrs. schleider. let us look at jury instruction number 31, because this is very significant. you have heard about the burden of proof, and they put up the scales of justice and they said we only have to tip the scales. not so on this question number 11. they have to prove by clear and convincing evidence. what is clear and convincing evidence? it is "evidence that is precise, explicit, lacking in confusion, and of such weight that it produces a firm belief or conviction without hesitation about the matter in issue." very important, a high standard, higher standard that they cannot meet to get punitive damages. and very importantly, the engle findings may not be considered in any way when determining whether punitive damages may be warranted. that is an instruction you get in this case that will be back with you in the jury room. so you have to use the evidence in this case 4830 and how it relates to mr. schleider. jury instructions 32 -- 30 and 32, you cannot base punitive damages on strict liability or negligence. i'll get to those in a second and give you some examples. and you may not find that punitive damages are warranted against reynolds for strict liability or negligence. both of those instructions are up there and i'll explain what that means, because here we go. we heard days of testimony about cigarettes being inhalable, about ingredients, about flue curing, all sorts of things. those things, dr. proctor told you first of all they have been inhalable before my client ever existed, we did not invent flue curing, but you know what we did invent? a better way to do it and we went out and paid all the farmers to retrofit their barns, he told you about that. and we did not make it more inhalable. and cigarettes today, that my client makes today, that mr. schleider smoked, those were just as dangerous and addictive as cigarettes from the 1800s. additives, again, they do not make cigarettes more dangerous, they do not make it more addictive. additive-free cigarettes are not any safer. 4831 ammonia, you heard about ammonia, ammonia, ammonia, ph, all of that. nothing makes them more addictive. nothing makes them more dangerous. and you cannot impose punitive damages for that design. and all of those ingredients that we have heard about, remember the chocolate, the licorice, et cetera, dr. proctor -- all of those are governed by the fda. dr. figlar told you that; dr. proctor told you that. they have never said hey, take anything out that is bad. all of that is governed and it is all provided to the fda. so instruction number 38 says you can look to mitigating evidence to see whether or not punitive damages are warranted. well, what is mitigating evidence? it is evidence that may demonstrate that there is no need to punish with punitive damages. you have heard a little bit about some of the evidence in this case. you have heard a lot about council for tobacco research. mr. paige said it was not legitimate doctors, but i'm going to run through this. if it is not legitimate doctors, if it is such a bad thing, why is the surgeon general citing it 600 times? why are there over 1600 independent scientific research projects that are funded? 4832 all of these things are co-funded by the institutes like cancer society, the public health groups. this was not fraudulent research. this was research that was in peer-reviewed journals and it was funded by r.j. reynolds and the other tobacco companies. now, we have worked -- reynolds has worked to make cigarettes safer, to try to reduce the carcinogens. you heard dr. proctor talk about that. we pioneered ways to reduce the carcinogens. and we spent over a billion dollars trying to produce safer cigarettes. and how did we do that. well, this is very interesting because this was the nordine study. and i'm going to give you this plaintiff's exhibit number because it is 1820. mr. paige said this is a very interesting document. he showed it to you today. it is very important. but they do not show you the third bullet of what reynolds was considering. and reynolds said, "provide other products, away from conventional cigarettes, which meet the same needs as cigarettes now meet, but without the negative effects," the health effects. and how did they do that? they created -- 4833 they spent money, they spent a billion dollars coming up with products that heated, not burned tobacco, and that was premier and eclipse. they are not very successful. premier has already failed in the market, eclipse is still sold. but they are trying. they have alternatives. and when you go back and you see these documents and it says, hey, we can go consider going out of business or doing this, there is a third alternative that is not shown to you, but the third alternative is what shows the evidence that was done, you have to ask yourself. the next -- the court: ms. henninger, i'm sorry. ms. henninger: i'm done. the court: you have to wrap up. ms. henninger: so other instructions, 35, 39, i want you to go back, number 39 is important, this one talks about if you answered yes to this, we have to come back on monday for another phase of trial. (video clip played as follows:) dr. hammond: in my opinion, people should be warned of the dangers and they are being warned. what they then want to do, whether they wish to 4834 smoke or not, is their own business. (video clip stopped.) ms. henninger: i'm going to leave you with that and i just show you one more verdict form question, it is the last one i just talked about, punitive damages, the very important one that mr. paige referred to that i think is very important. it is important that you check no, because plaintiff is not entitled to punitive damages in this case. i ran out of time. i'm glad i thanked you in the beginning. you guys have been patient. thank you so much for your time and attention.