mr. baringer: good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen. i want to join with mr. wichmann and mr. millard by starting out by thanking you very much. they are right. we have noticed you have been extraordinarily diligent. you have paid close attention, and probably, most of all, you have been incredibly patient with us. and i know the court, mr. schlenther, their counsel and ours very much appreciate the way you have approached this very serious and very important job. as i told you in opening, this case is really at bottom about one thing and one thing only, and that is the choices that beverly schlenther made throughout her life about smoking. it is about why she decided to start in 1955, and it is about why 2548 she decided to continue to smoke until she finally quit in 2001, when, unfortunately, it was too late. you have heard all the evidence. most importantly, you have heard from mrs. schlenther herself. you have seen her deposition and you have seen her address those very questions. mrs. schlenther smoked, ultimately, because she enjoyed it, and she thought it was fun. i believe we have established that you are the one that elected to begin smoking, right -- a. yes. q. -- and to continue smoking? a. i thought it was fun. she decided not to quit until 2001, because until then -- and you heard her say this over and over again -- she was not ready to quit before that. she did not want to quit before that. and you know it was not because she could not quit earlier. mr. wichmann in his closing told you about dr. kathleen brady. he called dr. brady the 2549 world's foremost expert on women and addiction. and you saw her testimony, and you saw she is an extraordinarily impressive physician. and she has extraordinary credentials. and what did she say about mrs. schlenther's ability to quit? doctor, it is true, is not it, that mrs. schlenther ultimately had the ability to quit smoking, right? a. ultimately, she did quit smoking. q. okay. and she always had the ability to quit smoking? a. yes. she always had the ability to quit smoking. i'm going to talk about all of mr. schlenther's claims and the evidence in some detail. but the bottom line is that mr. schlenther has failed to carry his burden of proof that mrs. schlenther developed copd and died in 2010 because of anything that r.j. reynolds did. because the resolution of this case depends 2550 ultimately on whether he carried his burden of proof, i want to talk about that just for a couple minutes before i start talking about the evidence. the court has instructed you on the law, and as you remember from jury selection, you are obligated to follow the law that the court gives you. you were told that mr. schlenther had the burden of proving every element of all of his claims by the greater weight of the evidence. when you deliberate, you will see that verdict form that plaintiff's counsel showed you during their closing. and the thing i want you to remember is on every one of those questions that you have to answer when you are done. all of those questions are about mrs. schlenther, not the public, not some other smoker, but mrs. schlenther and only mrs. schlenther. i'm sorry. my mouth just does not work on that sometimes. you will see that the consistent theme in all of those questions is the concept of legal cause. legal cause means that, but for reynolds' conduct, mrs. schlenther would not have developed the copd and die. "but for" is the standard. and you will 2551 see that the -- and this is an example from the concealment. it says "but for" in the first question -- or in the first instruction, and the second instruction talks about contribute substantially. but contribute substantially in our system of law means the same thing as "but for." to the extent when you go back into the jury room that you find that you have to guess or speculate about some issue that relates to the claims, it means that the plaintiff has not carried his burden of proof. and i want to talk again just a little bit about legal cause to illustrate this for you. in openings, i gave you the examples of the dominos falling and that what they had to show on concealment is, if you take out the concealment, that the dominos stop falling. and that was to show that without the wrongful conduct, she would not have continued smoking, and she would not have developed copd. i want to give you another example, now, to illustrate, and i want to talk about it in the context of the negligence claim, what it means that but for the negligence, she would not have 2552 developed. and i want you to think about this in the context, an easy example is a car accident. consider the first scenario. in the first scenario, the driver of the car is going down the road and texting. and that is negligent. and because he was texting, he did not see the stop sign. he ran through and hit the other car. it would be -- the negligence is the legal cause, because if you take away the texting, the accident would not have happened. but consider a second example. the driver is going down the road texting, but this time he sees the stop sign, but his brakes fail, and he goes through the intersection and the accident happens. his negligence was not the legal cause of the accident in that case, because you could take away the texting and the accident still happens. that is what legal cause, that is what "but for causation" means. you could have negligence in both cases. in one case it is the legal cause; in the other case it is not. and, ultimately, it was their burden in this case to prove that if you take away whatever they say reynolds did wrong, that mrs. schlenther would have stopped smoking and would not have developed 2553 copd and died. but they did not carry that burden of proof. i want to turn to the class membership question. and i'm going take this a little bit out of order, because i think the question that mr. millard addressed and the question of her copd is different from the rest of the issues in the case, so i want to talk about that first. you will remember in opening i told you that they had to establish a number of things to be a class member. and we will talk about these later, that she was addicted and the addiction was the legal cause. the other one is whether she had and knew or should have known that she had copd related to her smoking before november 21, 1996. and i'm going to focus on that piece of it right now. and as you saw, there are two separate questions on the verdict form about that. question 3. did she have it before november 21, 1996? and no. 4. did she know that she had it or should have known that she had it and that it was related to her smoking? now, in opening i did tell you that if it had 2554 been before may of 1990, her claim would have been time barred. and i told you that was a possibility. but as the evidence came in during this case, it became obvious that the real issue was whether she had it before november 21, 1996, and whether she knew or should have known that she had it and it was related to her smoking. so that is the key. i think the most logical way to approach this question is to think about what mrs. schlenther knew over time and what her condition was. and i created a timeline that, i think, will help with that. and i'm going to go through this in chronological order about what we knew and when. so what do we know about the 1970s and 1980s? we know that when she met mr. schlenther in 1974 and then they got married in 1976, she was already on inhalers for asthma. we know that by 1980 she was seeing dr. koehler, and he was taking care of her. and in her deposition, she told you that dr. koehler told her that her smoking was bad for her health, and it was causing her problems with her asthma. mr. millard talked about that and suggested that it was causing it. dr. koehler told her that 2555 her smoking was making her asthma worse and causing her problems, not that her smoking caused her asthma. and you saw evidence about the bronchitis, that january 1990 medical record that we talked about. chronic problems with shortness of breath. now, dr. whims-squires came in, and she told you that that was not really chronic bronchitis; it was acute bronchitis. and the evidence of that was she would get over it, just like mr. millard said. it was not going -- it did not persist. it did not, say -- every time she has a problem, she would get medication -- and mr. schlenther said that she got penicillin from dr. koehler -- and the bronchitis would go away. so it is consistent with what he said, that she had seasonal bronchitis that would come and go. so what do we know about the 1990s? we have no more medical records for mrs. schlenther until 1995, when she saw the heart doctor, dr. walsh. in 1995, she saw him for problems. she had shortness of breath and she had chest pain. now, remember what dr. whims-squires said about shortness of breath? she told you that there are many medical conditions that can cause 2556 shortness of breath, and not all of them have to do with a person's lungs. cardiologists, pulmonologists, always have to consider whether it is the heart, the lungs, whatever may be causing it. now, dr. walsh did write that he had to rule out the occult coronary disease and he had to rule out the pulmonary disease, just like mr. millard told you. the problem is the record does say rule out. but what do we know about what dr. walsh, this incredibly attentive doctor, did? he did not order any pulmonary tests. he did not have her have a pft. he did not refer her to a pulmonologist for follow-up treatment about that. he did not even write copd in his records. now, mr. millard told you that dr. walsh -- he said, right there we knew from dr. walsh that she had copd. what is the experience with doctors? when they think that you have a disease, they reflect it in your medical records. do dr. walsh's records say anything about copd? not a word. and what does this attentive doctor do as a result of this examination? he ordered a cardiac echocardiogram -- or an echocardiogram. 2557 what is that? it is a heart test. did he order a pft? no. the only thing that this physician did at the time was test her heart, and he made zero reference in his medical records to copd at the time. the next record is in 1998, the first time that mrs. schlenther saw dr. worth. and what did that record say? it said she had not seen a family doctor in three years at that point. no symptoms that sent her to a family doctor. and she did have -- there was a section on medical history. and what did mrs. schlenther put on that medical history? she said she had a history of asthma. now, if dr. walsh would have told her, as mr. millard suggested, in 1995 that she had copd and if she knew that -- and he said she should have known it was related to her smoking because of what dr. walsh would have told her -- why in 1998, when she fills out the record for dr. worth, does she circle asthma and say yes, and not emphysema? does it make sense to you that dr. walsh would have told her that she had emphysema or copd and she would have checked off asthma and not copd? that makes no sense 2558 whatsoever. now, there is this reference to this 1994 pulmonary function test. and as mr. millard said, there is no medical record of that. no one knows what doctor ordered it. nobody knows what kind of test it was. nobody knows what the results were. and no one certainly knows what mrs. schlenther would have been told about it at the time. in fact, dr. whims-squires told you that mr. and mrs. schlenther did not know the results of that test. all we do know is that when mrs. schlenther went to dr. walsh in 1995, she did not tell him that anybody had diagnosed copd in 1994 because of whatever tests she had. and even in 1998, dr. worth said there was nothing about copd -- there is nothing about copd in that 1998 record. and what did she say in 1998 to dr. worth about this whole thing, about this '94 test? she reports the history of asthma, not copd. dr. worth told you in his testimony that mrs. schlenther had not been diagnosed with copd when she first saw him in 1998. and it was not just that there was no diagnosis. she did not tell him that anybody told her that she had a history 2559 of copd. and he testified that there is no way of knowing when mrs. schlenther would have experienced symptoms because of her copd as opposed to some other medical condition like asthma. he told you that when he saw her for the first time, she was using an inhaler, proventil, which can be used to treat asthma. he said that when he saw her, she had no respiratory distress in 1998. she had acute bronchitis with a minimal cough. he did not order a pft when he saw her in 1998. she saw him again in february of 1998. at that time her acute bronchitis had gone away because of her medication. he did not order a pft at that point. he saw her again in september and november of 1999. neither one of those records that you have seen contains any complaint of respiratory symptoms or even shortness of breath. he did not order a pft in 1999. mrs. schlenther did not see dr. whims-squires until 2002. she did testify she thought it was likely that mrs. schlenther had copd in 1994, 2560 1995. now, dr. whims-squires talked about that same phantom pulmonary test from 1994. dr. whims- squires told you she did not have a record of the test. she did not know what type of test it was. she did not know whether it would have even been suitable to diagnose copd, because there are a lot of different kinds of tests, and she did not know which one she had. we do know that the test probably is not the kind they use to diagnose pft or copd. how do we know that? mrs. schlenther described the test that she had, the pft that they used to diagnose her copd. she said they put something over her nose and she had to breathe through a tube. that was the kind of pft that diagnosis copd. and what else did she tell you? that that was the very first time she had ever had a test like that. that is what she told you. dr. whims-squires said she had no idea what mrs. schlenther's symptoms were in 1994. why? because she was not treating her then. she did not see her for eight years after that. she also admitted, in a response to a question from one of you, that someone who has a 2561 history of asthma could confuse the symptoms of copd and asthma. they might not have known, mrs. schlenther might not have known. dr. whims-squires said mrs. schlenther was never actually diagnosed as having copd in 1995. no record of it at all. and we also know that dr. whims-squires says, i do not know if mrs. schlenther was symptomatic or even suspicious she might have something other than asthma in 1995. then dr. whims-squires says, i do not know what mrs. schlenther's symptoms would have been in 1996 or even 1997. and dr. worth told you medicine is not very good at measuring the progression of respiratory problems and symptoms that people with copd have. he said, there is no clear-cut standard for when people begin experiencing shortness of breath because of copd. we also know that mrs. schlenther's son, russell, came in here and testified in front of you. he said he began to notice his mother having breathing problems in the late 1990s or early 2000s. that is when he said she started having problems with her breathing, and she was not able 2562 to walk as far as she used to be able to do, and she was not able to do the things she used to like to do. late 1990s, early 2000s. mrs. schlenther's daughter susan testified that she began to notice that her mother was having difficulty walking distances in 1998. she said she may have noticed some shortness of breath around 1996, but it got worse later in the 1990s and early 2000s. and she also testified she did not know what was causing her mother's shortness of breath at the time. mr. schlenther testified in the lane case. the lawsuit they filed against that contractor and the city of largo. his testimony and his deposition in the lane case was mrs. schlenther started having respiratory problems in 2001 when the dirt and dust from the construction work invaded their home. in the lane lawsuit he said, that was when she started to lose the ability to do things around the house and do the things that they enjoyed doing together, 2001, after the lane construction started. so what do we know about the 2000s? dr. worth testified that any symptoms of copd that 2563 mrs. schlenther had when he began treating her in 1998 were mild but they became more severe over time. we know that dr. worth finally ordered a pft for mrs. schlenther in june of 2001, three years after he began treating her. he testified that that was the first time mrs. schlenther was diagnosed with copd. we know about the results in july 2001. dr. worth actually called mr. and mrs. schlenther at home and told her that she had copd. mr. schlenther testified that -- about that in his lane deposition, and they both testified that that was the first time that she knew that she had copd, in 2001, when dr. worth called. and remember what mr. schlenther said about it? he said he was shocked when they got that telephone call. both dr. worth and dr. whims-squires testified that 2001 was the first time mrs. schlenther was told by a doctor that she had copd. now, dr. worth referred her to dr. whims-squires, and she saw dr. whims-squires for the first time in 2002. and at her first visit dr. whims-squires noted -- and you saw a piece of 2564 this in the video they showed you -- that mrs. schlenther had progressive shortness of breath over several years. however, it seems to have accelerated over the past year. but dr. whims-squires, the piece you did not see in the video was dr. whims-squires admitted on cross-examination that her record is consistent with mrs. schlenther developing copd symptoms in the 1998 time frame. dr. whims-squires said that she told mrs. schlenther that her smoking was the cause of her copd for the first time in 2002. taken as a whole, ladies and gentlemen, mr. schlenther has not met his burden of proof to prove to you that mrs. schlenther was a member of the class. no one can say definitively when she first had symptoms of copd as opposed to asthma. but we know she was not told by anyone that the symptoms that she was having were copd and it was related to her smoking before november 21st, 1996. in fact, we know that the first time that she knew that was in 2001. they have not proved to you that mrs. schlenther had and knew or should have known that she had copd related to her smoking before november 21st, 1996. and i would ask that you answer no on questions 3 and 4. 2565 the other night when i was thinking about this closing argument i heard a train whistle from somewhere out there in clearwater, and for whatever reason it made me think about the plaintiff's theory of this case. essentially, what they are asking you to believe overall is that reynolds was responsible for mrs. schlenther's starting to smoke in 1955 and her -- for her to continue to smoke until she developed copd, copd which caused her death in 2010. it is like saying that reynolds lured her onto a nonstop train filled with smokers, and she had no way to make it stop, no way to get off that train until she developed copd. but the facts that you heard do not fit that theory. you know, i remember seeing old movies about old fashioned passenger trains, and in one of them i remember, a comedy, it was that there was this emergency cord hanging down, and if you grabbed and pulled on that thing, it would -- it would stop the train. it was like an emergency brake. and people would fly all over. and i have no idea whether that is realistic, or not whether they really did have those. but i think the analogy works, because the point is 2566 mrs. schlenther always had the ability to pull the cord to make that train stop. she had the ability to stop smoking after she had got started. it was not a nonstop train at all. it was one that was not out of control. it was exclusively within mrs. schlenther's power to make that train stop in time. her husband could not make her stop. her kids could not make her stop. her doctors could not make her stop. only she could. and certainly r.j. reynolds had no power to make her stop. i want to talk about the question of why did mrs. schlenther start smoking in 1955. now, this is not about blaming mrs. schlenther. this is not about saying she was only 13 and she did not know better so you should excuse her. the issue in this case is, was it something that reynolds did wrong that caused her to start smoking in 1953? she told you why she started to smoke in 1953. or 1955. she smoked her first cigarette with three friends in the bathroom at the movies. she said she was curious. the first cigarette was just something they did. she told you that she lived in a house with lots of smokers. that is why she started. it is 2567 just what they did. now she said none of the cigarette ads she saw affected her decision to smoke. that the only people that contributed to her decision were her family members who were already smoking. now, mrs. schlenther in her deposition did talk about bogie and bacall and seeing them in the movies and thinking they were very lovely. but she also told you that was not why she -- that was not why she started to smoke. and the only way you can deal with that is if they want you to discredit her testimony. did she know why she started smoking or not? dr. brady and dr. benowitz, two of the experts that you heard from, said that family and peer smoking are the most powerful influences of why kids start to smoke. does advertising have an effect? sure, it could. but what we know is the most powerful influences are peers and family. and certainly her peers and her family had a big influence on mrs. schlenther. plaintiff wanted you to believe, again, that it was all because of advertising, even though she denied that. so they brought dr. hurt. he is a doctor from the mayo clinic, and he came here to 2568 testify about just about everything, although he has no expertise in advertising, he is never done any research himself in advertising, he is never written about advertising. mr. wichmann showed him some documents and asked dr. hurt to talk about that. and i want to show you a couple of the documents he used. one was a document by dr. teague in 1973. they read you part of this. but the part they did not read you was dr. teague saying they were constrained from promoting cigarettes to the youth market; that is, to those in the approximately 21-years-old-and-under group. they also did not show you that dr. teague's memo also said, we should not in any way influence nonsmokers to start. and remember, this was supposed to be a top secret document that would never see the light of day outside reynolds. but that is what dr. teague wrote. then they want on and they talked about a document from diane burrows that was written in 1984, 29 years after mrs. schlenther started smoking. dr. hurt talked about that. but again, there were a bunch of things in the secret document that they did not show you. 2569 younger adult smokers was defined as 18 and 24. it also said, if we are to compete effectively, we must recognize the imperative to know and meet the wants of those who are 18 and have already elected to smoke as well as those of older smokers. they did not show you that one. they also did not show you this part: rjr's consistent policy is that smoking is a matter of free, informed, adult choice, which the company does not seek to influence. nothing in those documents talked about why smokers start. nothing talked about inducing young people to start. and, you know, r.j. reynolds was in a fiercely competitive industry. they advertised a lot. and we are not denying that or minimizing that in any respect. but it was legal for them to advertise. dr. hurt admitted that the federal trade commission has always had the power to regulate cigarette advertising. and although the plaintiff talked about advertising, they never linked it specifically to mrs. schlenther. it was always that it is out there in the environment and mrs. schlenther was exposed to it, like everyone 2570 else. but that is different than saying what the effect of it was on her. for example, despite all that advertising, her sister was exposed to exactly the same thing, she never started to know smoke. in fact, you heard evidence that two thirds of the women in the united states are never smokers, never smoked, even though they were exposed to all the same advertising that mrs. schlenther was. what is the point? it is not just the advertising. it is how did it affect that individual. and that is what their burden is in this case, to show how it affected her. now mr. wichmann tried to -- he sort of suggested that cigarette ads were the only thing that was out there at the time she smoked her first cigarette. but you also heard the testimony of a real historian, dr. gregg michel. and i want to make one quick comment about dr. michel. in mr. wichmann's cross and here again in closing today, he criticized dr. michel because his opinions in two other cases were the same as they were in this case. i do not understand why that is supposed to be startling or surprising. the man is a historian. history does not change 2571 from case to case. the articles that were in reader's digest, the articles that were in the newspapers, the television coverage that you saw, none of that changes from case to case. now, dr. michel did go and visit the places that mrs. schlenther lived, and he wanted to give you examples of what was in the local press about that. but there is no reason to think any of -- any of what was going on at the time changes just because it is a different case. the sources of information that you saw are the sources of information that we all get information from. it does not change from case to case. now, think about -- i want to you think about one other thing. compare that to dr. cummings, who you saw. dr. cummings was a video deposition. in it he said he testified over 40 times for plaintiffs in smoking and health cases. his video is used all over the state of florida when he does not go, and mr. wichmann thought it was perfectly fine to put that on. but it is not all right for dr. michel to have the same opinion as a historian? one other point. mr. wichmann again showed you that wall street journal article talking about 2572 the gallup poll and suggested that it was misrepresented. you saw on cross what the truth was. and i'll have to explain it again because mr. wichmann apparently did not pay attention. that 1954 poll said -- mr. wichmann: judge -- mr. baringer: -- have you seen or have you heard -- have you seen or have you heard that smoking causes lung cancer? ninety percent of the people answered yes. and that is exactly what dr. michel told you. dr. michel also went on to say, but that is different than belief. and what did we do after that? we showed you belief polls, and we showed you that belief built up over the whole time. there. was no misrepresentation. not by dr. michel. dr. michel showed you mountains of information that was available in the -- to the public about the health effects of smoking and the addictive nature of nicotine. he showed you textbooks that were used in west virginia when she was a student there. he showed you textbooks from florida when she was a student there. he showed you that there were -- outside of school there 2573 were lots of other -- there was lots of other publicity. he showed you examples from west virginia newspapers; he showed you examples from florida newspapers; all before she even started to smoke. does that mean that we are suggesting that she absolutely knew and believed that in 1954 and 1955? of course not. it is simply that that was the information environment, that none of it was a secret, it was out there. one other point i want to make about that. mr. wichmann seems to suggest that no one could possibly be aware of the dangers of smoking or that it is addictive if they go on to become a smoker. adults make that choice. sometimes, unfortunately, kids make that choice. it does not mean that they are not aware of the potential dangers. it does not mean that they do not believe it. sometimes people make choices to accept a risk, just like mrs. schlenther made that choice. so long before mrs. schlenther smoked her first cigarette in 1955, there was ample evidence, there was ample coverage of the possible health effects and the fact that it can be difficult to quit. 2574 now, dr. benowitz. and i'm going to talk about dr. benowitz in context in a minute. but mr. wichmann made a suggestion in his closing that is just a little baffling. first of all, i did not tell you in opening that i was going to bring a witness here to say that mrs. schlenther was not addicted. i never said that. i told you, you are going to have to make up your mind based on your common sense. and then mr. wichmann said, so the only thing i could bring was dr. benowitz to talk about it, who ended up, it was another generic deposition. it was a generic deposition. it is used by plaintiffs all over the state of florida. i did not bring dr. benowitz or play that tape to say mrs. schlenther was not addicted. i brought it to talk about what addiction means and ability to quit. and i'll show you that very shortly. but dr. benowitz, who is one of the world's leading researchers on nicotine and addiction, told you that even before mrs. schlenther smoked her first cigarette, it had been commonly known in this country for over 100 years that nicotine is in tobacco, and that it is been known for over a hundred years that it is difficult to quit once you 2575 start smoking, and he told you that terms like "nicotine fiend" and "nicotine fit" have been used to describe the difficulty of quitting for a long time in this country. dr. cummings, the other video that they showed you, said -- he admitted people have known for a hundred years that tobacco is difficult to quit. the evidence is clear, there was abundant information that was available. it was not all just advertisements. but the bottom line is mrs. schlenther told you why she started smoking. it was because of peer influence and family influence. it was not that there was no information floating around out there about the hazards of smoking or the difficulty of quitting. it was not because of advertising. she told you that. there is no evidence that reynolds did anything wrong that caused mrs. schlenther to begin smoking in 1955. so we know why she started. she told you. and now i want to talk about why she continued to smoke until 2001. why did she choose to stay on that train? why did not she make it stop and get off? 2576 you heard from mrs. schlenther herself about why. she liked smoking. she did not want to quit. and it was not because she was not warned. she told you in her own testimony, she was warned by her husband, she was warned by her children, she was warned by other family members, she was warned by her doctors, she saw evidence, she saw the coverage in the media, she saw the government mandated warnings, and she saw public health community public service announcements. every one of those things gave her warnings about the potential risks of smoking and the addictive nature of nicotine and smoking. and it was not because she was not aware. she told that you she was -- she said that she was aware of the warnings on every pack of cigarettes once they started going on. and you have known since at least the time the warnings went on packages that smoking might pose a health risk, correct? a. yes, sir. she also told you in that 2577 deposition that she was aware that, because of the warning, that smoking was bad for her health. and she saw all the warnings over time. the beginning, in 1966. the change in 1970. and then in 1972, those were on every ad that was run. and then the four rotating warnings that have been on every pack since 1985. she was aware of all that. she was also aware from personal experience. we know that her grandfather died of lung cancer in 1973. her uncle earl died from heart problems associated with smoking in 1973. her aunt virginia died in the seventies from lung cancer that mrs. schlenther linked to smoking. she learned from personal experience. we also know that she told you that the reason she did not stop was because even though she believed that smoking would be injurious to her health, she did not stop. why? because she did not want to. and all of the addiction experts that testified in this case agreed that if a smoker does not really want to quit, they will not. she -- we know that she ignored her stepfather. remember, her stepfather lectured her about smoking on her way to school when she was 14 2578 and told her it was bad for her health. what did she say she did? she ignored him. and that may be typical of a lot of teenagers. but it did not stop with her stepfather when she was a teenager. she said her daughter said that when mr. schlenther confronted her about her smoking, what was mrs. schlenther's response? leave me alone. now, i want to real quick, before i do the next one, i want to say something about the brother-in-law. mr. wichmann said i broke a promise to you because i promised that you would hear the brother-in-law say that she at one point said that she would rather be dead than quit smoking. and we did not put him on here separately, because if you remember dr. brady's video, the psychiatrist, i went through all of mr. martin's testimony with her. and i asked dr. brady, is not it true that the brother-in-law has testified in his deposition that she said she would rather be dead than quit? and dr. brady, who had read his deposition, agreed. i did not bring him to say the same thing. but you heard his testimony through dr. brady. 2579 her kids constantly were trying to get her to quit smoking. but she was not ready. that is what she told you. were they concerned for your health -- a. i'm sure they were. i'm sure they were. q. what was your reaction? what was your response when they would talk to you about it? a. i do not know. i cannot answer that. q. were you not ready at that time? a. i was not ready. she was not ready at that point. then when her doctors were advising her to quit she was not -- the doctors told you to quit, correct? a. yeah, but i did not. q. and you testified to earlier, you were not ready to quit. you did not want to quit then, right? a. that is right. she did not want to quit when 2580 her doctor's warned her. she said did not even listen to her doctor's warnings because she did not want to quit. did you listen to your doctors when they talked to you? a. no. q. why not? a. because i -- i did not want to quit smoking. q. is it fair to say you liked smoking? a. yes, sir. q. okay. you enjoyed it? a. i did. q. okay. and you did not want to quit back in this time frame, correct? a. no, i did not. she also testified that despite seeing and believing the warnings on those packages of cigarettes, she said she was not quitting and made no effort to quit. did you pay any attention to the content of 2581 the label? a. i mean, i -- i would read it on the cigarette pack, but i -- i was not quitting. q. did you make any efforts at the time when you saw it? a. no, i did not make any effort. you also saw medical records. one example was from dr. worth in 1999. patient flatly declines smoking cessation. despite the clear testimony from mrs. schlenther herself, plaintiffs tried to convince you that she could not get off that train she was on because of reynolds' wrongful conduct. and i want to talk about their theories of what they did wrong that made her continue to smoke. but ladies and gentlemen, every one of those theories is going to fail when the facts are applied. the first theory is, and their fundamental theory in this case, is that mrs. schlenther was addicted and could not quit sooner because of the addiction. now, this is part of the class membership issue that you are familiar with. and i'm going 2582 to discuss this concept, this issue in the context of the first two questions on the verdict form that go to class membership. was beverly schlenther addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine? and was beverly schlenther's addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine a legal cause of her copd and death? those are two separate and distinct questions. but the question they are not asking is did cigarette smoking cause her copd. we all know that. that is not in dispute. what we are in front of you in closing arguments, that is not what the case is about. the first question is, was she addicted? now, despite what mr. wichmann told you, what i said in opening was the court is not going to give you a definition of addiction. and he did not. you heard the jury instructions. there is no definition. and in the end, all that means is that you have to use your common sense and decide whether you think mrs. schlenther was in control of her smoking or whether it was in control of her. did she smoke because she wanted to, or did she smoke because she had to? was she willing or unwilling? 2583 now, you saw evidence in this case about her ability to control her smoking. she did not smoke in the house or the car after mr. schlenther quit. she did not smoke around her grandchildren. she obeyed the restrictions at work, only smoked on her breaks or took a puff when we went to the bathroom. she did not smoke during meals. she did not get up and leave during meals. she did not smoke at church. she did not leave church services. she did not smoke at sunday school. in the morning when she was taking care of had mother, she would wait over an hour before she would have her first cigarette. but that is evidence that she was not out of control. but ultimately, on the simple question of whether she was addicted, that is up to your common sense. because as i told you in opening, the real issue is the second question. the real issue is, was the addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine a legal cause of her copd and death? you do not reach that if you do not -- if you decide she was not addicted. but if you do, this is a separate question. now, mr. wichmann talked to you, and he 2584 showed you clips of experts saying she was addicted. and he went to his verdict form and he checked off "addicted" and he checked off "it was the legal cause of her death" as if it were the same question. and ladies and gentlemen, it could not even be close to the same question. the real question is did mrs. schlenther have the ability to quit? and the answer to that undoubtedly is yes, she did. now, they showed you a piece of a document from 1980 where somebody wrote, i have been told that we cannot defend these cases on the basis of free choice if someone is addicted. and the one thing i will tell you about that document that they showed you is it is a perfect example that people can be wrong. if -- if it was not wrong, if that was not the case, we would not be standing in front of you right now. now, in opening i did talk about personal choice behavior. and mr. wichmann is absolutely correct, i am going to talk about choice a lot. but as i told you in opening, i'm not the only one and the tobacco companies are not the only one to talk about choice. you saw this in opening. in 1977 and 1978, the publication of public health 2585 service called smoking a personal choice. that was not written by r.j. reynolds. in 1982, the surgeon general's report. a personal choice behavior. in 1986, the surgeon general wrote, cigarette smoking is an addictive behavior, and the individual smoker must decide whether or not to continue that behavior. let me tell you, first of all, one of the things that is interesting about that is the surgeon general in 1986 was c. everett koop, who i think you saw a clip from. that is what he put in his report in 1986. dr. cummings, the expert that they put on by video, said he agreed with the surgeon general in 1986. dr. brady, the psychiatrist, the first witness you saw in the case, said she agreed with the surgeon general's statement. as a matter of fact, there was only one witness that disagreed with this. dr. hurt. i asked dr. hurt, well, if it is not a choice what do you call it when 60 million people stop smoking? and after thinking about it for a while, he 2586 called it treatment. and i still do not know quite what that means. but the one thing we do know is that the surgeon general has a point about this. dr. brady in her deposition or in her testimony said it would not make any sense for the surgeon general to say that the individual smoker must decide whether or not to continue if the individual smoker did not have the ability to carry out that decision. it would be an exercise in futility. it would make no sense. and every one of the addiction experts that you heard from in this case said that smokers, even highly addicted smokers, have the ability to quit. does that mean that we are suggesting that it is always easy? of course not. it depends on the individual. for some individuals it is easy, for some it is extraordinarily difficult, but they all ultimately have that ability. and the evidence of this simple fact is that there are over 60 million ex-smokers in the united states. how could they have done that if they did not have a choice? how could they have done that if they did not exercise that choice and quit? 2587 all of the evidence shows, even on the 60 million people, all of their experts told you the vast majority of them were addicted when they made that decision and when they successfully quit. and none of the experts that you heard from said that beverly schlenther could not quit. obviously, they could not say that. she did in 2001, and she never smoked again for the remaining nine years of her life. and none of them told you she could not have quit sooner. there was absolutely no evidence that the day mrs. schlenther made the choice to quit smoking, that she was any less addicted than she had been at any other point in her life. and please remember what dr. brady said. dr. brady said, she always had the ability to quit. now, whether a smoker is addicted or not, nicotine does not interfere with an individual's ability to think or reason. and i think there were a couple of questions from you during the trial about whether addiction affects a person's ability to understand warnings or understand the information that is available. dr. brady addressed that question, and she told you nicotine does not -- 2588 i believe i can show you this. does that mean that smokers are unable to understand the warnings on the pack? a. no, i do not believe it is to that extent. q. would it impair them so much that they would not be able to understand health warnings from family members, friends, physicians? a. i do not think so. dr. benowitz addressed the same question. just so we are clear, there is nothing about the effect on the brain that -- the effect nicotine has on the brain that prevents a smoker from understanding that cigarette smoking causes lung cancer, copd and heart diseases, right? a. that is correct. q. all right. and nicotine does not affect the thinking or cognitive process at all, does it? a. no. (end of video clip.) 2589 mr. baringer: dr. brady also admitted that the evidence in this case shows clearly that mrs. schlenther was aware of the health risks of smoking, and she was aware of the health consequences of smoking. mrs. schlenther's own testimony was that she believed and understood the information in the warnings. but remember, she said she just did not care. she did not want to quit. now, dr. brady talked about the brain changes. mr. wichmann talked about the 60 million smokers and brain changes. dr. brady told you that even addicted smokers, with all of the changes in the brain she described, can quit smoking, and that the key to successfully quitting is personal motivation. and dr. benowitz told you the exact same thing. the key is personal motivation. and the changes in the brain that they both talked about do not prevent that from happening. you also saw a pamphlet from the american cancer society. do you have what it takes to stop smoking? and remember, it asks three questions. do you want to stop smoking? are you willing to make some changes in your daily routine? are you 2590 willing to put up with some uneasy moments after stopping? and at the bottom it says, if you can answer yes to all three questions, you can stop smoking. and all of the experts agreed with every bit of that. but the evidence was mrs. schlenther was not prepared to answer yes to those questions until 2001. she did not throw her cigarettes away before. she did not throw her ash trays away before. she did not do any of those things. now, dr. cummings, their expert on addiction, told you one of the ways to judge if a smoker is truly motivated to quit is if they do things like throw their cigarettes away, get rid of their ash trays. and she did not do that until 2001. dr. worth told you when he first saw her in 1998, she was not ready to commit to quitting. he testified that she quit for good in 2001, when she was motivated and when she was committed. the vast majority of time in her life she made no effort to stop. the first time she tried was in 1985 or 1984, almost 30 years after she started smoking. now dr. benowitz, dr. brady and dr. cummings 2591 also all admitted that the fact is some people just do not want to quit. he said some people feel pressured into saying they want to quit by friends, family, spouses, doctors. and he said that smokers will say they want to or even say they are trying just to get somebody off their back. you heard from family members say that mrs. schlenther tried and could not quit sooner. but she told you the truth. she told you that the reason she did not quit before that was because she really did not want to. and that -- remember that 1984, 1985 vacation that she went on with mrs. schlenther -- with mr. schlenther when they went away for two weeks and they both tried to quit smoking? she told you that when they got back and she started smoking again, that she told mr. schlenther she tried but could not, she just could not do it. but she told you in her deposition the truth, and the truth was it was not that she could not quit, it was that she did not want to quit. is that one of the reasons that led to you 2592 choose to pick up another cigarette and start smoking? a. no. i just wanted to smoke. i was not ready to quit. that is what she said about why she picked up that cigarette when she went back to work. she just was not ready to quit. but we do know that in 2001 she was ready. now she did not receive a package of previously secret reynolds documents one day. she did not suddenly get information that they claimed was concealed. that had nothing to do with why she became motivated in 2001. and we know why she was motivated. she said that it was because she wanted to stop for her granddaughter's first birthday the next day. her daughter susan said that mrs. schlenther told her that she was starting to be bothered by her smoking once she started having grandchildren. and she said now that she was having grandchildren, she did not want to smoke around them, and she did not want to take time away from, them so she decided to quit. susan told you that is the first time she ever heard her mother say that. she said that it was the first time -- 2593 mrs. schlenther actually said that was the first time i threw away my cigarettes. that was the first time she put up motivational notes around the house for herself. she told you in her testimony that was the first time she had ever quit for any length of time. and we know that she never smoked again. now, we asked her about the prior quit attempts that you have heard about. and in her deposition she identified three things that she had done over her life before 2001 to quit. the vacation with her husband in 1984, 1985. and you just heard her say that the reason she did not stay quit was because she was not ready. then she talked about hypnosis. and they told you she went twice. and the evidence was on hypnosis that they could not hypnotize her. and she said she never actually even stopped smoking when she tried that. she did not skip a single cigarette. she just went. we are not sure why. there is no testimony about why. but we know she never put down her cigarettes when she was trying to do that. nicorette gum. she said she tried that once for a couple weeks. but what does she admit? 2594 while she was using the gum, she never tried to stop smoking. she never skipped a cigarette. she just chewed the gum. they were not serious attempts. and susan told that you, she said she -- she said it was her impression that her mother really was not serious about quitting. and susan testified that her mother told her she really did not want to quit. now, dr. benowitz told you that if you use smoking cessation aids, things like the pills, or the pill, wellbutrin, and although there is evidence that she had a prescription, there is no evidence that she ever took it. the patch, gum, any of those things, dr. benowitz told you it is no substitute for motivation. and dr. brady told you that cessation aids will not make a smoker quit smoking if the smoker really does not want to. it does not work. the evidence was that mrs. schlenther did not try to stop smoking until smoking affected her in a way that was personal and mattered to her. and that was something reynolds could never have given her the motivation to quit for her grandchildren. and it is true some people have a great deal of difficulty quitting. but mrs. schlenther, when 2595 she finally made the decision to do that, she never relapsed once. she never had another cigarette. now, it is true, she used the patch. but she started using it the next morning. and she said even though she was doing okay, she decided to keep it on for a couple of other weeks, couple weeks after that. there is no reason to believe she could not have quit without the patch, because she was motivated. she was truly motivated at that point. when mrs. schlenther made the decision, when it became personal to her because of her grandchildren, she quit for good. and that was motivation her husband, her children, her doctors and r.j. reynolds could never have given her before. that is what it took. your honor, i think this would be a good time to give the jurors a break. the court: okay. do you have more closing? mr. baringer: yes, i do. the court: members of the panel, why do not we take a little necessity break, and we will take back up with the lawyers. let us make it until 25 after by the courtroom 2596 clock. if you just close your notebooks and leave them there. mr. bailiff, if you will escort them in whatever direction they would like to go. the bailiff: yes, your honor. the court: and we are off the record. (the jury retired from the courtroom at 3:08 p.m.) (a recess was taken at 3:08 p.m.) (court called to order at 3:28 p.m.) the court: we are back on the record in case no. 10-5736. we have attorneys present. we are out of the hearing of the panel. we are without plaintiff. anything else from plaintiffs before we bring the panel back? mr. wichmann: no, sir. the court: anything else from the defense? mr. baringer: no, your honor. the court: we are ready for them. the bailiff: yes, your honor. (the plaintiff returned to the courtroom.) (the jury returned to the courtroom at 3:29 p.m.) 2597 the court: thank you. according to my notes, we had left off with mr. baringer doing his closing. counsel, you may continue. mr. baringer: thank you, your honor. ladies and gentlemen, i have talked about the two class membership issues. as you will recall from earlier on, you were told if you ultimately decide that mrs. schlenther is a member of the class -- and i do not think the evidence supports that, but if you get that far, the findings come into play, and i want to talk about that just for a couple of minutes. i want to remind you that the findings do not mean that reynolds is liable and they do not establish whether mrs. schlenther was injured by any conduct of r.j. reynolds. in and of themselves, the findings do not establish either of those things. and ultimately, as the instruction tells you, you must not speculate or guess what those mean or what they were based on. the point is, the class action jury that made those findings years ago did not know anything about mrs. schlenther. they did not know when her smoking history was. they did not know why she 2598 made whatever decisions she made. they simply did not know. and the plaintiff still has the burden, even with the findings, of establishing that whatever wrongful conduct they want to describe to you caused mrs. schlenther's injuries. that is the only way that reynolds becomes liable. and i want to talk about a few of the theories that you have heard from plaintiffs during the course of the case. one was about filtered cigarettes and low tar cigarettes. you heard dr. hurt testify about that. and you heard mr. wichmann ask him questions about, were not filters just false reassurance for smokers to keep them smoking? were not low tar cigarettes intended -- intended to keep people smoking? and my point is going to be very simple about this. it does not matter that the public health community advocated both. what really matters is what difference did that make to mrs. schlenther. what do we know about filters? she never smoked a nonfilter. she never switched from nonfilter to a filter because she thought it was healthier. she started smoking a filtered cigarette, winston, that she got from her mother that her mother bought for her, but nonfilters 2599 were never an issue. there is no proof that it had -- that the reassurance issue they are talking about had anything to do with her. she never switched. the same thing with low tar and light cigarettes. what was the testimony about that? she tried one that she borrowed from a friend, she did not like it, and she never smoked them. and even when mr. schlenther was buying her whatever was cheapest at the indian store for the last 14 years she smoked, it was never low tar. she never bought light -- he never bought light cigarettes for her, because she did not like them. the issue was completely irrelevant in this case. let us now talk about another theory you heard. and that was that reynolds intentionally engineered its cigarettes to be more difficult to quit. dr. hurt talked about this. and he talked about -- remember, he showed you some internal reynolds' documents, and it was talking about the importance of nicotine and how reynolds understood that nicotine was important to smokers, but it was a deep, dark secret that they never told the outside world about. 2600 well, let us talk about the documents he used in his case to try and prove that. the first one was from claude teague in 1972. and that document, which we will not bother showing, was talking about -- remember that it said nicotine is the sine qua non and without nicotine, nothing? what did i do? i showed dr. hurt a 1950 reader's digest article. and what did that reader's digest article say? nicotine is the essential ingredient in tobacco. without it, it is just another weed. that was over 20 years before -- that was over 20 years before dr. teague wrote his memo. and then lennox johnson, i showed him that, because that same teague document talked about cigarettes deliver a dose of nicotine like smoking opium delivers a dose of morphine? and dr. hurt admitted that lennox johnson, the scientist in great britain, 30 years before dr. teague wrote that memo that they showed you, had discussed exactly the same concept. it was not a secret unique to reynolds at all. but the document also talked about altering tar-to-nicotine ratios on cigarettes, adjusting the amount of nicotine relative to the amount of 2601 tar. and dr. hurt was very critical of reynolds, because it said that reynolds was looking at how to keep customers satisfied, how to keep them smoking, how to control the amount of nicotine. and i asked dr. hurt, was not it true that the surgeon general of the united states advocated research in that very concept? and dr. hurt -- i had to show him the 1981 surgeon general's report. in '81, the surgeon general said, examination of the ratio of tar yield to nicotine yield per cigarette is interesting in light of the hypothesis that nicotine, perhaps in combination with organoleptic compounds, exhibits a threshold value for acceptability to the consumer. now, ladies and gentlemen, the surgeon general in 1981 was not talking about engineering cigarettes to be more difficult to quit. it was part of a public health strategy. i showed him that same report: research could show if there was an optimum combination of standard yield and ratio that leads to maximum satisfaction and minimal exposure to toxic products. and why in the world was the surgeon general 2602 advocating this? not to addict smokers and keep them smoking. remember the concept that i discussed with dr. hurt? the danger and the disease causation does not come from the nicotine. it comes in the tar. it comes in those constituents. and the surgeon general's theory and the public health community, what they were trying to do was find a way to give smokers the nicotine they wanted but deliver far less of what was dangerous in the process. and that is exactly what that -- what those documents were about. even dr. hurt admitted that the danger is from the tar and the constituents, not the nicotine. now, to the public health community at the time, it made perfect sense to do what you could to develop a less hazardous cigarette for smokers. that made sense to everyone but dr. hurt. what did dr. hurt say? he said it was a waste of time and it was wrong for reynolds to spend decades trying to produce a less hazardous cigarette. remember, he acknowledged that they worked with the national cancer institute, tobacco working group. and the purpose of that work was to develop a less hazardous cigarette based on the 2603 surgeon general's recommendations. and what did dr. hurt say? it was wrong. they should not have even tried doing that. something else i discussed with dr. hurt was his concept about smoking ph, and that if you increase the ph, it makes cigarettes more addictive. and he told you about the theory about free nicotine being absorbed faster and that, in and of itself, he says, makes it more addictive. but when i talked to dr. hurt about that, remember what we established happened. if you increase the ph and there is more free nicotine, where did dr. hurt say that is first absorbed? in the mouth and in the throat. and what did he say about how fast that is? that is a much slower route to the brain than if it is absorbed in the lung. so if you want to make a cigarette more addictive, why do you make it so that the nicotine, a part of the nicotine that ordinarily would not be absorbed in the mouth and the throat, why would you want to do it? it slows down delivery. that was not the point. and then the other thing that we established is that because of the ph of mucus in the lung, 2604 smoke from a cigarette that does not have any free nicotine in it, as soon as it hits the lung, the higher ph of the lung converts the nicotine to free nicotine and it is absorbed. and how long did dr. hurt tell you that that takes to hit the brain? i think he said five heartbeats. a matter of seconds. so i asked him, if you increase the ph and you come up with some free nicotine that is not absorbed in the mouth or throat, if some gets down there, how much faster does it get to the brain? and what did he tell you? he says he is not sure, but maybe milliseconds. so remember that chart he showed how fast nicotine gets to the brain and dopamine starts getting released? and i asked him, what was the ph of the cigarette use in that chart? and he did not know. and i said, well, how much difference would there be between a cigarette with a higher ph and a lower ph in that peak concentration? and the answer was, he did not know. he does not know what the meaning of his theory is. he cannot tell you how much faster it is, if at all. the one thing he can tell you for 2605 sure is less of the nicotine gets to the lung, more is absorbed through the mouth and throat, and he could not tell you what difference it really made. but there are a couple other interesting things that he talked about. first of all, remember he said that was the biggest secret that was revealed from the documents in minnesota? and that was in 1998, that suddenly the world discovered this whole issue of ph? but i asked him about public documents from the 1970s where the nci tobacco working group was addressing that very issue, the use of modification of ph to try and make a safer cigarette. ladies and gentlemen, there was nothing secret at all about the idea or the theory that if you altered ph, it could have some effect. in the 1970s, 20 years before dr. hurt was surprised, it was public that the federal government, in cooperation with the cigarette industry, was looking at that issue. and remember what he and dr. benowitz told you. if you grow your own tobacco, if you go out in the field and you pick it, you cure it, you chop it up into pieces and you smoke it without 2606 any ammonia, without anything, it can be addictive. and if you smoke it long enough, not only is it addictive, it will cause copd. there was -- and then i asked him about the thirties, forties, and fifties. i said, were the cigarettes in the thirties, forties and fifties, long before anyone thought of this ph idea, were those cigarettes addictive? the answer was yes. addiction is not created by this issue at all. and then i asked him, in terms of the effect, if he compares brands of cigarettes, one with a higher ph and one with a lower ph, i said, is there any evidence that the one brand is easier to quit than another? and what was his answer? no. he did not have any proof that any of his theories made any difference at all. no evidence that one brand was easier to quit than the other. then he talked about menthol. what did he tell you about menthol? he said, well, it really does not affect the addictiveness, but it makes it more palatable, that they are easy -- and i asked him, well, more palatable. does that mean they inhale more? does that mean they puff more? and he said no, there is no studies that 2607 indicate that that is true. then i asked him, well, is not it true that mrs. schlenther started with nonmenthol cigarettes and they were plenty palatable for her? she smoked them for a long time. and his answer was, yes. what about the overall cigarette market? are nonmenthol cigarettes palatable enough for millions of people to smoke them far in excess of menthol? absolutely. menthol was another nonissue in this case. another area that dr. hurt and dr. cummings discussed was public statements that the companies made that it had not yet been proven that smoking causes lung cancer. before we talk about that specifically, i want you to think for a minute, what was mrs. schlenther's constant view on that question about whether or not it caused disease? was there any evidence, one witness that said that mrs. schlenther ever expressed any doubt about whether smoking could cause disease? no, not one witness. not one said that. was there any evidence that she ever made it a point if somebody said, hey, that smoking is not good for you, you 2608 should quit, did she ever debate with them and say, no, i do not think so? no. did she ever dispute it? did she ever say, i do not need to quit; it is not going to hurt me; it is not harmful? did she ever say that? no. what did she say? she acknowledged that it was bad for her health. she acknowledged the health risks she was taking, but her answer was always that i'm not ready, i do not want to quit. and remember, mrs. schlenther's daughter susan said, she -- her mother never said she heard anything from a statement by a tobacco company. she never relied on anything that a tobacco company said. and the only thing that we ever heard that -- anything that she said was that it was after she quit. mrs. schlenther told you in her deposition, the only thing that she ever heard about a tobacco company was after, years after she had quit. there is no evidence of that at all. now, mr. wichmann played you a clip from mr. cullman, the ceo of philip morris in 1971. and he made a comment about some women want smaller babies. and i think without any doubt, we can all agree it was idiotic and that a statement 2609 like that should never be made. i'm not going to defend that. a lot of stupid things were said over the years. but what i want you to think about is what mr. wichmann said about that. he said, well, they are going to say it has nothing to do with beverly schlenther, but it sure did. because she had kids in the earlier sixties and she was allowed to smoke in the hospital. now, things were different back then. times were different. but mr. cullman's idiotic statement in 1971 is certainly not why beverly schlenther was smoking in the hospital in the earlier sixties when she had her kids. and it is a perfect example of something stupid, but it has no effect on this case. dr. hurt tried to make it sound like, when he was testifying, that reynolds believed that it was proven that smoking caused cancer before that meeting at the plaza hotel that you heard so much about ever occurred. and supposedly, that evidence, the evidence to show they believed it before the plaza hotel was a memo written by dr. teague. but when i asked -- remember that 1953 survey 2610 of cancer research written by dr. teague? i asked dr. hurt about it. and dr. hurt admitted that nowhere in that document did dr. teague conclude that it was proven yet. he said there was evidence that was accumulating that might tend to confirm it, but he did not say it had been proven. and remember, that was exactly the same thing that one of the authors of the epidemiological research he was talking about said himself, that this is evidence, but it is not conclusive yet. and remember that i showed dr. hurt a hill & knowlton document that he did not show you. and what was in that hill & knowlton document? it said the ceos of the company were sincere in their belief that it had not yet been proven. and what were they relying on? it said the national cancer institute. that is what they were relying on. and dr. hurt admitted that the position of the national cancer institute at that time was it had not been scientifically proven yet that smoking caused lung cancer. dr. teague's memo did not say anything to the contrary. now, then he went to a 1956 document by dr. rodgman. and he read you a piece from 2611 dr. rodgman. and it was the piece about how strong the evidence was, but he did not read the rest of it. and it goes through and talks about there is parallel evidence. some of the evidence supports the proposition that lung cancer is caused by air pollution or some of it smoking. and then the next piece said, in some instances, the evidence seems to be stronger in support of cigarette smoke as a causative or associated factor. in other instances, the evidence seems to be stronger in support of air pollutants as a causative or associated factor. the point is, nowhere in that document either did dr. rodgman conclude that the evidence proved that smoking caused lung cancer. he was discussing evidence that was being debated by the public and by the public health community and other scientists at the time. now, did he show -- did they show you a single document from reynolds where it said that the management, the ceo, that there was a consensus in the scientific department at some point that smoking had been scientifically proven to be -- to cause lung cancer at this time? out of all those millions and millions of pages, did 2612 you see that document? no, you did not. now, nonetheless, dr. hurt and dr. cummings talked about the effects that they thought these statements might have on some smokers. they said, well, it is possible that smokers could rely on these statements saying that it had not been proven yet, and they could use it as a psychological crutch, or they could rationalize, they could engage in denial because of these statements. they never once gave you any evidence that mrs. schlenther did any of that. and there is zero testimony to support that they ever did it. that was just a theory they had. and there was -- the part they did not tell you about was what i had to do with dr. hurt on cross. there was no medical and scientific consensus in that period in the 1950s up until the early 1960s on whether smoking caused lung cancer or other diseases. i went through with dr. hurt, and i went through statements every one of these people made from the mid 1950s to 1963, where all of these people with all of these associations said publicly that they did not believe it had been proven yet that smoking caused lung cancer. and there is not a single person on there or a single 2613 institution that is associated with the tobacco industry. not one. they were making statements in public as well. and the significance is, when you think about their theory, is if a smoker was going to latch on to a statement by someone that said it had not been proven yet as a reason to rationalize continuing smoking, would they have chosen a statement from these people that it had not -- it had not been proven yet? or were they more likely to rely on the tobacco industry for the same kind of statement? well, there is no evidence mrs. schlenther did either. but one of the things we know is we went through and we talked about where did the public get its information? who did it trust for its information about smoking and health? was it the tobacco industry? not in 1959. only three percent. in 1968, five percent. in 1970, three percent. in 1980, three percent. if someone was going to pick a source to use as a psychological crutch, it would not have been the tobacco industry they would have been looking for. it would have been all of these other people. 2614 and remember that we talked about this issue of -- remember awareness versus belief poll, that whole 1954, ninety percent had heard? and they criticized dr. michel because they thought he misrepresented it. well, dr. michel showed you belief polls. not just have you heard, but do you think, do you believe. and we went through a bunch of these. in 1957, it was up to fifty percent. then 71, 81, 87, 94. the point was people, over the time when these statements were being made, in ever increasing numbers, believed that it had been proven that it caused lung cancer. and the same was true of emphysema. this one was from 1987. did people believe, despite the industry statements, despite those things you heard, did they believe that it caused emphysema? in 1987, 85 percent of the public believed it, despite what the companies said at any point in time. how about what was happening with smoking rates in general? by 1965, 17 million americans had quit smoking. in the four years after the warnings first went on cigarette packs in 1966, in 2615 those four years, an additional 13 million people quit, despite all the statements. by 1979, the number was 30 million. today, the number is over -- right around 60 million. what about women in general? what was going on during that period of time? by 1965, 25 percent of all women who had ever smoked had quit. by the 1970s, it was up to 29 percent. by 1985, it was up to forty percent. all during the period of time that they are talking in ever increasing numbers, people were quitting. and all of that, all of that -- you can take that down. but all of those people that quit, everybody that quit before 1998, the 40, 50 million people did so without ever seeing one of the secret documents they want to keep talking about. they never saw them. but 40-plus-million people quit without seeing them, because they did not need them to quit. mrs. schlenther, despite all of this, said she believed the warnings that she had seen, she believed that she could be risking her health, but she was not ready to quit. none of the public statements have been proven to have had any effect 2616 on her. let me talk about one very minor issue mr. wichmann talked about in -- during the case, and he talked about tirc and ctr, the research organizations that you heard about. and he said, well, they pledged to do research, but they never really did any research. and dr. hurt said, no, they never really did any research. but in the dr. cummings video, one of the things that he testified about was that tirc and ctr had spend over $150,000,000 sponsoring independent research. the result was publication of hundreds of peer-reviewed scientific articles, and that the tirc/ctr research has been cited in the surgeon general's reports on smoking and health over 600 times. mr. wichmann also wanted to talk a bit about reynolds and public statements it made about addiction. and as i predicted in opening when we did opening statements, i told you that during the course of the entire trial, they would not show you one single document where r.j. reynolds or any other tobacco company ever publicly disputed the fact that it could be difficult for smokers to quit. 2617 did you see one? not a single document, not one where reynolds ever challenged the fact that it could be difficult to quit. so what did they do instead? well, they had to wait until 19 -- actually, 1994. in 1988, when the surgeon general changed the definition to addiction, i talked about the fact that there was controversy about whether it should be called addiction or not. and that resulted in the 1994 congressional hearings. now, mr. wichmann, through the cummings video, showed you a snippet, about 30 seconds, of all the ceos sitting there in front of congress, they raised their hand, swear to tell the truth, and the congressman asked. and the first one you see him ask is ceo of reynolds, jim johnston. and he said, do you believe nicotine is addictive. and mr. johnston says, no, i do not believe it meets the classic -- and he gets cut off by the congressman, and he says, i'll take that as no, and then he goes on to the rest. and they -- that is all they showed you. they said, reynolds denied that smoking was addictive 2618 in 1994. we showed you the rest of -- by the way, that hearing went on all day. i mean, that was not a 30-second-long hearing. and we showed you a clip of what mr. johnston said in that hearing. and he explained that he did not think that smoking should -- that cigarettes should be lumped in with cocaine and heroin. and they had a debate about that. but the most important thing that i hope you picked up from that testimony was mr. johnston said, he agreed that it was very difficult for some smokers to quit. and that is what the point is. dr. benowitz and cummings both admitted that the label is not what is important. the difficulty in quitting has been called a lot of things over time. it is been called an addiction. it is been called habituation. it is been called dependence. but all of them are just labels used to describe the fact that it can be difficult to quit. now, over 10 years ago, reynolds dropped that whole debate and just said, as addiction is commonly used now, we agree that it is addictive. and maybe you think that it is silly, that they should never have been in that debate. and that 2619 may well be true. but the fact is it made no difference with mrs. schlenther. that was on in 1994, when it really happened. she admitted she did not see anything about that until after she had already quit smoking. but even if she had seen it in 1994, would it have told her anything she did not know? remember, she went through that two-week quit in 1984 and 1985 with mr. schlenther. she knew what it was like for her personally. and that would not have told her a thing that she did not already know. and there is no doubt, one of the other things that she testified is back in the 1960s, she said that she knew it would be difficult to quit, in the sixties. and she was asked, well, had you even tried to quit by then? and her answer was, no. but she still knew it was going to be difficult. you have to ask yourself why. it is probably because of all the information that was available. but the statements, that label debate about what to call difficulty of quitting in 1994, addiction or habit, has no bearing on this case at all. i'm going to talk about -- specifically about 2620 concealment for a little while. this is question no. 7 on the verdict form. and you will see -- it asks about please state whether beverly schlenther reasonably relied to her detriment on any statement by r.j. reynolds tobacco company after may 5, 1982, which concealed or omitted material information concerning the health effects and/or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes, and, if so, whether such reliance was a legal cause of her copd and death. the next question that you will see on the verdict form, no. 8, is the agreement to conceal. so i'm not going to talk about those separately. but i want to remind you again that the key is they have to -- they have to prove to you that but for the concealment -- in other words, if what they say was concealed, had not been concealed -- it would have changed what happened with mrs. schlenther. and remember, one thing i want you to remember about their addiction theory. they want to talk about no choice, nothing could have happened, she could not quit earlier. if that is true, think about what that means for her -- their concealment claim. if mrs. schlenther was 2621 addicted and nothing was going to change her mind, what does all the concealment have to do with anything? if that information had been public and she was addicted and had no choice and could not quit, would it have mattered? it makes no sense. so what was it -- one other thing i want to mention about this, about the old documents. remember dr. hurt? dr. hurt said he used some of the old secret documents as part of his treatment program in minnesota. forty-eight percent of the people he showed those documents to and gave treatment and kept them in treatment for eight days did not quit. the documents did not make them quit. and the other 52 percent, hard to tell. they got all the treatment. but the point was, you could not just show these to somebody and boom, they quit. you have to know more about the individual. you have to know more about what is important to them. and that was their burden to establish why it was important to mrs. schlenther in this case, and they did not do it. now, they had two primary themes on what was concealed. one was the addictive nature of nicotine and the other one was on the health 2622 effects of smoking. i asked you in opening, as you listen to the evidence about concealment, to keep three things in mind. what information was hidden? you have got to know what it is to be able to figure anything out about the claim. was it available from other sources? was it, for example, like dr. teague saying nicotine is important, and the same information was available in reader's digest? but most importantly, would the information have actually made a difference in mrs. schlenther? and you have to think about this. you cannot just take a well known fact, stamp "confidential" on it, stick it in a drawer, lock it, and create some secret that matters to someone. you know, if you write down on a piece of paper, tomorrow is wednesday, and lock it up tonight, it does not make it a secret. and that is essentially what a lot of what they are talking about is. and keep in mind that the same lack of information they are talking about did not stop tens of millions of other people from quitting. let us talk about the addictive nature of 2623 nicotine. what was concealed? to begin with, dr. brady and benowitz and cummings all admitted that it was no secret to mrs. schlenther or anyone else that once you start, it can be difficult to quit. they all said that was commonly known in the united states, for over a hundred years people knew that. now, remember, i used -- i told you already about claude teague and the sine qua non and the delivery device. and dr. hurt ultimately admitted that what he claimed, in answer to mr. wichmann's questions, were deep, dark secrets in the laboratories of r.j. reynolds were concepts that were known 20 and 30 years before dr. teague ever put pen to paper. and remember what else that dr. michel showed you? dr. michel showed you magazines and newspapers from the twenties, thirties, forties, fifties, sixties, seventies, and eighties, all talking about the issue of the difficulty of quitting. remember all those articles that talked about how to quit and the fact that it can be addictive, the fact that it can be hard to quit? constantly in the public realm there were articles from a lot 2624 of different sources talking about the fact that nicotine could be addictive or habit or whatever you want to call it. but all through that period of time, people understood that it was difficult to quit. there was nothing that they showed you from r.j. reynolds, any of those secret documents, that contained a fact that bears on the question of whether or not it was difficult to quit. and that is the only thing logically they could say would have made any difference to mrs. schlenther, and she knew it. what about health effects? again, dr. michel showed you what information was available to the public. he went through and showed you reader's digest, twenties and forties, talking about health effects. all of these, injurious to the health, specifically on chronic bronchitis, specifically on emphysema, specifically on lung cancer, all through this period of time from the twenties, thirties, forties, more frequency in the fifties. he showed you that time and newsweek ran articles as well. he showed you newspapers from west virginia, he showed you newspapers from florida, all containing information that cigarette smoking 2625 might be hazardous to health. 1964, the surgeon general's report. major front-page news all across the country, including here in florida. there were magazine articles about it that you saw. there were special news reports on television the day that it was released. you saw one of those. all of them, information about the health effects of smoking. and what did the surgeon general conclude? these are examples of articles: cigarette smoking increases the risk of dying from chronic bronchitis and emphysema. a relationship exists between cigarette smoking and emphysema. and, remember, as i showed you earlier back in opening, i think, the surgeon general also concluded in 1964 that it was a habit not easily broken, and it was drug-related. in 1968, daniel horn, who was the head of the u.s. national clearinghouse on smoking and health, said you could stand on a rooftop and shout "smoking is dangerous" at the top of your lungs and you would not be telling anyone anything they did not already know. and he is talking about the health effects of smoking, something that 2626 plaintiff wants you to believe reynolds was able to hide from the american public. and all through the period, again, what was happening? increasing belief on the part of the public, increasing numbers of people that quit. one very minor point about this. one thing that they also said was a deep, dark secret was that they had identified compounds in cigarette smoke inside r.j. reynolds and the public did not know. the one example from a document that they used with dr. rodgman was a compound called benzo[a]pyrene. and i asked dr. hurt about that. and the document they were talking about was from 1956. this is a reader's digest article from 1950, six years before that. and lo and behold, benzo[a]pyrene had been identified to the public six years before the secret they said reynolds was hiding. the reader's digest continued doing it. in 1959, reader's digest was talking about eight carcinogenic polycyclics are in tobacco smoke. there was nothing secret about anything about constituents. one thing you probably did learn, though, is 2627 dr. hurt ultimately admitted that r.j. reynolds tobacco has been responsible for identifying more than half of all the constituents in cigarette smoke and publishing those. in fact, he admitted, r.j. reynolds invented the technology by which scientists have been able to identify constituents in tobacco smoke. i want to go back and show you the concealment question one more time, because of this, the may 5, 1982, and explain to you what that means on the concealment question. in order for the plaintiff to prevail on the concealment question, no. 7, they have to prove that mrs. schlenther reasonably relied on a statement by reynolds that concealed or omitted material information about the health effects of smoking or the addictive nature of smoking before -- or, excuse me, after may 5, 1982. plaintiff has not done that at all. remember, mrs. schlenther admitted she was aware of and believed the warnings on cigarette packs starting in the 1960s or 1970s at the latest. if she already was aware and already believed, how could she have reasonably relied on anything that reynolds said after 1982? she had 2628 already come to the conclusion that it caused disease 12, 15 years earlier. she also said she knew cigarettes were bad for her because of the warnings, but she said she did not quit because she did not want to. remember what her susan -- her daughter susan testified to. she said there was no reason to believe that mrs. schlenther was not already aware of the health risks of smoking by 1980, two years before this cutoff, and she could not possibly have reasonably relied on anything reynolds said about the health effects after '82, because she already knew that. and remember on the addiction side, she testified that she knew about -- she knew personally it would be hard to quit before she had ever tried it. she said that she knew it would be hard to quit. she was asked, had you tried it at that time? and her answer was, no. and then, and the question was: well, how do you know it would be difficult? and she said, it is just one of those things you get addicted to. she knew, she heard that information, it had 2629 been part of her environment, and she was well aware of it. and finally, remember that mrs. schlenther testified that the only thing she ever heard about the tobacco company statements was after she had already quit. she did not hear anything in that period that she could possibly have reasonably relied on. i want to talk to you about this idea of comparative fault. this is where mr. wichmann was talking about how much fault do you assign to mrs. schlenther, how much do you assign to r.j. reynolds. this only comes into play if you decide somewhere along the way that reynolds did something wrong that was the legal cause of mrs. schlenther's injury. you do not even get to this if you do not get that far. but if you do, i want you to keep in mind, because all of this is the plaintiff's burden of proof, mrs. schlenther's responsibility starts at one hundred percent. i mean, that is a basic american concept. you are responsible for your own actions, and the law reflects that. they have to prove that she is not one hundred percent at fault. and the only way you move down from one hundred percent is if you agree 2630 that reynolds did something wrong that contributed to why mrs. schlenther developed copd and died in 2010. now, remember, there is no question in this case that mrs. schlenther had the ability to quit and quit sooner. dr. brady, their psychiatrist, said she always had the ability to quit. dr. benowitz. (a video clip was played as follows:) q. nicotine in cigarettes does not prevent a smoker who goes to see you from understanding a warning, you tell them you need to quit smoking or you are going to get lung cancer or you are going to get heart disease, right? a. correct. q. and smoking cigarettes does not cause a smoker to lose the ability to be responsible for their own actions, correct? a. correct. responsibility. dr. benowitz, the world's leading researcher on nicotine addiction, agrees with the fact that someone is addicted does not relieve them of responsibility for their own decisions. 2631 dr. brady, how does she feel about that? -- responsibility even though the choice might -- i mean, you are not saying that because it is a tough choice that they are not responsible, are you? a. no. i'm not saying that. q. okay. even if it is a tough choice, even if it is difficult to do, they are still responsible for this choice. and mrs. schlenther -- or dr. cummings actually even agrees with this. and you agree with the surgeon general, correct? a. yeah, i do agree with him. q. you agree that the individual smoker must decide whether or not to continue smoking, correct? a. well, obviously, an individual smoker is the one that individually can determine whether they can change their behavior. (end of video clip.) 2632 mr. baringer: and remember that mrs. schlenther was asked whether she accepted some responsibility. and her answer was yes. do you feel like you bear any responsibility, even partial responsibility, for any of your smoking-related illnesses? a. i probably should have never started, but i did. and i do not think it is entirely my fault. q. some your fault, some the tobacco company's fault? a. yeah. because it is put out there, and it is put out there, it is going to harm you. q. if i understand your testimony, you acknowledge that you have some responsibility for the choices you have made in terms of deciding to smoke, correct? a. (nods affirmatively). q. that was a "yes"; is that correct? a. (nods affirmatively). remember what she said there. she said it is put out there, that it is going to harm your health. mrs. schlenther was not sitting 2633 there saying gee, i did not know. gee, they fooled me. gee, i did not believe the cause. she acknowledged. and that is one of the reasons that she accepted some of the responsibility. she admitted that she was the one that decided to start smoking, she was the one that decided to become a regular smoker and she was the one that did not decide until 2001 to quit. now, one of the surgeon general's warnings that has been around formally on the packs since 1985 was, quitting smoking now greatly reduces serious risk to your health. and that is when it went on the packs. but that was the message from the public health community, as dr. hurt agreed, for decades before that. since the fifties and sixties, the surgeon general, the public health community were all saying if you quit, you reduce your risk. and remember, mrs. schlenther's doctors were telling her the same thing all along: you have got to quit smoking to eliminate the risk to your health. her answer was always no. in 2001, she finally did make the choice to quit. it had nothing to do with reynolds. she did not get reynolds documents. nothing like that. her granddaughter did it. she was well aware of 2634 the risks of smoking, and she had the right to choose to take that risk. she had the right to say, i'm not ready to quit. she had the right to say, i do not want to quit. she had the right to say, leave me alone, when people told her to quit. it is not second guessing her decision. it is not saying something was wrong. she had a right. she was an adult. she was fully informed all during this period of time when the issue was should she quit. maybe she was not fully informed when she was 13 and she picked up that first cigarette. but she -- long after she became an adult, she had the ability to quit smoking, which would have eliminated or reduced her risk of developing copd. and in exercising her right not to do that, she becomes responsible. she is responsible for the consequences. now, on this comparative fault form, you do not get there unless you have already decided that there was something wrong that reynolds did. but with all of the evidence, with all of her awareness, with all of the testimony about what she wanted to do and when she was ready to do it, it is hard to imagine you could find more than five or ten percent fault for reynolds, even if you get 2635 this far on the -- on the form. the choice was in her hands. she was the only one that had the power to do something about it. and, unfortunately, she exercised that power that she always had too late. let us talk about damages for a few minutes. again, you do not get to this unless you have decided that reynolds did something wrong. i need to discuss this, because i want you to understand that this is a matter that is solely within your discretion and good judgment. there is absolutely no doubt that losing mrs. schlenther was difficult for mr. schlenther and her kids. anyone that is lost a loved one understands that. and it is natural to sympathize with that. but as all agreed and as you have heard, sympathy is not the basis for either awarding damages in the first place or even considering the amount. no matter what you award, you cannot bring mrs. schlenther back. but as mr. millard said, this is the way the law deals with these issues. now, there is no claim here for lost wages, medical bills. there is no claim for mrs. schlenther's pain and suffering. there is no 2636 claim for her children's pain and suffering. it is only mr. schlenther. and the object of compensatory damages is to make him whole for his loss, not make him wealthy. how do families normally deal with this kind of situation? you can never replace someone you lose, but what do we do as a society? typically, people, you know, try and do the best for their families. they buy life insurance. what is normal? fifty thousand, 100,000, 250,000? that is probably a little high for typical. eight to $10,000,000? there is no basis in reality, based on this evidence at all, for even thinking about such an extraordinary sum of money to make mr. schlenther whole. now, there is some -- there is some temptation to say, well, the defendant is a big corporation. they can afford it. remember during jury selection, one of the things i asked was, if there was anybody that thought if you take the same loss, should a corporation pay more than an individual? and i think everybody agreed that that is not right and that is not the law. you cannot discriminate against corporations. 2637 let me go back to an example of a car accident. no matter how we lose someone we love, it is a loss. so whether it is a car accident or copd or something, a loss is a loss. but if there were a car accident case and it was just a normal individual that was the defendant, mr. schlenther's loss would be exactly the same. he would have lost his wife. but would you even consider awarding 8- to $10,000,000 in a case like that? of course you would not. mrs. schlenther took risks, calculated risks, but she took risks because of the pleasure that she got out of the activity. now mr. wichmann wants you to take the fact that mrs. schlenther took a risk and have it pay off in millions of dollars, $10,000,000. and what about the nature of the claims? remember, mr. millard went through this. he said loss of companionship, loss of protection, loss of support. he went through that. and i want you to think back for a minute about that lawsuit that mr. and mrs. schlenther filed in 2003 against the city of largo and david lane. and mr. schlenther in that case, what did he ask for? he asked for damages for mrs. schlenther's copd, because she 2638 could not do things around the house anymore like she used to. she could not walk to the mailbox. she could not walk around and they could not go do things like go to conventions anymore. why? because the dirt and dust from the construction project caused this harm to mrs. schlenther. and mr. schlenther asked -- he said he had -- he had mental anguish because of the condition of his wife that was caused by that contractor. and he asked for all of those damages. and in cross-examination, he admitted he is asking for exactly the same kind of damages, but now it is from r.j. reynolds. they settled that lawsuit in 2007, toward the end of the year, and less than eight months later, at the beginning of 2008, they filed the lawsuit for the same damages against r.j. reynolds. let us talk about punitive damages for a few minutes. they want you to say yes, punitive damages are warranted here. now, the court has instructed you -- it was in the instructions -- that the standard of proof is different. it has to be clear and convincing evidence, not just the preponderance of it. what does clear and convincing evidence mean? 2639 clear and convincing evidence means that you have a firm belief or conviction without hesitation. it is a much higher standard. you can take that down. in order to have a firm conviction and to say that you believe punitive damages are warranted, you have to firmly believe that reynolds acted willfully, wantonly, flagrantly, with reckless disregard for human life and a violation of their customer's rights. now, i want you to keep some things in mind. number 1, the whole issue of whether or not it is been scientifically proven that smoking causes disease was resolved 12 years ago, 2000. reynolds admits that. it is not an issue anymore. reynolds has agreed that smoking is addictive, nicotine is addictive. that happened a long time ago. the tobacco institute, ctr do not exist. they have not existed since before 2000. and keep in mind that the only way you can award punitive damages is for the conduct that you decide harmed mrs. schlenther. now, what does that mean? it may be you did not like the debate about the label, whether it should be called addiction or habituation, and you 2640 think that is wrong; you think that was reckless. but if it has -- if it did not have anything to do with mrs. schlenther, you cannot use that as a basis for awarding punitive damages, even though you might not have liked it. you might not have liked the testimony you heard about filters and low tar cigarettes. but you know that that had nothing to do with mrs. schlenther, so that cannot be the basis for awarding punitive damages. you may think that the position on causation -- and i want to talk about that a little more. you may think that it should have been sooner. and maybe it should have. but unless you believe that that information had any effect on what mrs. schlenther did, you cannot use that as the basis for punitive damage. and keep in mind what dr. benowitz said. dr. benowitz acknowledged that for decades r.j. reynolds worked on ways to make cigarettes less hazardous, not just on the nicotine side, but in a lot of different ways. reynolds cooperated with the national cancer institute on the tobacco working group. none of that represents the conscious disregard. 2641 and on advertising, remember that the united states congress considered the question in 1965 as to whether or not cigarettes should still be allowed to be manufactured and sold and advertised in this country. and they decided, despite the fact that they knew about the health hazards and the addictiveness, they decided that it should. and as dr. hurt admitted, the congress of the united states could change its mind and ban the sale and advertising of cigarettes tomorrow. so the mere fact that reynolds sells and manufactures and advertises cigarettes cannot be the basis for an award of punitive damages. and also keep in mind that if you get to that point, you will have already fully compensated mr. schlenther enough to make him whole. that is what compensatory damages go. punitive damages are in excess of that, and it is not to make him whole anymore. ladies and gentlemen, it has been a long trial. you have been extraordinarily patient. and the last thing i'm going to do is ask you to consider basic facts and whether or not if the plaintiff has proven that anything that happened to mrs. schlenther was the responsibility of 2642 r.j. reynolds. the evidence has been overwhelming. mrs. schlenther smoked because she wanted to, because she enjoyed it, because she thought it was fun. mrs. schlenther smoked until 2001 because she was not ready to quit before that. she did not want to quit before that. dr. brady testified that mrs. schlenther always had the ability to quit, and the reason she did not had nothing to do with r.j. reynolds. throughout the entire time, there was only one person that had the ability to stop that train, mrs. schlenther. her husband tried; he could not do it. her kids tried; they could not do it. her doctors tried; they could not do it. and there is no reason to believe that r.j. reynolds could not have done that. based on all of the evidence, everything that you have heard, i'm asking you to return a verdict in favor of r.j. reynolds. thank you all.