mr. boyce: thank you, your honor. may it please the court? ladies and gentlemen, good morning. this is the last time i get to talk to you. i'm sure one of the things plaintiffs do not like about openings is i get the last word, and you can probably guess that one of the things i do not like about closing is they get the last word. i want to start right where i started in voir dire and opening statements and that is by thanking each and every one of you for your service. the price of citizenship is different for people in this country. for some its as easy as paying your taxes and going to vote, but for you, you have been asked to do more. you have been asked to put your lyes on hold for a couple weeks and come in here and resolve this dispute. and you should all be proud of that. but there is more than just promising to be here on time, to catch your bus, to wait in line in security. the most important part of what you agree to do is the promise each and every one of you made to 2275 be fair and impartial jurors, to decide this case solely on the basis of the facts that plaintiffs prove for mr. schoeff. and judge tuter said it perfectly during mr. paige's closing remark. he said we are focusing on this smoker, mr. schoeff, the only facts you can consider as you deliberate in this case are the facts that plaintiffs prove for mr. schoeff. and we talked about that from the very beginning. and that is where i would like to start, because as i told you in opening statements, the facts just do not add up for plaintiffs in this case. on every key issue, the facts of mr. schoeff's life, the decisions he made, and the choices he made and the timing of those choices do not fit the claims that plaintiffs have made. and it is apparent on every key issue in the case. first is reasons for smoking. on the left are things that the evidence shows mr. schoeff said about himself in this case. he said that he liked smoking, he said that he enjoyed smoking with his coffee, enjoyed smoking with his meals, he enjoyed the taste. he enjoyed smoking with his friends, it relaxed him, it relieved stress, and he smoked because it helped him at work. that is the evidence of what mr. schoeff 2276 said himself about his own smoking. what he never said, i'm addicted, not once. i was tricked into smoking, not once, and i regret smoking, not once. no evidence of that. just does not add up. it is the same when you get to awareness. plaintiffs just like to assert that mr. schoeff ignored everything he learned about smoking throughout his whole life. they wave their hand and pretend that he knew nothing. mr. paige said this, i wrote it down. he did not know anything. that is what they want you to believe about mr. schoeff. but look at what the evidence was in this case. first mrs. schoeff's testimony is on the left. it really was not until the late '80s or '90s until he had more firm awareness of the health effects. think about the evidence, think about how that claim does not add up. in 1950 mr. schoeff's father quit because of asthma, told him, i'm quitting because of my lungs, 1950. that is a warning from his father. it does not get any more personal and any more real than your father telling you, i'm giving up smoking because of my lungs. in 1953 mrs. schoeff quit. in the '50's, mr. schoeff's sister betty walker quit. she quit smoking because a doctor told her to quit smoking. she told mr. schoeff that. 2277 when we talk about reliance -- i'll get to this in a point, it is not just reliance, the instruction is perfectly clear, it has to be reasonable reliance. you do not get to just ignore these kind of warnings, the law does not allow that. it has to be reasonable under the circumstances, and when your sister tells you before 1960 that she is quitting smoking because a doctor told her to because of health reasons, it is impossibly to reasonably rely on statements to the contrary. in 1957 mr. schoeff quit smoking. i never heard a good explanation for this, perhaps it was because his daughter pamela was born in 1957, but he put cigarettes down in 1957, he quit for long enough for all the nicotine to be out of his body, he quit long enough for any withdrawal symptoms he was experiencing to be done, and when he went back to smoking, it was for reasons that had nothing to do with reynolds. that is 1957. he quit smoking. in 1966 the warning label went on the pack. plaintiffs like to talk about all of the individual puffs of a cigarette that mr. schoeff took over his life, but every single cigarette that he took out of any pack from 1966 on had a warning label right on the side of it. right on the side of it, hundreds of 2278 thousands of warnings from the tobacco companies with each and every cigarette he smoked from 1966 on. in 1967 he quit smoking again for two months, all of the nicotine is out of his body, any withdrawal he is experiencing is long gone. when he goes back to smoking, it is for reasons that have nothing to do with reynolds, nothing to do with the misunderstanding about the risks of smoking, and nothing to do with plaintiff's allegations in this case. he goes back to smoking because somebody gives him a cigarette at an accident scene. that is 1967. in 1970 the warning labels changed. mr. schoeff told you that they talked about that warning label. that is 1970. mr. schoeff quits in the '70s, in 1983 he is told that he has pvd from smoking. he has surgery, nothing will teach you that smoking has risks more than being operated on for a smoking-related disease. that happened in 1983. plaintiffs pretend, well, he smoked filters after that, that is not reasonable. that is not reasonable reliance. that is simply a statement that is made in this lawsuit where they want $9.5 million. he did not sue anybody, he did not blame anybody, and he never said he regretted it in 1983. but in 1983 there should be no doubt that anything after that that they claim is reliance is 2279 absolutely not reasonable. in 1985 he goes to smoke enders -- excuse me, 1983 he goes to smoke enders and drops out, and in 1985 the warning label is changed to say, smoking causes lung cancer. that is the disease he got. it was written on the side of the pack starting in 1985. and plaintiffs would have you believe that it is reasonable for him to smoke a filtered cigarette after that. did they point you to a single statement that said filters were safer in the whole case? and i'll get to this in a minute, but just ask yourselves as you sit here right now, can you think of a single statement from any entity anywhere that mr. schoeff saw, just one. it is 50 years. they cannot point to one statement from one person affiliated with the tobacco industry that this man actually saw, actually saw and actually heard and actually relied on, not one statement in the whole case. it is the same when it comes to advertising. at trial mrs. schoeff testified, sure, we talked about advertisement all the time, when the proponents of the cigarette companies had all these wonderful ads, how cigarettes were. i showed her her sworn deposition testimony when she was here, and she said, look, he 2280 never showed me an advertisement, he never once in our entire lives together pointed out an advertisement to me and said, hey, look, look at this great cigarette ad, and you said no, not like that. it does not add up. the story they told in court does not add up. it does not add up to making mr. schoeff a class member, and it does not add up to $9.5 million for mrs. schoeff. it is the same for nicotine withdrawal. and this is an important point. every time mr. schoeff put smoking down, and even this relapse stuff that they talk about, and there is no evidence that he ever relapsed or that he was overcome by a compulsion to smoke at all. but two things about withdrawal. that is a medical diagnosis. this is a man who was never diagnosed with nicotine withdrawal. but secondly, look at the symptoms he experienced himself. first in court mrs. schoeff testified that he had been captured. he had a compulsion about it. he said to me it felt like a compulsion. i asked her, is not it true you used to joke with him about his nicotine withdrawal? he would be irritable and fidgety, and she said, we would talk about it. not just talk, you would actually about joke about it. she said, uh-huh. they joked about it. that tells 2281 you all you need to know about the severity of his withdrawal symptoms. he was fidgety. mr. schoeff was a marine. when did being fidgety become an excuse not to change behavior that you want to change? that is plaintiff's case. when he put a cigarette down, he was fidgety. fidgety. that is their justification for 50 years of smoking. but remember what happened when mrs. schoeff was here and we talked about withdrawal. between them, his symptoms were something they joked about, not something that they went and got medical treatment for, not something that they needed professional assistance for, but joke. he was cranky. did you see any evidence that mr. schoeff was the kind of man who could not put up with being fidgety or irritable if he really wanted to get something done? no, he did not. there was no evidence. it is the same with reliance, mr. schoeff told you that continually -- excuse me, consistently in the '60s, '70s, '80s and '90s she would pick out articles about smoking and health and show them to her husband, but she admitted that it was a one-way street. mr. schoeff never showed her an article disputing the risk of smoking, not once, not one article ever. she 2282 just said he believed stuff. did she ever point to anything specific that he had seen and heard and accepted, internalized so that he was making decisions based on that? not one piece of evidence. in their entire time together, he never went back to mrs. schoeff and said, hey, all those articles, you are showing me, look at this one, not once. not a white paper, not a press release, not a statement on tv, not an advertisement, not a commercial, none of it. and it is the same with ability to control. when it comes to whether mr. schoeff had the ability to control his smoking, it is right here. it still does not add up on all of these issues. mrs. schoeff said that he had been captured and that he was compelled to smoke. but look on the right. this is what we asked mrs. schoeff about when mr. schoeff went to work for dr. goodman, and i want to make one point here. dr. goodman was also mr. schoeff's doctor, a close personal friend and his doctor. and when we asked mrs. schoeff, well, why would dr. goodman put mr. schoeff in the house, did he know that he would follow the smoking rules? what did she say? they knew he would find a way. when it mattered, mr. schoeff could control his smoking. 2283 there should be no doubt about it. he was not captured, he was not compelled to smoke. his own friend and his own doctor -- mind you, a man who never diagnosed him as addicted. dr. goodman never diagnosed him as addicted, never diagnosed him as being -- suffering from nicotine withdrawal, not once. dr. goodman is on their witness list. all of these treaters are. not one physician took the stand for plaintiffs and said mr. schoeff was addicted, let alone that addiction was so substantial, so continuous, and so direct that it would meet the standards to be considered a legal cause under florida law. that is what legal cause is, direct and substantial and continuous. it is but for. if you take that out of the picture, would he still be the same guy? if you take reynolds out of the picture, would mr. schoeff have been a different man? if you take nicotine out, were there other things that mr. schoeff liked about smoking? that is legal cause. but remember dr. goodman. when it was up to dr. goodman and his own child, his opinion was, mr. schoeff will find a way. he knew that mr. schoeff would not break those smoking rules. quit attempts is the same thing. mrs. schoeff 2284 testified on direct that he tried so many times i do not even remember the number. she said, he was very sincere. and i asked her about smoke enders on cross-examination, and she admitted that about half way through the program he dropped out. and we learned that half way through the smoke enders program is when you actually have to quit, that is when you reach the point where you have made all your preparations and you are going to quit smoking. he dropped out. but there is an interesting point here, and you probably noticed it yesterday with dr. bernstein. the reason dr. bernstein did not know that mr. schoeff had dropped out of smoke enders was it is not in anyone's deposition. it is not in mrs. schoeff's deposition anywhere, it is not in david's schoeff's deposition anywhere, it is not in pamela schoeff's deposition anywhere; it is not in any of the depositions in this case. and, in fact, it did not even come up on mr. alvarez's questioning of mrs. schoeff. the first time it came up was on my cross-examination. i'm sure mrs. schoeff just remembered it in between the examinations, but it is a very important point because it shows that addiction is not a substantial part of this man's life. how can 2285 it be that his wife would forget through two depositions and a direct testimony in her own lawsuit that her husband had dropped out of a cessation clinic if addiction was a substantial and direct and continuous cause of his behavior? that cannot be. it does not add up. it cannot be that this is a man being compelled to smoke, tries to stop and fails, when his wife does not even remember until i asked her questions that he had dropped out of smoke enders. his own son said the same thing. david schoeff lived at home from 1959 until 1978. he lived at home for two years after he graduated college in 1982. he testified that he does not have a single memory, not one memory, of his father trying to stop smoking. he remembers his father talking about it, but he does not have one memory of an action, an affirmative step to change behavior. and, remember, plaintiff's response was, well, maybe he was not in the driveway when he pulled out. and they said it again today, well, mrs. schoeff does not remember the address and maybe they do not remember the name of the hypnotist; that is not the point we are making here at all. and i will tell you right now, no one is attacking mr. schoeff. i feel like i'm the only one defending this man and the kind 2286 of person he was, but we saw in their argument they know how to character assassinate when they want to, and it is directed at me. that is the attack. but here, think about what this means. this is his own son. we are not suggesting that he needed to be in the driveway when he pulled out. we are saying that over 35 years he never was there when his dad was quitting. he did not see it, and the reason he did not see it is that quitting an addiction were not substantial parts of mr. schoeff's life. if they were, if addiction, some of the other things required in this case, were substantial parts of this man's life, that evidence would be here. and it is that lack of evidence that prevents plaintiff from meeting their burden of proof on just about every claim in this case. now, we talked a little bit about the class definition. i'm sure probably most of you have taken it to heart and could recite it to me, but basically the first question on your verdict form is, was mr. schoeff addicted, and if so, was that addiction a legal cause of his lung cancer and death? was he addicted, and if so, was that addiction substantial, continuous, cause of his lung cancer and death? where is the evidence that mr. schoeff was 2287 addicted? they did not bring you a single doctor to testify that mr. schoeff was addicted, not dr. goodman, not any of the men that treated him in 1993 or 1994 or 1995. they did not show you a single medical record where mr. schoeff was diagnosed as addicted. think about that for a second. we have records and they are all in evidence and you can look through them yourselves, there are records from the '90s when mr. schoeff is suffering serious problems, heart problems and lung problems, and not one of those doctors puts in any medical record this man is dependent or addicted to nicotine. not one. they did not bring a single doctor to tell you that mr. schoeff was addicted. doctor henningfield did not do it. he admitted right off the bat, i do not have any opinions that relate specifically to the individual in this lawsuit. his opinions are generic. dr. proctor gave you the same admission. i do not have any opinions specific to mr. schoeff. his opinions are generic. dr. villa, you are not an expert in addiction. i am not. you have no opinions regarding whether mr. schoeff was addicted or not addicted? zero opinion. those are the three experts, no opinions specific to mr. schoeff 2288 and the claim that he was addicted to nicotine for more than 40 years. that is a fundamental failure of proof. you cannot substitute that proof for plaintiffs. that is why they want you to think that addiction is not a medical diagnosis, but we heard quite clearly that it is. addiction is a medical diagnosis. it is in the diagnostic and statistical manual, and that book, just on a side note, that book has all kinds of ailments in it. things like depression, bipolar disorder, all kinds of mental problems are in dsm-iv, including nicotine dependence, but it is because of that that you need an expert to apply it in a given situation. plaintiffs do not want you to do that. think about what plaintiffs want to do. they found the fagerstrom test. they have found a test that assumes you are dependent right off the bat. i wish i had tests like this in high school. you cannot fail this test. if you get a zero, you are dependent. this test assumes from the outset that you are dependent. but think about what plaintiffs want you to do. they have found a test you cannot fail and they have filled it in with information provided exclusively from the woman who is suing reynolds for $9.5 million; that is their addiction evidence in this 2289 case. they have filled this in with mrs. schoeff. they found a test you cannot fail, and they have mrs. schoeff check off the boxes, and he got an eight, i think. what kind of way is that to judge a man's life? we are talking about 40 years of smoking, 40 years of decisions and choices. what kind of way is that to judge a man's life, to make a medical diagnosis with a checklist? dr. bernstein explained this very well. these are not checklists. he is a forensic psychiatrist. i will confess he did not explain that well in response to my questions, he explained it i think a little better in response to your questions, but he explained it. they are like quincy, we probably remember that show, but forensic psychiatrists look at all of the evidence. that is the difference between dr. bernstein and the experts plaintiffs hired. he is a clinician, he treats real people. and before he makes a diagnosis of a mental disorder, he looks at all the available facts, sworn deposition testimony, discovery responses, everything he can find, medical records. he looked at everything. henningfield never saw a single piece of paper about mr. schoeff, proctor never saw anything. proctor sat up here and told you, he knew the material was available and did not want to see 2290 it. it does not matter to his opinion. but dr. bernstein is different, and he explained why fagerstrom and dsm cannot just be filled in as checklists, and if you think about some of the other mental disorders that are in dsm, i think that makes a lot of sense. you would never diagnose somebody as being depressed or having bipolar disorder by checking off things on a form; that is not a diagnosis, that is not addiction. and that is why plaintiffs have such a failure of proof in this case. but more importantly, it is this concept of addiction as cause. and let me back up for a moment. addiction is really just a word. we have heard that there were different definitions over time. for different people it meant different things and today we use it to describe a variety of activities. if you doubt that the concept of addiction has been watered down, remember dr. proctor's testimony. i asked him, is not it true that the state of florida collects a tremendous amount of taxes from the sale of cigarettes? and he said, yes. i call that the second addiction; that is dr. proctor. dr. proctor is the guy who would ban the sale of cigarettes in this country, dr. proctor is the guy who testifies repeatedly against tobacco companies, and he is the kind of guy 2291 that for him tax revenue for a state is an addiction. that shows you that it is just a word. it does not answer the real question that you have to focus on for class membership. and that question is whether addiction was a legal cause of mr. schoeff's lung cancer and death. and here plaintiffs have no evidence at all. setting aside fagerstrom, setting aside d sm four, setting aside what you decide you want to call mr. schoeff's smoking, that is up to you, you get to decide what you call it, setting all of that aside, the real issue is whether that smoking, that addiction, was substantial and direct and continuous enough to have been considered a legal cause of his lung cancer and death. not a single witness in this case testified that addiction was a legal cause of mr. schoeff's disease. not one. not one witness for the plaintiffs said that addiction was substantial enough to be considered a legal cause of mr. schoeff's lung cancer and death. not one witness. not even mrs. schoeff. not one witness. no evidence at all. henningfield admits that everyone can quit. this is the evidence we did hear, well everyone can quit. and plaintiffs write that off and try to pretend it is 2292 harder for some people and mr. schoeff had a tough time, but henningfield admitted that everybody can quit. he also admitted that there is some people who simply do not want to stop. it is perfectly natural for mrs. schoeff to wish that her husband had made different choices about smoking at different points in his life. but there is no evidence that mr. schoeff was not this kind of person. he is not somebody who could not quit, he is somebody who was not interested in quitting. this is legal cause, and that is the but for part of it at the bottom. these are all of the other reasons that mr. schoeff gives for his smoking, but i want to fast forward and make two points about legal cause. it has to be continuous and it has to be substantial. and just think about two events in this case -- mr. alvarez: objection. misstates the standard. it says or. the court: overruled. you guys are guided by the legal instructions that i have given to you in the back. go ahead, sir. mr. boyce: we have a chart and we have addiction on one side and continued smoking on the other because that is basically what you need to find. you need to 2293 find that addiction was substantial and continuous cause of mr. schoeff's lung cancer and death. you can see that this is broken in 1957, he quit cold turkey. how can mr. paige represent that mr. schoeff did not know anything about the risk of smoking when he quits cold turkey in 1957? he quits cold turkey for long enough time for the nicotine to be gone from his body, for the withdrawal symptoms to be gone, and when he goes back, he goes back for reasons that have nothing to do with reynolds. he was not tricked into resuming smoking, he was not forced to resume smoking, he made a choice to go back to smoking. that breaks the causal chain. it happened again in 1967. in 1967 he quit smoking for months. mrs. schoeff does not know why he quit smoking in 1967, she does not remember how he quit smoking in 1967, she does not know what his reasons were. she thinks that health might have had something to do with it, but she is not sure. but what is important here is that when he goes back to smoking, it has nothing to do with addiction, nothing to do with reynolds, and nothing to do with what mr. schoeff did or did not know about the risks of smoking. what is important about 1967 and 1957 is this concept of declining risk. and this is when dr. villa 2294 told you if you quit smoking long enough ago, you will avoid problems from cigarette smoking. okay? your body repairs itself almost immediately after you stop smoking. if you quit smoking 20 years ago, the relevant risk is significantly reduced. doctor villa went on, ten years ago, your relevant risk of lung cancer would be substantially reduced. and if a person quit smoking for 25 years, the risk of developing lung cancer is reduced by ninety percent or more. if mr. schoeff had stayed off cigarettes in 1957, he would have avoided his lung cancer, the same for 1967. he would have avoided the injury that we are talking about in this lawsuit. this is the surgeon general's report, this document is in evidence, this is as 29. if you do not like dr. villa's testimony, if you are looking for more information about what happens when you quit smoking, the surgeon general reported that after 15 to 20 years the ex-smoker's risk of dying from lung cancer decreases to the point where it closely approximates the risk of somebody who never smoked. that is after 20 years, that means if mr. schoeff had quit smoking even in the '70s, his risk would have been down to that closely approximating the risk of a nonsmoker by 1995. 2295 and the surgeon general in 1989, which is as 36, said that after 10 to 15 years, the risk of all forms of mortalities returns nearly to that of persons who have never smoked. that is the surgeon general and plaintiff's own expert. there is one other point i want to make about this declining risk. this is where mr. alvarez accused me as being part of the same fraud and conspiracy that he accuses my client of. nobody in this case told you that mai causes lung cancer. i stood before you in opening statements and said smoking causes lung cancer. there should be no dispute about that. the reason mai was brought up was because of what dr. villa told you. he said that the reason that 85 percent of smokers never get lung cancer is because your body repairs itself daily. if you smoke a cigarette -- if you need a tissue or anything, please just let us know. if you quit smoking or if you are a smoker, you are doing damage to your lungs, but your body fixes that damage. and what dr. villa told you was is that for mr. schoeff it was his opinion that this mai, this lung infection, which is a bacteria growing in his chest, prevented his body from doing what it would normally do. that is why mai is in this case, he is 2296 suggested mai caused his cancer. this is dr. villa's opinion that this was a guy who before he was ever diagnosed with lung cancer had a disease that has no association with smoking, that prevented its body from doing what it normally does. but '57 and '67 quits are important for those two reasons. they break this continuous chain of addiction as a legal cause, and they are both at points in time long enough ago that mr. schoeff would have avoided his injury if he had stayed off cigarettes. and there he is. this is the reason that addiction is not a substantial cause here. the only cause of mr. schoeff smoking was mr. schoeff. that is the point of this chart. standing between addiction and lung cancer is a man, a man who was a ceo and a vice president, an executive. you saw the commendation letters where he was commended for his ability to discipline himself and make tough decisions. that is the man we are talking about here. that is the lifetime plaintiffs want you to skip right over. they go from 1947 to 1995 with a wave of the hand. he smoked. there is an entire life in there. he enjoyed it. mrs. schoeff told you that he was a proponent of smoking. not because he did not know any better, but for him it was something that 2297 helped him at work, he liked to do it with his friends, with a drink, a cup of coffee, perfectly normal reasons that people give for doing things that may not be in the best interest of their health. that is not drug addiction. that is not drug addiction so substantial as to be considered a legal cause under florida law. he did not try to quit for decades, for decades. decades at a time. go back. think about that for a second. let us just focus on 1957. you may have heard this expression, what happened the day after? what happened the next day? 1957 he quit smoking, he goes back to smoking for reasons we do not even know about in this case, no evidence of what they are. what happened next? if he is serious about changes in behavior, would not you see a quit attempt in '58, '59, '60, '61, we go a decade. '57 to '67, a decade in between, it is not a consistent effort, and there is no evidence that if mr. schoeff would have put in a consistent effort that he would not have succeeded in quitting. he disregarded warnings from his family and friends, he was smart and disciplined, goal oriented. his own son told you, the goals that he had were important to him. that should tell you all you need 2298 to know about whether quitting smoking was one of those goals. the goals he had were important to him. he controlled his smoking when he wanted to, he was able to quit, and he did successfully quit. i want to turn for a moment to the findings. you have heard about them from the judge, the instructions talk about them in this case. the first thing is, the findings do not apply in this case until you first determine whether mr. schoeff was or was not a member of the engle class. but even if you find that he was a member of the engle class, the findings still do not answer the questions that you have to answer in this case. and that is what you will find in the instructions, there are still significant limitations on the use of those findings. we talked about these ones in opening, but the findings do not establish that reynolds' conduct is a legal cause of mr. schoeff's death. that the engle findings cannot be considered until you determine he is a member of the class. but more importantly is you will see on the verdict form the engle findings do not answer the questions you have to answer. when you look at the verdict form, you will see that you have ten questions to answer, and they all work to this requirement of legal cause. all of the 2299 stuff that plaintiffs want to talk about has to be connected to mr. schoeff by facts, by evidence and facts that can be considered direct and in continuous sequence, such that it is said that it was a substantial impact on this man, a substantial part of his life, such that he would have avoided what happened to him but for reynolds. that is the fundamental inquiry. if you take reynolds out of the picture, would mr. schoeff have been a different guy? and there was no evidence of that. there was no evidence from any witness that mr. schoeff was a person who was being compelled by a tobacco company to do something he otherwise did not want to do. did you see any evidence of that? he is a ceo and a former marine. did you see any evidence that this was a guy who was doing something he otherwise would not do because of reynolds? no, you did not. this is the verdict form. i would like to spend a moment here going through the verdict form with you, and we can talk about some of the questions that you are going to have to answer and some of the evidence that i think relates to it. and the first one is what we call strict liability, and the question here is, were the defective and unreasonably dangerous 2300 cigarettes manufactured by reynolds a legal cause of mr. schoeff's lung cancer and death? the first point i want to make here is plaintiffs did not prove to you that there was anything wrong with unfiltered cigarettes. they did not show you a single defect in unfiltered cigarettes in the whole case. mr. alvarez: objection, judge. it is inappropriate. it goes against the findings, it is questioning the findings. the court: overruled. okay. i have told you what the findings are in the instructions, folks, and you will be guided by the evidence as to what the lawyers are arguing. mr. boyce: they have cannot have it both ways. you cannot have filters being wrong, and then say, well, now it is unfilters. think about the evidence you saw in this case. think about what you learned about unfiltered cigarettes. the cigarettes that mr. schoeff smoked for the vast majority of his life, basically that is tobacco rolled in paper. that is what we learned in this case about unfiltered cigarettes. if you grow tobacco in your backyard and you roll it up in paper, you basically have an unfiltered pall mall or an unfiltered camel or an unfiltered lucky strike. that is what mr. schoeff smoked for the vast 2301 majority of his life. in fact, dr. villa told you that when mr. schoeff switched to filters in the '80s, that that was too late to make any difference. we asked him, if he quit smoking in the '80s, is that enough time to reverse the damage? they said, no. and he also told you that smoking for about ten years or less is not enough to increase your risk of lung cancer. so the filtered stuff in the late '80s is not really a part of this analysis, what was causing the disease. but here you can see that natural tobacco contains irritants. unfiltered cigarettes. both have carcinogens, both have nicotine, both have chemicals and cause cancer and are addictive and dangerous, that is an unfiltered cigarette. there was no evidence of a specific defect in unfiltered cigarettes in this case. mr. alvarez: objection, judge. these cigarettes have already been found by a matter of law to be -- the court: do not make speaking objections. mr. boyce: that is not true. that is totally not true. the court: both of you stop. the jury will be guided by the evidence they have heard in the courtroom and the decisions that they make. you may continue, mr. boyce. 2302 mr. boyce: you will see that one of the problems with the findings is a lack of specificity. mr. alvarez: objection. mr. boyce: there is no finding. the court: okay. the findings are as i've outlined them in the jury instructions, ladies and gentlemen. this is legal argument, keep in mind that both lawyers are entitled to argue what they wish, but you must follow the legal instructions as i've given to you already. mr. boyce, you may continue. mr. boyce: thank you, sir. they have got the wrong cigarette here. it does not add up. they have got the wrong guy to try to force into the engle class, but they have also got the wrong cigarette. for the vast majority of his life, he is smoking basically tobacco rolled in paper. they are harsher, more difficult to inhale. you saw -- plaintiffs like to say, well, mr. schoeff is just like everybody else. he was completely atypical with his brands. when he started smoking, the market share of unfiltered cigarettes decreased from 99.44 percent to 2.8 percent, he stayed with that brand. think about what that means in terms of the effect that advertising would have had on mr. schoeff. 2303 you heard dr. proctor admit, unfiltered cigarettes were not promoted in advertising in the '60s, '70s, '80s and '90s at all. all of that $250 billion that mr. paige spent so much time talking about is not focused on the brands mr. schoeff smokes. advertising cannot be a part of it. he is not smoking the brands that are advertised. he is not even smoking the type of cigarettes that are being advertised. nonetheless reynolds was able to achieve, as you heard from dr. cook, dramatic reductions from the tar and nicotine levels from unfiltered cigarettes. the nicotine levels drop by almost 57 percent we found as we talk about on the last line, that an unfiltered cigarette is no different in terms of addictiveness or dangerous than tobacco rolled in paper. the only thing that plaintiffs have focused on in this case that can be considered a defect, i think, would be filters and then their allegation that reynolds and other tobacco companies manipulated the ph of cigarette smoke to create more free nicotine. i would like to spend a minute talking about both of those and why the evidence does not allow you to find for plaintiffs on this claim of strict liability. remember, there is no defect with the unfiltered cigarettes on the evidence in this case, but let us 2304 just talk about filters for a second. mr. alvarez: judge, can i have a continuing objection to this question -- to this statements that is inappropriate -- the court: you may. mr. alvarez: -- it goes against engle. the court: you may. the objection is overruled. the jury, again, is guided by the legal instructions that i previously gave to them and the evidence that has been developed in the courtroom and nothing else. go ahead, mr. boyce. mr. boyce: thank you, your honor. now, let us talk about filters for a minute. plaintiffs would have you believe that reynolds and other tobacco companies went in the back room, decided to make filters as part of an effort to hook kids and keep people smoking for 50 years. did you see any evidence of that? first off, this conspiracy does not relate to the way they make cigarettes at all. they compete on the way they make cigarettes. if you think philip morris will tell reynolds how they make a marlboro, that is just not true. there is no evidence the way they make cigarettes, the way they design cigarettes is part of this. it is about statements, information about the 2305 risk of smoking, nothing to do with cigarette design, nothing to do with the way they make cigarettes. the evidence in this case was actually the opposite. that reynolds and the other tobacco companies worked with the national cancer institute for a decade to reduce the risks associated with smoking. it was called the tobacco working group, and it was in existence from 1968 to 1978. scientists from reynolds, philip morris, and brown & williamson worked in conjunction with the national cancer institute to reduce the risks of smoking. they funded a massive amount of research on cigarette design and modification, and then the twg was abandoned by the government in '78 and reynolds kept going. but what is important about this is all of these design features that plaintiffs complain about now, filters, porous paper, reconstituted tobacco, puffed tobacco, expanded tobacco, all of that, is part of this joint effort. that is where these things are coming from, filters, faster burning paper, and putting less tobacco in cigarettes; that is part of a working group. that is where these efforts come from. they are being developed in conjunction with the national cancer institute because the joint goal was to reduce the risks associated with smoking. that is 2306 where it all comes from. but there is a very important reason why you do not have to spend much time thinking about filters in this case. there is been dispute over when mr. schoeff switched to filters and which brands may have had filters on them, and you can make your own decisions about the that evidence. but there is one piece of evidence that is not in dispute, and that is mrs. schoeff's testimony that when mr. schoeff switched to a filtered cigarette, he smoked less. he smoked less of them. you can think whatever you want to about filters. in this case, we can all agree smoking less cigarettes is better than smoking more. he did not compensate when he switched to a filter, he did not puff it more deeply or inhale it any differently. she told you, there is no difference in the way he smoked filtered cigarettes, and that from her perspective, from her perspective, it seemed like he was smoking less. and by that you think he was smoking fewer cigarettes per day, is that what you are saying? and mrs. schoeff said yes. that is all you need to know about filters in this case, when he smoked them, he smoked less of them. next his ph. i just want to spend a moment talking about ph. plaintiffs obviously like this 1 because they want you to think that there is freebase nicotine in cigarette smoke, and that evidence is not here. and we saw this from dr. proctor. dr. proctor himself. they put up this document on direct and i had to do it on cross-examination. i had to show him what happens with the ph of smoke, and for those of us who were listening, ph scale runs from zero to 14 roughly, seven's right in the middle. okay. and it is a range that determines how acid a substance might be, or how base a substance might be. and seven is right in the middle. but what is important in this case is that six, 6.0, a ph of 6.0 is the point where you start to see some free nicotine in this smoke. 6.0 is sort of the cutoff. 6.5 actually i think is what dr. procter said. but in that range. below 6.5 there is so little free nicotine in cigarette smoke that you do not even need to worry about it. that evidence comes from the surgeon general himself. the 1979 surgeon general's report. the ph of the resulting mainstream smoke is below 6.5 and that potentially contains only protonated or bound nicotine. if your ph is below 6.5, there is no free nicotine in the smoke. below 6.5, no free nicotine in the smoke. and that is what dr. teague reported here on his graph. but here's what is important about the brands that mr. schoeff smoked. we asked dr. proctor, do you have any evidence, have you seen a document anywhere that unfiltered pall malls, unfiltered camels, luckys had a ph over six. he said, no. i've never seen a document that said that. we asked him about kool, did you study the ph of kool cigarettes before you testified, not apart from the fact that i know virtually all modern cigarettes are low ph, low ph. there is no evidence in this case that the ph of a kool cigarettes, the ph of a lucky cigarette, the ph of a camel cigarette or the ph of a pall mall cigarette ever got above 6.0. free nicotine is a red herring, to use mr. alvarez's word. the next claim on the verdict form -- and i may take them out of order. i think actually negligence comes first and strict liability comes after that. but i would like to spend a moment talking about the claim of negligence, and as you can see here is basically the question is, was reynolds' failure to act like a reasonably prudent product manufacturer would have under the circumstances a legal cause? all of these focus on direct and continuous and substantial cause. a legal cause of mr. schoeff's lung cancer and death. and here the answer is, no, 2309 for one simple reason. none of the stuff that reynolds did or did not do with respect to cigarettes made any difference to mr. schoeff. now, i'll just give you two examples, the first is eclipse. reynolds spent billions of dollars to develop a product called premier and another product called eclipse. and you might remember i talked about this with dr. proctor, but the bad stuff in cigarette smoke, the stuff that causes cancer and emphysema comes from burning tobacco. if you burn organic material, you get some nasty compounds in the smoke, and those compounds cause disease. so reynolds decided to try to make a cigarette that would heat tobacco, not burn it. if the bad stuff comes from burning, let us try heating it instead; that is the concept behind premier and eclipse, and they spent billions of dollars to try to develop those products. dr. proctor told you they were safer. he said, look, i would ban the sale of all conventional cigarettes. well, plaintiffs talk about credibility and bias, remember dr. proctor's admission that if it was up to him, no american would be able to make a choice about smoking or not. he would take that choice away from them and ban the sale. but he said i'll make an exception for eclipse. they are much less 2310 deadly. i do not think i'm in favor of banning a cigarette like eclipse; that is plaintiff's own expert. okay. that is a different product, but what is important in this case is, and this is why reynolds' negligence is not a legal cause of mr. schoeff's injury, none of this made any difference to mr. schoeff. you heard it from his wife, he was never interested in premier, never interested in eclipse, which came out very late in his life, but premier came out in '88, never interested in those products. and it is the same with ultra low products. plaintiffs claim that reynolds never made a cigarette that addressed the addictiveness of nicotine, and the evidence is actually the exact opposite. this is a report from dr. henningfield. dr. henningfield is plaintiff's own expert. he reported to the fda that the amount of nicotine necessary to have pharmacological effects is much lower, somewhere in the range of 0.2 milligrams. that is plaintiff's expert. if you are below 0.2 milligrams of nicotine, according to dr. henningfield, you are not having a pharmacologic or drug-like effect from the nicotine. okay? that is dr. henningfield. 2311 but remember when we talked about carlton? we talked about carlton with dr. proctor and dr. cook brought up carlton as well. and the testimony in this case was that carlton brand yields about one milligrams of nicotine. dr. henningfield is telling you below 0.2, no pharmacologic effect, and carlton is one that when smoked on the machine has .1 milligrams of nicotine. that is a cigarette that is so low in nicotine that according to plaintiff's own expert, there is no pharmacologic effect from it. this is what i mean about negligence having no connection to mr. schoeff. on one hand, reynolds makes a cigarette that reduces the risks of smoking by heating tobacco. on the other hand, reynolds makes a cigarette that is so low in nicotine it does not even have a drug-like effect. mr. schoeff had no interest in either one. he never smoked a low tar cigarette, he never smoked an ultra low tar cigarette, and he never smoked a cigarette that he heated tobacco instead of burning it. he was not interested in this. he is an unfiltered smoker. that is why any of this stuff that plaintiffs complain about, conduct, should have happened then, should have happened now, does not apply to mr. schoeff. i want to spend a moment here talking about 2312 reynolds publications. you heard throughout this case that reynolds never said anything about the risks of smoking, never published anything, and that it was all part of the conspiracy. i'm sorry, your honor, did you want to take a break? i forgot to ask. the court: is everybody okay? yeah, okay go ahead. mr. boyce: thank you. time and time again reynolds published on the risks of smoking, but i just want you to remember the chronology. the documents is in evidence when dr. teague writes in 1953 a book report that there is a bunch of articles out there linking smoking with disease. reynolds hires a chemist, the guy's name was dr. alan rodgman. dr. alan rodgman has been thanked specifically by the surgeon general of the united states. they hired him in 1954, they put him in a lab, spent eight years studying cigarette smoke. when he was done, he wrote up all of his findings, they submitted to the surgeon general. huge list of constituents submitted to the surgeon general in 1963, and reynolds and dr. rodgman were thanked specifically for their cooperation, but reynolds went further. these are just some of the publications that dr. rodgman put out over the years. 2313 you can see he is writing on cigarette smoke and hydroxyl oxides and aliphatic esters and acetates. he gave a speech in 1969 where he not only disclosed all the stuff he had found in cigarette smoke, he drew pictures of them, and it is in evidence. and i will not be able to give you that exhibit number until somebody hands it to me, but it is in evidence, it is a speech from dr. rodgman from 1969. you can flip through it, you can see that he drew pictures of all of the compounds that he had found in cigarette smoke. now, remember when dr. proctor was here and he had the list of bad stuff in cigarettes. i said, did you check that list against dr. rodgman's speech before you call this man a liar, before you come in here under oath and call a man like alan rodgman a liar and a fraud and basically a murderer. mr. alvarez: objection, judge, inflammatory. the court: okay. again, folks, if that was not in evidence, you should ignore it. if there was testimony to that effect, you can consider it. you may proceed, mr. boyce. mr. boyce: i asked dr. proctor, did you check your list? did you check this list before you told this jury this was stuff that was in cigarette smoke that people did not know about? did you check it 2314 against dr. rodgman's speech, and he said no. i said do you think there is anything that is on your list that is not in dr. rodgman's speech? and he said, i think polonium-210 is probably not on there. what did we do, we flipped right to the index, we look up polonium-210, it is right there. polonium-210, listed by dr. alan rodgman in 1969 in a speech to the american chemical society. that is publications, but again, none of this is making a difference to mr. schoeff. he is over here, this does not add up. we have a debate with the public health community, and then we have got a man who is making his own decisions about his own life and perfectly able to control his own behavior when he wants to. reynolds published on methods to find more bad stuff in cigarette smoke, and we talked about that with dr. proctor. and we talked about how with dr. proctor reynolds also published on ph, how to test smoke ph and how to find bad stuff in cigarette smoke, and this is just a summary of some of the publications that are in evidence in this case. now, i want to turn now to the claims for fraud and conspiracy in this case. there is two of them in here, and both of them have some severe limitations on 2315 them. but fist you heard from the judge this morning, after january 1 of 1969 you cannot bring a claim that reynolds failed to warn you about the risks of smoking; that is in the instructions. you will see it quite clearly. after the warning label goes on the pack, january 1, 1969, no more claims that you failed to warn me. they are gone. it is federal law. it is called preemption, you may have heard me say objection, preemption during this trial, but that is what that is. as a matter of law, no claims that you failed to warn me after 1969. the other limitation here is that reliance has to be reasonable. it is not enough to say, well, he believed the other stuff. we asked him, well, what was the other stuff? i do not remember. that is not sufficient evidence. they have to connect a statement to mr. schoeff and you have to determine that his reliance on that statement was reasonable. reasonable under the circumstances, and denial is not reasonable. if you know something to be true, it cannot be concealed from you. that is the law. the third limitation is this date range that the plaintiffs talked about. in this case plaintiffs have to prove to you that reynolds made a statement after may 5th, 1982, that mr. schoeff saw and heard and 2316 relied on reasonably to his detriment. and let us just think about that window for a second. may 5th, 1982, that is 32 years after mr. schoeff's father told him, i'm quitting smoking because of my lungs. 32 years after his father says, i'm quitting smoking because of my asthma. his sister quit smoking before 1960. that is almost 25 years after his sister calls him up and says, doctor told me to quit and i just quit and guess what, my husband frank just quit, too. that is evidence that you need to think about before you even look to see if it is possible for mr. schoeff to rely on something after 1982. but there is one more point i want to make here. he is diagnosed with pvd in april of 1983. the doctor brings him into an office, tells him you got a disease from smoking and i need to operate on you. anything after that is not reasonable reliance. there is no evidence that mr. schoeff saw anything in this initial matter, but after that pvd diagnosis and his leg surgery, it is impossible for him to rely on any statements about the risks of smoking. that gives plaintiffs a window of basically may of 1982 to april of 1983 for both of their fraud claims. no failure to warn after 1969, but on these fraud 2317 claims because of florida law, that is basically their window. and look at the evidence. did you see any statements from 1982 specific to 1982? and if you did, did you see any evidence that mr. schoeff saw them or heard them or relied on them reasonably to his detriment? it is not enough for plaintiff to take the stand and say, he did not believe it. he thought filters were safer. there has to be specificity here. they have got to show you some statement, make some effort to connect the dots. and here is what the evidence actually was in this case. nobody had even heard of the frank statement. mrs. schoeff told you, i never even heard of the frank statement, no evidence that mr. schoeff saw it. not any evidence that mr. schoeff ever saw any statement on ctr or tirc or the tobacco institute or press releases or white papers or interviews or statements or statements about smoking and health or statements about smoking and addiction, not one. and there was an important piece of evidence, i think, that underscores all this. we asked time and time again -- i'm sorry, can you guys keep it down, just a little distracting. mr. paige: i'm so sorry. mr. boyce: just hard for me to concentrate. 2318 there is one piece of evidence that underscores this complete lack of evidence here, and that is what david schoeff said. david schoeff said that after his dad was diagnosed with pvd, he never once came to him and said i was tricked, son. do not be like me. do not do what i did, do not make my mistakes. instead david said the exact opposite. my dad thought it was up to me to make my own choices about smoking. how can that be evidence of a man who has relied to his detriment on these statements? you heard in this case time and time again about all of the settlement, all of the documents are on the website, plaintiffs keep pointing out, well, they are put up there because of settlements, that is where all this conduct has been addressed, this generic objection to the way the tobacco companies behaved over the years, that debt's been paid. this is mr. schoeff's case, and if they cannot prove to you by a preponderance of all the evidence that he saw it, heard it and relied upon it, they cannot prevail on these claims. the date limitations are the most important ones. no failure to warn after 1969 and no fraud if it is not after may of 1982, and because of the pvd diagnosis it is a very small window. just as importantly as what 2319 mr. schoeff did not see is what everyone else in this country did. and we talked about this repeatedly throughout this case, but truly the amount of awareness in this country about the risks of smoking is staggering. staggering. you heard dr. proctor admit that the polling numbers that they get when they ask people both if they are aware of the risks of smoking and if they believe the risks of smoking are historic, historic levels of awareness. the kind of polling you cannot get if you ask people who gave the sermon on the mount. the type of polling data you cannot get if you ask people, who is the president of the united states. that gives you some indication of what is going on with respect to everybody out there and what people knew. and remember what mr. paige said. mr. paige would have you believe he did not know anything. mr. schoeff did not know anything, ignored his dad, ignored his sister, ignored his doctors, ignored his wife, ignored what was written on the side of the pack, ignored the warning labels and the ads, ignored everything. he did not know anything; that is what plaintiff's position is. this is the evidence in this case. now, i want to go through first mr. schoeff's 2320 personal awareness, and i'll quickly summarize the general awareness evidence i have in this case. but this is just mr. schoeff, his father, mrs. schoeff quitting, mr. schoeff quitting in '57, aware of the government warnings, mrs. schoeff telling him to stop, mr. schoeff quitting in the '60s, his doctors warning him, discussing the '79 or the 1970 surgeon general's warning, his children telling him. he knew smoking was bad for his health. the fact that he chose to disregard those warnings is not proof that reynolds is a legal cause of what happened to him. we know the public information campaign worked because of the quitting statistics. from 1955 to 1965, 17.6 million people quit smoking in this country, the vast majority of them did so cold turkey, you heard from dr. proctor and others in their opinion, the vast majority was probably addicted, probably dependent. from 1955 to 1965, 1.6 million people quit. and from 1964 to 1979, that number explodes to 30 million people. 30 million people out there get the message and quit. and it is obvious that they got the message because it goes back to before this -- back two centuries, it goes back to the late 1800s. we heard this from dr. proctor. dr. proctor admitted that in 2321 his opinion he would not be surprised to learn that in illinois and indiana and florida school children were being caught that nicotine was addictive and that smoking caused cancer in the '30s. he told you there was even more prominent in the lutheran church. lutheran schools were teaching kids that nicotine was addictive and that smoking was deadly back in the '20s. we heard repeatedly how serious mr. schoeff took his lutheran faith. he went to lutheran schools in indiana and illinois. indiana and illinois banned the sale of cigarettes, so did florida. the three states this man lived in banned the sale of cigarettes way back in the late 1800s or early 1900s. guys, i'm sorry. the court: folks, please, be quiet. go ahead, mr. boyce. mr. boyce: in 1906 florida reported that cigarette smoking is looked upon by all smokers as the worst form of tobacco addiction. that is 1906. 1906, we had 45 states in this country in 1906, i looked it up. 45 states, 1906. mr. schoeff is not even born and florida is reporting that tobacco is an addiction. none of this is a secret. we talked about tex williams in 1947. this is 2322 the year mrs. schoeff meets mr. schoeff, 1947. the number one song in the country, number one song in the country was smoke, smoke, smoke that cigarette. and the lyrics as we saw talk about nicotine being addictive and smoking being deadly. it is going to get you to the pearly gates. in 1950, reader's digest starts to publish on the risk of smoking. dr. proctor says, well, there are only 36 articles. think about the titles of these articles, think about the evidence that we got from dr. proctor on cross-examination that the surgeon general himself said reader's digest had done a profound job of educating the american public about the risks of smoking. titles like, i quit smoking, cancer by the carton, nicotine knockout, that is the gene tunny article we talked about. are you a man or a smokestack, that is in the '30s and '40s, well before mr. schoeff is a regular smoker. move forward and we talked about the 1953 article in life magazine where the skin paintings are recorded. this is life magazine in 1953. this is the same year mrs. schoeff quit smoking, 1953. in 1955, if we can play this clip, please, tammy, this is what is being reported by dr. hammond of the national cancer institute. 2323 ability.) speaker: in 1952, doctors hammond and horne of the american cancer society began an extended study of the smoking habits of american men. here is dr. hammond reporting on the results of the first two years. speaker: it is now established in my opinion beyond a reasonable doubt that cigarette smoking greatly increases the probability of developing lung cancer. in my opinion people should be warned of the danger, and they are being warned. what they then want to do, whether they wish to smoke or not, is their own business. (end of video.) mr. boyce: that was 1955. 1955. mr. schoeff was 24 years old. in 1957 the surgeon general's position was we have informed the public and the national cancer institute said the media had done an excellent job. dr. proctor waves his hand and writes that off, as if none of us knew smoking was bad for us back then. he waves his hand, do you remember what he said, these are bureaucrats, patting themselves on the back, that is the surgeon general and the head of the 2324 national cancer institute in 1957. remember, mr. schoeff quit smoking in 1957. you doubt for a minute that this message was getting through to him personally? remember the dates of his quits. in 1964 the surgeon general's report reports quite clearly that cigarette smoking is causally related to lung cancer in men. in 1965 florida health notes report that nearly all floridians have heard about the surgeon general's report. they have got pictures with a skull coming off the end of the cigarette, and remember that the schoeffs remember the '64 surgeon general's report. mrs. schoeff remembers it herself, even though it came out 11 years after she quit smoking, she remembers the news report about it, she remembers the report itself, and she remembers discussing the report with her husband, mr. schoeff. in 1966 the warning label goes on the pack. 1966. it is a year before the first super bowl, three years before we walked on the moon. smokers are being warned about the risks of smoking right on the side of the pack. we have got the public service announcements, this one from bill talman, and just to remind you, dr. proctor on direct wanted you to think that there were powerful psas back in the '60s. he suggested that this was a recent phenomenon, that it was in 2000 2325 or so. he is talking about presentism. it is only been later years where we had powerful psas that would really be effective for people. i just want to remind you about some of the messages that were coming out in psas in the late '60s and you make your own decision about whether this is a powerful message or not. ability.) speaker: this is the house we lived in. this is billy, he is (inaudible). steve, home from college, barbie looking after her brother timmy. debbie who will soon graduate from high school, susan our youngest. and my wife peggy, who looks after all of us. and that is me, bill talman with a friend of mine you might recognize. you know, i did not really mind losing those courtroom battles, but i'm in a battle right now i do not want to lose at all because if i lose it, it means losing my wife and those kids you just met. i've got lung cancer. so take some advice about smoking and losing from someone who is been doing both for years. if you do not smoke, do not start. if you do smoke, quit. do not be a loser. (end of video.) mr. boyce: that is from the '60s. there is no 2326 presentism problem with that message. that is a powerful a message as anybody would need to know that smoking causes deadly diseases, and mr. schoeff is no different. we get to 1970, the warning label now changes, this is the one that plaintiffs acknowledge is a warning, they like to call the one in 1966 is caution, we talked about with dr. proctor what that difference was. i still do not understand it, but nonetheless, 1970 it says warning. we get to ed asner in the '70s and this is the great american smokeout. before we play the clip, tammy, remember that mrs. schoeff remembers the great american smokeout. she had stopped smoking in 1953, and she remembers the publicity around this event, and just to refresh your memories, this is what mr. asner said about what the great american smokeout was designed to do. ability.) speaker: hi, i'm ed asner, last year the american cancer society asked me to quit smoking, just for a day. i said, okay, but just for a day. that was november 16th. well, i got through it, so i tried again on november 17th and 18th and 19th, and you know 2327 to this day i still have not had a cigarette. why do not you try it? join the great american smokeout this november 15th. tell yourself, it is just for a day. (end of video.) mr. boyce: that is in the '70s, we get to 1985 and these are the warning labels that we talked about, smoking causes lung cancer, smoking by pregnant woman may result in fetal injury, cigarette smoking containing carbon monoxide and quitting smoking now greatly reduces serious risk to your health. and we talked also about the yul brynner advertising that came out in the '80s, another powerful message that is being given to the american public. there is one last point i want to make awareness, if you have any doubts about it, remember what dr. proctor said. dr. proctor told you that in america people think smoking is so dangerous that they will answer yes if you ask them does smoking cause a fake disease. do you remember that? he said, i think it was -- deceptive, do we have that clip? we may not. he made up some word, i remember one of the court reporters asked me what it was, i said it is a made-up word, i do not know how to spell it, it is a made-up word. it is a made-up disease. 2328 people in this country are so convinced of the risk of smoking if you ask them does smoking cause a fake word, they say yes. that is a staggering level of awareness. we have got personal awareness from mr. schoeff's own life and overwhelming general awareness. that is the fundamental reason that any reliance in this case is unreasonable. but more particularly, if you look at this window from may of '82 until april of '83, there is no way mr. schoeff could have reasonably relied on anything, and there is also no evidence that he saw anything. the last point on these two forms -- these two interrogatories that i want to make is plaintiffs take zero responsibility for any of this. when they stand up here and tell you that they take some responsibility in this case, mr. paige told you that the way they see this case, the way they think they have pled it and the way they have asked the court to organize the verdict form, they do not take any responsibility on the claims of fraud and concealment. and what that means on the issues about what mr. schoeff knew about smoking and when he knew it, plaintiffs claim reynolds is one hundred percent responsible. that is plaintiff's position. you do not have the ability to allocate fault on 2329 those claims. if you think mr. schoeff bears any responsibility for what he knew about smoking and when he knew it, you have to put no on both of those forms. there is no other way around. that is the burden plaintiffs have chosen for themselves in this case. mr. alvarez: objection, judge, improper statement. the court: overruled. mr. boyce: that is the burden they have staked out for themselves on those two claims. if you think mr. schoeff bears any responsibility for what he knew about smoking and when he knew it, you have to answer no on fraud and you have to answer no on concealment. your honor, i just have two more topics, might i request a two or three-minute break to organize? [#deleted recess#] mr. boyce: thank you, your honor. welcome back, members of the jury. just two more topics to talk about. and i want to talk briefly about plaintiff's claim that mrs. schoeff should be awarded punitive damages in this case. there is a few issues to consider when we talk about punitive damages. the first is: who can punitive damages be awarded to. in this case, punitive damages can only be awarded to mrs. schoeff. 2334 you can not award punitive damages to public health agencies, you cannot award it to anti-smoking organizations or smoking cessation clinics or other smokers or anyone but mrs. schoeff. and so that is one fundamental limitation on punitive damages in this case. the only person that you can give them to is mrs. schoeff and that they would be in addition to any compensatory damages you might determine are warranted. the second is: what is the purpose of punitive damages? and there is only two that are recognized under florida law. one is to punish for past conduct and one is to deter future conduct, and i would like to spend a minute talking about both of those: why there is no need to publish reynolds and why there is no need to deter future conduct. but first, i want to show you a limitation. this is the standard of proof for punitive damages, and it is different than preponderance of the evidence. and let me just take a minute to remind you. the scales of justice are not the burden of proof. we talked about this and the instructions make this perfectly clear for you. that is not lady justice. lady justice is blindfolded. that relates to the promise each and 2335 every one of you made under oath to treat the defendant the same way you treat the plaintiff. that is why the scales of justice are equal. every defendant and every plaintiff are entitled to the exact same treatment in a court of law in this country. that is not the burden of proof. this is the burden of proof (indicated). it is all plaintiffs. the defendant comes in at zero on every claim. they have to prove each and every element, each and every claim to a preponderance of the evidence. from zero to 51 percent, not from 50 to 51. there is no slight tipping of the scales when it comes to the burden of proof. that is just preponderance of the evidence. punitive damages is something much different. it has to be clear and convincing, precise, explicit, lacking in confusion. such weight that it produces a firm belief or conviction without hesitation. when you consider whether punitive damages are entitled to -- i do not think you will get that far on the verdict form, but if you do, this is the standard that applies. it has to be without hesitation. more importantly, you cannot consider any of the evidence that plaintiffs spent so much time talking about. when you consider the issue of entitlement to punitive damages, the court is going to explain to you 2336 that in determining whether punitive damages may be warranted, you have to focus on conduct which plaintiff has proven caused mr. schoeff's lung cancer and death. 400,000 deaths, stories about marketing to kids. none of that stuff being considered for punitive damages in this case. if plaintiffs have not connected the evidence specifically, through clear and convincing connections to mr. schoeff, you cannot consider that evidence on this interrogatory. only evidence that they have connected specifically to mr. schoeff can be considered for punitive damages in this case. so we have a different burden of proof, and we have a fundamental requirement that you must focus exclusively on evidence related to mr. schoeff. you cannot focus on conduct for harm to others or simply -- the one point i forgot, cigarettes are a legal product in this country. whether you like cigarettes, you do not like cigarettes, they are a legal product in this country. reynolds cannot be punished for selling cigarettes or manufacturing cigarettes or marketing cigarettes. and so we have got some serious limitations on what you can consider, if indeed you get this far on the verdict form. 2337 now, first, i think there is a variety of reasons why reynolds should not be punished, but the first is all of these organizations are long gone. ctr is gone, ti is gone, tirc is gone, claude teague is gone. we talked about this with dr. proctor. all of the guys that signed the frank statement were born in the 1800s and have been dead for decades. mr. heimann, on that video that we see time and time again, that video was taken in 1986. six years after he retired from the american tobacco company. he retired in 1980. he is been dead for decades. all of those men are gone. they no longer work at the companies, they are no longer affiliated with the companies, and the organizations that made these statements -- ti, tirc -- they have been disbanned for years. more importantly, reynolds' website now says that smoking causes disease and is addictive. i told you in opening statements that i was not going to waste your time debating some of the things that tobacco companies had said over the years. they are unacceptable. there is no point in me wasting your time trying to defend them. they are unacceptable statements then, they are unacceptable statements now. but you have to remember, when you think about 2338 punitive damages, it is not connected to mr. schoeff. you cannot consider it. it is a fundamental limitation about this phase of this trial. last, any debate about whether smoking causes disease or smoking can be addictive simply cannot happen again. for starters, reynolds published on addictiveness of nicotine way back in 1963. i just want to make sure that people understand that. this is the article we talked about with dr. proctor. it was done in conjunction between the american cancer society and ctr. it says right there: heavy cigarette smokers appear to be true addicts. this is some of the stuff that dr. proctor wanted you to think that ctr did meaningful research and ti never did anything. here is an article published in the american journal of psychiatry, a year before the surgeon general's report, saying that heavy smokers are true addicts. that is some of the stuff that ctr did. some of the other stuff that ctr published thousands of studies, they are cited in the surgeon general report 600 times. how can ctr's research be totally unconnected to the risk of smoking and the effects of nicotine when their articles are published in the peer review press 2339 and cited in the surgeon general's reports more than 600 times? ctr-funded research at universities like yale and harvard and duke, the american medical association. we talk about how they work with the national cancer institute. this is the stuff that you do not get to see until the defense brings it up. we talked about the green monster, which was larson, haag & silvette. dr. proctor admitted that at its time, it was the best bibliography of smoking and health literature ever compiled. and it was compiled by the american tobacco company. and then they gave the to the surgeon general. it has chapters on disease and death and lung cancer and emphysema, carcinogens in smoke and addiction. it was relied on specifically by the surgeon general in 1964. there is more than 20,000 articles summarized in the green monster. they named it the green monster because it is so big. premier and eclipse, we talked about this with regard to the strict liability claims. but reynolds spent $2 billion developing these products. plaintiffs always like to point to this $500 million figure, those are the donations made to ctr, ti and tirc by three companies over 60 years. three companies, 60 years, $500 million total. 2340 reynolds alone spent more than double that developing cigarettes that their own witness said were much less deadly, safer cigarettes. that does not deserve to be punished. this decreased the biological activity, and even though premier failed in the marketplace, reynolds kept going, developed eclipse, and eclipse is sold today. but the most important reason that punitive damages are not warranted in this case is that there is nothing to deter. reynolds has changed its conduct. this is reynolds' website today. smokers can go there and they will be told that cigarette smoking is a leading cause of preventable death. cigarette smoking decreases your risk of lung cancer, heart disease, bronchitis, emphysema, and other serious diseases and adverse health conditions. this is reynolds' website today. reynolds tells people that if they are worried about smoking or have questions, to rely on the surgeon general. go to the american cancer society, go to the american lung association. if you have any doubt, go to those organizations, listen to those public health officials. this is reynolds' website today. nothing to deter. the best course of action for tobacco consumers 2341 concerned about their health is to quit. that is reynolds' website. if somebody gets that message from reynolds today and wants help in quitting, there are links on this website where they can get cessation assistance. you could link right to the american cancer society, right to the centers for disease control, right off reynolds website today. reynolds has changed. the ingredient list is right there on the website, all of them. you can search by brand, you can search by ingredient. if you want to know which ingredients are in your particular cigarette, you go in and you search by brand. if you want to know if a particular ingredient is in cigarettes, you can go and search by ingredient. that is reynolds' website today. rely on the surgeon general. here's what is in cigarettes. and if you want and are worried about this, the best thing you can do is stop. now, i just have one more topic i want to talk to you about and i'm sure most of you can probably guess what it is, but it is the fundamental issue of responsibility and control. at the end of the day, that is what all of the questions in this case come down to. who was in control of mr. schoeff's behavior and who is 2342 responsible for the consequences of that behavior. plaintiffs told you that they think it is 85 percent reynolds, 15 percent mr. schoeff. and mr. paige explained how he came to that calculation. but what that means, if you do the math, there is 20 cigarettes in a pack. plaintiff's position is that mr. schoeff is responsible for three cigarettes out of every pack he smoked and reynolds, a tobacco company -- a tobacco company that he never heard say anything about the risks of smoking -- is responsible for the other 17 cigarettes. that is plaintiff's position on two of their claims alone. they take no responsibility on what he knew about smoking, but with respect to his smoking, they think reynolds is 85 percent responsible. 17 cigarettes out of a pack are on reynolds, three are on mr. schoeff. but more importantly, time and time again, remember the issue of control. remember that mr. schoeff was able to control his smoking when he wanted to, and that is why the dr. goodman story is so important. dr. goodman is a doctor. he treated this man for his cancer. he treated him for his diseases at a time when mr. schoeff is supposed to be smoking. if 2343 anybody would have concluded that this was an addict compelled to smoke such that you could think that addiction was a substantial cause of his lung cancer, it would have been dr. goodman. dr. goodman did not testify in this case, dr. goodman does not have a single medical record where he diagnosed mr. schoeff as addicted, dr. goodman does not have a single medical record where he diagnosed mr. schoeff as being subject to nicotine withdrawal. and most importantly, when it came to dr. goodman's own child, his daughter, what did he say? mr. schoeff will find a way. i know he will not break my rules. i know he can control himself when he wants to. that is dr. goodman's opinion about mr. schoeff smoking, and that is why the evidence in this case is so clear that mr. schoeff was the kind of man that can control his smoking when he wanted to. he quit when he wanted to, he controlled smoking when he wanted to, and he smoked when he wanted to. he is the one driving the bus. plaintiffs like to pretend that mr. schoeff got on a smoking highway in 1947 and never had a chance to get off. that is what is so frustrating about that surgeon general's chart. it goes from addiction to lung cancer. it has all kinds of errors for dna 2344 mutations and some of the genes they think are involved in cancer creation. there is no exit on that chart. we know real life is not like that. we know that every single cigarette he smoked was a choice he made himself, every one of those cigarettes is an exit off the highway that he could have taken. and reynolds is not blocking him from the exits. that is not real life. real life is different. in real life people do have control. in real life mr. schoeff had control, and in his real life, he chose to smoke, and that is the second issue, responsibility. did you hear any evidence from any witness ever that mr. schoeff was the kind of man who was not willing to take responsibility for the consequences of his actions? that is why we brought up the lawsuit. that instruction that mr. alvarez read you relates to wrongful death cases, it does not relate to personal injury cases. it is for wrongful death. when somebody passes away, the estate gets to decide whether there is a lawsuit or not. it has nothing to do with personal injury. in 1983, if mr. schoeff wanted to sue, he could have sued. in 1990, if he wanted to sue, he could 2345 have sued. and remember there is no claim for pvd in this case. plaintiffs are not seeking damages for pvd. do you know why? mr. schoeff did not want to sue for it. mr. alvarez: objection, judge. the court: sustained. it is outside the evidence, ladies and gentlemen. disregard the remark. mr. boyce: there is no claim in this case from damages on pvd. mr. alvarez: objection. the court: overruled. okay. there is not. overruled. focus on this case, folks, and focus on the evidence in this case and wrap up, mr. boyce. mr. boyce: there is no claim in this case for damages from his heart trouble. none. those are the diseases he could have sued for if he wanted to and he decided not to. but time and time again, we heard from witness after witness that smoking, for mr. schoeff, was a choice. a choice he made and a choice he was comfortable with. and here is the evidence. we have talk about all of the people in his life, and he knew, he knew had smoked, knew had quit, never reached out to it. 2346 the fact that he is in control is clear. what is also clear is he is simply not motivated to change his behavior. these are all people who have stopped smoking that mr. schoeff never asked for help. and we talked about monograph 15. that explains quite clearly, according to the national cancer institute the difference between betty walker, who quit smoking, and mr. schoeff, who kept smoking, is not addiction. the difference between mr. schoeff's father, who quit, and mr. schoeff, who kept smoking, is not addiction. the difference between mr. schoeff and frank walker, and his own son, is not addiction. there is no difference when it comes to the amount of smoking, the time they smoke in the morning, or addiction. people make difference choices at different times. for some people, you get a health scare from smoking, put them down cold turkey, and never go back. mr. schoeff was not that guy. but there is no evidence in this case that the difference between mr. schoeff and the people who make different choices was addiction. look at it this way, we ask time and time again: tell us about what he did to quit, tell us about what he did to quit. and i understand this is a long time 2347 ago. we asked multiple witnesses, and basically what we have is he quit in '57, '67, two trips to a hypnotist in 1970, and smoke enders in 1983. from 1947 to 1983 we have about five attempts to quit smoking. just think about that for a second. that is almost 40 years. almost 40 years and five things, that is almost once a decade. look at it this way: if you met somebody in 1947 and they said: i really want to get a job. and you bumped into him again, 45 years later, in 1995, and they said: you know what, i still really want to get a job. and you go: it is been 45 years. what did you do to get a job for the last 45 years? and they said: well, i looked for a job once in 1957, i looked for a job in 1968. there were two times i looked in 1970, and i think i looked for a job for a little bit in 1983, but the job program i was in, i dropped out of. your conclusion would be that this is a person who does not want a job. and look at this chart again. because this is what this really means. not only did he not try to find a job, he is surrounded by people who got jobs and never once asked a single one of them: how did you do it? i cannot get it done. how 2348 did you do it? help me out. help me out, dad. help me out, sister. help me out, son. his own son. that is evidence of a lack of motivation to change behavior. and there is nothing wrong with that. that is what plaintiffs miss. there is nothing wrong with the choices mr. schoeff made for himself. the problem comes in when you try to pretend that they are not his choices and that he is being controlled by a tobacco company. it is not just the schoeffs that look at smoking as a personal choice. it is the surgeon general. time and time again. personal choice in '78. personal choice in '82. cigarettes and addictive behavior, but it is up to the individual to stop in '86. we keep seeing the clips of dr. koop. dr. koop's own website makes it perfectly clear: you are the one who has control over your behavior. the cigarette is not going to light itself and jump into your mouth, nor are you going into a brain-induced hypnotic trance and light a cigarette. that is dr. koop's website today. today. in 2010, the surgeon general says it again. no one can make you quit and no one can do it for you. it is the same thing mrs. schoeff said. mrs. schoeff testified that into the '90s, into the '90s, a decade 2349 after her husband is diagnosed with pvd, she continued to buy him cigarettes. and the reason she said that she bought him cigarettes was not because she remembered some old ad with lucille ball. it was because for her, she thought whether to smoke or not was a decision mr. schoeff had to make for himself; that is why she bought him cigarettes in the '90s. after he had gotten sick from smoking, she continued to buy him cigarettes because for her, it was his decision to make. david schoeff said the same thing: when he found out you were smoking, he never told you not to smoke. no. this is in the '80s. this is in the '80s when david is smoking. the bottom: he let you make your own decisions about smoking when you were in college. correct. that was mr. schoeff. and when mrs. schoeff was on the stand, she described her husband as somebody who believed that smoking was his choice to make, and mr. schoeff believed that it was his decision about whether to start or continue or stop smoking. that is the evidence of choice. that is the evidence of responsibility. and that is why reynolds is entitled to a verdict 2350 in its favor in this case, the schoeff case, a man who could control himself when he wanted to, and a man who did quit. there is three key facts i would like you to remember. plaintiffs get the last word and i need one of you to go back and just remember a few key facts as you go through the evidence, remember that. mr. schoeff never said he was tricked into smoking. not even in 1995. he never said he regretted it. and he never blamed anyone for his smoking. he taught his kids the exact opposite of plaintiff's theory in this case: you are responsible for your actions. you are in control. and you can change your behavior and you choose not to, you are responsible for the consequences. that was mr. schoeff. and that is why we brought up the lawsuit issue. that is why we asked mrs. schoeff: he just was not that kind of guy. and her answer right there at the bottom. right, right, yeah. that was my husband. that is why plaintiffs have not met their burden of proof in this case, because fundamentally, throughout their lives, smoking was not a driving force of mr. schoeff's behavior. one last piece of evidence. mrs. schoeff told 2351 you that in 1992, her husband quit smoking. we had some debate about this, we have the hospice records that said he might have quit for a year in 1994. mrs. schoeff remembers him quitting, i think, for two weeks in 1992. so there is some discrepancy about the dates. i think david and mrs. schoeff both testified that they thought mr. schoeff may have been telling the hospice people that he had quit for a year when he was really smoking. but regardless of the dates, there is one point i want to point out here. we asked mrs. schoeff: what did he do to quit in 1992? she did not know. we asked: how long did he quit? i do not know, but i know he started smoking again. this is the important one. this is 1992. 45 years into it. this is almost a decade after the pvd surgery. she knows he quit, she sees him smoking again. we said: what did you say to him? she goes: i do not remember. how can addiction be considered a substantial part of mr. schoeff's life when in 1992, his own wife does not even remember talking about it with him. mrs. schoeff remembers that he ripped one filter off one cigarette one time in 45 years. she does not 2352 remember what she said in 1992 when he went back to smoking. the only explanation for that, the only explanation that makes any sense is that between the schoeffs, smoking was a choice, smoking was something he was responsible for, and smoking was not a substantial part of what made this man the man he was. remember mr. schoeff. remember all he accomplished. remember his abilities and his dedication and his discipline and his intelligence as you deliberate in this case. and i think if you keep that in mind, you will see that plaintiffs have not met their burden of proof on any of their claims, and they certainly have not proved to you that mr. schoeff is a member of the engle class. ladies and gentlemen, thank you, again, for your time. i appreciate your attention. i know how hard it is to sit in those chairs and listen to people talk for hours on end. so thank you for your attention, your patience on behalf of myself and the team, mr. alden, ms. theriot, ms. castle dean. thank you.