mr. paige: may it please the court. good morning. so this is our last opportunity to speak to 2192 you all, as the judge said. and i mean this, we all know -- everybody knows how busy everybody is and the time that you guys put in to listening to everything, we have appreciate your patience and being here. and on behalf of joan and alex and robert, we do appreciate and i know kevin boyce and i think very highly of kevin, and i know he also appreciates everybody being here, coming in when you are not feeling well, you all have your own families, your own lives, your jobs and to give us your attention and your devotion is important. and we do appreciate it. this could not happen, you know, people like joan schoeff could never have a day in court, you know, if it was not for people exercising their duty and coming here and being willing to do -- a lot of people are not willing to do it. so thank you. this is an important day for both parties, and you guys have heard a lot, you probably know a lot more about nicotine and addiction and smoking than you did before you started. and you certainly know a lot more about it than people knew about it in the 1950s and 1960s and 1980s and 1990s. and, you know, when you go back to your lives tomorrow or the next day, hopefully, you know, there might be one more day of trial, but whatever you do, all we ask is that you 2193 follow the law and you follow your hearts and you do what is right, and we know you will do that. and i think when you see what the law is in this case, he explained it, but i'm going to go through a little bit with you, i think some of the decisions will be easy for you all. but this is something that as you go on with your lives, you may remember some of this and we appreciate you being here very much, but the real issue here, and i'm going to get to class membership in a second, but the bottom line what you get to determine here today as jurors, as six, seven ordinary citizens from the community, regular people, you get a chance to come in here and be the judge, and you get to decide today whether it is okay in america for large, powerful corporations to do what they want, to have no rules, no compliance, no regulation, to lie, to abuse their power, to use all their money and their resources and their greed, all the while knowing that people are dying. that teenagers are getting addicted, teenagers are getting addicted to a drug, and they know what the end result is going to be. and you decide today whether you are going to accept that or whether they should bear some responsibility. whether they bear -- you know, the very first 2194 pleading that we filed, mrs. schoeff, and i believe this, that addicts bear some responsibility. at some point in time and i'll talk about that. but you decide today whether a corporation with the power, the money, whether they can just lie and get away with it or whether they should be accountable to some degree. the first question and the most important thing is about class membership, as you all know. and this is not a class, as the judge explained to you, it was a prior lawsuit, it took a year, there was a lot of evidence in that case. and it was in the '90s when it was filed, it pertained to people, it does not pertain to everybody, it pertained to people like jim schoeff who started smoking in the '40s and '50s when things were different. and in that trial they were still disputing, in the '90s it had to be proven in that trial that nicotine was addictive, they denied that. it had to be proven in that trial in the '90s that smoking caused lung cancer, they denied it. so right now the first question to you all, is this gentleman, like the other people in the '40s and '50s, a member of the class. you know, back in the '40s and '50s, they invited them in, he was a teenager, they wanted him to smoke, they wanted him to be a member of the class. he was a member just like 2195 everybody else, and now that he is exercising his rights, they do not want him to be a member anymore. but to be a member -- well, before i talk about that, i want everybody to really think in your heart of hearts before i get to the jury instructions, if you think this gentleman smoked for 50 years because he was addicted to nicotine or did he do it for the taste and whether you think his lung cancer was from smoking. and i ask you, if you answer those two questions the way i think you will answer them after hearing everything, your answer to whether he is a member of the class, whether he belongs with these other victims, with these other victims of the tobacco industry is going to be very clear to you all. so this is the first question, and i'll try to stand out of your way. so this is the question, somebody is a member of the class -- it does not apply to somebody who started smoking in 2000 or 2005. it applies to people who started smoking in the '40s and '50s when things were different. and if you did and you became addicted -- and i'll talk about legal cause -- and it caused your lung cancer and death, you are a member of the class. it is that easy, that is the law. it does not have to do with fault. class membership, see, this is the -- this is the confusion 2196 here. okay? the case is tried as you can be excluded from the class if you accept some responsibility. that has nothing -- you will not see one word in here about if you do not like smokers, they cannot be a member of the class, or if you do not like tobacco companies, you have to be a member of the class, or if you admit fault, you cannot be a member of the class. fault is not an issue here. fault of the parties is an issue later, and i'll talk about that and i'll talk to you about comparing fault, percentages of fault, and why mr. schoeff does bear some responsibility, but that is not even -- we are not even there yet. and they know that, so when they talk about, oh, well, he did not have enough willpower, he was too weak, or he should have stopped sooner, he should have tried harder. all addicts should try harder. if this case was about can addicts quit, nobody would be a class member, and they know that. and that is not right. if this case was about whether addicts should try harder, nobody would be a class member. they know that. that is why they tell you this. this case is clear. they make like this is about james schoeff. this is not about james schoeff to them. they hired dr. bernstein, you heard from him. he said nobody is 2197 a member of the class, he is testified to all these trials, nobody is a member of the class. all these people cannot be identical to jim schoeff. they do not want anybody to be a member of the class. they lost engle when they denied these things, and now they do not want to be bound by them. they had a fair trial already. if you believe dr. bernstein, and that is their witness, you know, that is who they rested their case on, dr. bernstein, if you believe him for all the money he makes, for all the ad -- and i do not begrudge him for advertising, if that is what he wants to do and he does not want to publish and he wants to come to court and testify and that is who they want to hire, they made an issue with dr. bernstein, they said, dr. bernstein, you know, dr. benowitz and dr. henningfield, they testify for the plaintiffs, do not they. they are free to hire whoever they want, they could hire dr. benowitz and dr. henningfield. but they do not like what they have to say. they could hire anybody. when you see the surgeon general reports in evidence, you go look and see how many different addiction experts in the country contribute to those reports. i mean, there is hundreds of them. they could hire anybody they want. if they want the 2198 truth, they could hire them, r.j. reynolds, but they choose to hire dr. bernstein, he made $80,000, and he told you nobody is a member of the class. so that is their defense. so again, this is not part of this. and here we get to a legal cause. addiction is a legal cause, i do not want you to get confused on the words or what lawyers say and what they do not say. it says what it says, it means what it means. to be determined as a legal cause, addiction has to produce or contribute substantially to producing the lung cancer, so that you can say and they define for you, what does it mean to produce substantially? if you can say, but for the addiction it would not have occurred, then we are not here. so did the addiction play an important role? did the nicotine addiction play an important role here? did he smoke cigarettes for 50 years, a pack a day, first thing in the morning, and relapse all those times because he liked the taste or did the nicotine play an important role? did philip morris, r.j. reynolds, lorillard, brown & williamson, american tobacco, do you think they knew that nicotine played an important role? because today they tell you nicotine did not play an important role at all. they say addiction -- we do not sell addiction, we are not 2199 selling nicotine. well, if that is the case, take the nicotine out, lower the nicotine levels, make the cigarettes -- why do not they -- i mean, think about it. they have choices. they make billions of dollars these companies, is not it okay if they make a few less billion. five or ten billion dollars. make less money. mr. boyce: objection, your honor. the court: sustained. there is no record evidence about any of that, sir. do not give your personal opinions. stick to the evidence. you will disregard any comments regarding the wealth of any corporation, there was no evidence in that trial regarding that. go ahead, sir. mr. paige: if nicotine is not important, they can lower the nicotine levels, make it not addictive. if nicotine is not important, they can remove the nicotine, and they could sell a product like that if they really wanted to make it about choice. if they really wanted to give teenagers a free choice, whether they want to be making addicts, if they were going to be giving cigarettes to young people in the military, giving cigarettes to school kids, giving cigarettes to teenagers, if they really wanted to make it about 2200 choice, give them cigarettes without nicotine in it so they do not have to be addicted. but for the addiction, do you really think jim schoeff was so different than everybody else? they know statistically people do not smoke a pack a day for 50 years, they do not do it. they do not do it unless they are addicted to nicotine. it never happens, not even a -- it is not even like -- i mean, nobody can say that. it just does not happen, so for you to exclude him from the class, you would have to decide that somehow he was different from everybody else, nicotine had no effect on this kid, did not have any effect at all, and exclude him from the class because that is what they want you to do. all we ask that you do is follow the law; that is all we want. and i'm sure that is what mr. boyce wants, and if you follow the law, the answer has to be easy. again, if you apply the facts, nicotine addiction, you smoke because you are addicted, it causes lung cancer, it causes death. you all have seen that. and this is r.j. reynolds' documents. they know -- it is funny because now they say nicotine is not important when they know -- when we get to this part of the case, now it is no longer important, nicotine does not mean anything. but this is what 2201 they are saying in the documents in the '60s and '70s, this is the information they were concealing from people, they were not admitting this, they were not telling people this, they were concealing it. they knew it was important, they knew they could have done things differently. after the '64 surgeon general report, think about it, they could have helped people. they could have opened up smoking clinics, they could have helped people and said look, we apologize, we did not know our product was so addictive, we did not know we were killing so many people. let us do the right thing here, let us not sell cigarettes to teenagers anymore, let us make it an adult decision, ask people in their 20s, 30s, 40s to start smoking, they will not, they know that, and let us help these kids get off nicotine because they had that opportunity. maybe they would not be such a big industry, but they would have an industry, they could have done that if they wanted to, that was their choice, they did not want to do that. for a typical smoker, nicotine satisfaction is the dominant desire, the important thing, not taste. in designing a cigarette, the dominant specification should be nicotine delivery. nicotine is a potent 2202 drug. the industry is based upon the sale of an attractive dosage of nicotine. so to them internally, you know, mr. boyce represents r.j. reynolds and i like -- i respect mr. boyce immensely, i really, really do. i'm not saying that, i really do, but he is not r.j. reynolds. he is not the cigarette company; that is not who he is. he works for them, they have a right to hire whoever they want to hire and they hired a very good lawyer, but they will not admit that this nicotine is important, and that is what drives their business. this is what the nih, nida, cdc, world health organization, this is not just me or dr. henningfield, everybody agrees nicotine is highly addictive. cigarettes are designed for addiction. this is what keeps people smoking, even when they want to quit. you know, these are organizations. you know, it is a little insulting when dr. bernstein gets up here and he disagrees with everybody. he will not agree with anybody, except r.j. reynolds. you know, national institute of health, the cdc, and the world health organization, what is their motive for saying these things if it is not true? they spend millions of billions of dollars, probably, researching this to help people, and, you know, he just will not agree with 2203 them. this is the surgeon general of the united states. like heroin, cocaine, nicotine changes the way your brain works and causes you to crave it more and more. these powerful cravings make it hard for you to think of anything else. nicotine addiction is a disease. it is a disease. it is a brain disease. everybody agrees, even dr. bernstein did agree with that. nobody chooses to be an addict. nobody says, hey, i want to be addicted to nicotine. i want to be addicted. i want to be an addict. that is not what happens. they get these kids when they are young, their brains are different, they are not thinking, they are not smart enough. mr. boyce: objection, your honor, relevance to mr. schoeff. the court: overruled. mr. paige: and then when they get old enough, they are addicts and then they have a lifelong struggle with addiction, that is what happens. that is their business model. is it a good business model? probably not. has it been good for them? yes. this is the definition of addiction: a chronic, relapsing brain disease -- this is nida -- by compulsive drug use, despite harmful consequences. 2204 you know, they tell you that mr. schoeff did something wrong because he did not quit when he knew he was sick or he did not quit hard enough when he should have. you know, that is part of the disease of addiction. these people, they rationalize. they make up excuses. that is how the addict's brain works, and so the cigarette companies know that. you know, they know that. that is why in their internal documents they talk about, let us provide these addictive smokers with crutches and rationale so they continue smoking. who would do that? you get somebody who started to smoke when they are a kid, you know they are addicted, you know it is a brain disease, and you know that they want to quit or they should be hearing from their family they should quit, and then you are going to go out and you are going to spend $250 billion advertising from 1940 to 19 -- to 2004, that was the number in evidence, $250 billion. that is $15 million every day, you know, convincing these smokers with crutches and cues of how healthy and glamorous and good it is what they are doing. that is not right. here is mr. schoeff, started at age 15, 95 percent of addicted smokers start as teens, they know that, that is their target. the younger you start, the more likely you are to become addicted. 2205 they know that. most regular smokers are addicted. you know, you could smoke two, three cigarettes a day and they say that is not enough to cause addiction. you have got to get over five or ten, i think henningfield said over five cigarettes where you are getting enough nicotine to the brain. when you are smoking a cigarette, you get ten hits of nicotine. nicotine is a drug, so if you are smoking a pack a day, or two packs a day, you are getting 200, 400 hits of nicotine to that brain every day. that is why nicotine, when you are not smoking it, people are like, where is my nicotine. that is why they wake up in the morning and they have not had nicotine for eight hours, the first thing they do is smoke because they need to get that nicotine back into their brain. that is why when they go to church and they sit through a service and as soon as church is over and they pray to god and they thank god for being here, they run out and they put a cigarette in their mouth. that is what an addict does because he needs the nicotine, and they know that. and they capitalize on it. they take advantage of it. you know, she tried cold turkey many times and he relapsed. it is something -- they make that as there is something wrong with him. he did not have enough 2206 willpower, he was not strong enough, he was a weak man. you know what? every addict can try harder. if he tried ten times, i will tell you he should have tried 20 times, if he tried 20, he should have tried 40. but relapsing is not the fault of an addict, that is not their fault. they know that, that is why, you know, they put these cues out there, they want the smoker to see this. it is a lot harder back then to smoke when you did not have chantix, you did not have zyban, you did not have the patch that was just coming into effect, the gum was just coming out back then. you could smoke everywhere. you go to an office, people are smoking, you go to a movie, people are smoking. could you imagine how hard it was to quit smoking in the '70s and '80s when they did not have any of these aids to help people and everybody was smoking everywhere? it was not easy. i'm not saying that is an excuse, but that is the shoes you have to put mr. schoeff in. you have to put him in those shoes. he attended smoke enders course, and finally, you know, at the end, he is on oxygen, he is dying, and he is crying, the cigarettes got the best of him. if he is not addicted to nicotine, i submit to you that nobody is. nobody is addicted then, because that is what 2207 addiction looks like. that is what nicotine addicts do, that is what happens to their lives, and that is how the cigarette companies succeed. and after he dies, they are on to the next one. mr. boyce: objection, your honor. the court: sustained. we are only focusing on this smoker, sir. mr. paige: we played the video deposition of dr. henningfield, you saw his qualifications, you know, we played video depositions of him and dr. cook for you all. dr. cook is from r.j. reynolds, because they give what is called a generic testimony, it is a class action, so they are busy people and they cannot be coming to court all the time, so we take it one time and their opinion is pretty much about nicotine and how it works, applying to everybody. but he had impeccable credentials, i believe, and he says the way to really tell if somebody is addicted, forget about the dsm, which he was on the committee to write the dsm, forget about the fagerstrom, forget the nida definition, if somebody smokes the first thing in the morning and they are smoking 25 cigarettes a day, it indicates heavy addiction. so that is from dr. henningfield, he is done a lot of research in this field. 2208 if you do not want to go with the nida definition or dr. henningfield, we have the dsm, and when we spoke to dr. bernstein about it, you know, i think it was -- i mean, i think it was clear, now, i may be biased because i'm doing the examination and i do not really sit in your shoes, but to me it seemed clear that withdrawal, i mean, i can go through it, he was smoking first thing in the morning, had had those four or five withdrawal effects, the example given by the dsm to make this is that most people who start as teens do not expect to be smoking five years later, let alone 50 years later. he did try to cut down, you know, many, many times. this example given by the dsm is people who leave church or movies or things that smoke, work, et cetera, and finally continuing despite knowing that you have a problem. and that is the -- you know, the rub with addiction is that they try to say this is a characteristic of being addicted. you know, if you were not addicted, they would not smoke, so they know that smokers smoke -- if you are going to smoke despite the fact that you know you may die, despite the fact the fact that your doctors are telling you you are going to die, they want you to believe you do that because you choose, you are a risk taker, you do not 2209 care about your life. but the people who study addiction, they know that people really do that because of addiction and how nicotine works with the brain. and finally the fagerstrom test, you know, we know that if you go through these questions, this is what dr. benowitz said, he said anybody could apply this test. he would get three points, you know, he was having a difficult time in movies, restaurants, church, he was leaving. this one we do not know, in all fairness, we could not ask him, so i cannot know what the answer to that is. even if he smoked -- maybe he smoked more than a pack and a half, or even if you give him this right here, it is only two points. mrs. schoeff said he smoked more during the morning, and we know he smoked when he was sick. and if you use the score of the fagerstrom that is applied by scientists and researchers, he would have a very high addiction level. and this you have seen many times. the fact that he smoked while he was sick is no different than many other addicted smokers, it is no different. you know, half the smokers who undergo lung cancer surgery resume smoking, they relapse. even after having their larynx removed, they relapse. so these are people, this is not particular to 2210 mr. schoeff. mr. schoeff, and, again, he bears some responsibility, but we cannot vilify him because he relapsed, you cannot vilify the guy because he is doing what nicotine does to him. he did not know back in 1945 that there was cyanide and arsenic in his cigarettes. he did not know back in 1945 when he started that they would start manipulating the nicotine on him. he did not know that the filters did not work, he did not know all that. and i'm sure when he woke up in the morning, he did not say, boy, i want to be addicted to nicotine. that was not his choice. again, they know how important it is to their business, you know, they brag in their documents -- well, not brag, but they recognize in their documents, without nicotine our market would collapse. we would lose our jobs. they are not concerned about -- you never found the document that said, you know, with nicotine in our cigarettes, i feel really bad, people are dying, what should we do to help them. no, what they say is, without nicotine we are going to lose our jobs; that is what they are writing about. you know, they talk about here, this is r.j. reynolds document, 1820, it is in evidence, it is a good 2211 document, important document. but, you know, they do not say in this document, you know, boy, we should not manipulate the nicotine because people are getting sick and people are dying. they talk about, hey, we have to keep selling nicotine because we cannot be comfortable without it because without it we could be out of business overnight. that is what they are concerned with; that is the problem here. they are greedy, and they are liars. mr. boyce: objection, your honor. the court: sustained, sir. that is your personal opinion. based on the evidence, sir. base your argument on the evidence. you will disregard that remark, ladies and gentlemen. mr. paige: well, they are saying here that they are concerned with their jobs and their money, and if you find he is a class member, you will be bound by the finding that they concealed material information. so based on those facts, you determine what weight you would like to give it. this is how nicotine addiction causes disease. once you have nicotine, you know, you are inhaling all these chemicals. we know 45 percent of all long term smokers will die, 450,000 americans die every year. 2212 that is a tragic figure. this is a chart they show us the difference between a social smoker and a nicotine addict. and a social smoker who is smoking a pack per month, he might get 120,000 exposures to nicotine during his life. but somebody who is addicted who is smoking a pack and a half over 50 years is getting 5 million, almost 500,000 lifetime exposures, that is the number of inhalations of ten inhalations per cigarette, he is getting 5.5 million hits of that drug into his brain over his lifetime. again, the surgeon general, they recognize what an important part nicotine addiction, you know, nicotine addiction plays in causing lung cancer, and here it is in his own words. ability.) speaker: we should also give priority to the one addiction, tobacco addiction, that is killing more than 300,000 americans each year. (end of video.) mr. paige: so i want to just go back quickly to legal cause. so this is the issue of whether he is a member of the class or whether you agree with r.j. reynolds and you exclude him from the class. it is 2213 simple; you just follow this law. and, again, if the nicotine addiction played an important role, whether he was smoking a pack a day for 50 years, is that the reason he got lung cancer? and, you know, again, it does not say here that it has to be the only reason. okay? it does not say, you must pick between nicotine addiction or you must pick between choice. there is a place for that. that is what i want to be very clear about. there is a place where you are going to get to apportion fault. but they do not say that nicotine addiction has to be the only factor. it does not say nicotine addiction has to be, you know, you cannot consider other factors. all it says, and this is the law that you are bound by, did nicotine addiction play an important role, that but for the addiction would he have gotten lung cancer or would he have just considered smoking that much and gotten lung cancer anyway just because -- and if that was the case, why would he just not smoke nicotine with a cigarette. so if he was addicted to cigarettes and if it was a legal cause, he is a class member, and that is important here because class membership is important. the whole trial, it is a yearlong trial, took many years, 2006 or 2007 these people from the '40s and 2214 '50s were permitted to file these lawsuits. and once you are a member of the class, you are permitted to file these lawsuits, they are bound. they cannot come in here and say they did not conceal, they cannot come in here and say they did not have a conspiracy, they cannot say that anymore. they are not allowed to. and we did a two-week trial. that trial was almost, i think it was 11 months, there was a lot of evidence showing what they -- more of what they did than what you have seen. these are the findings that they are bound by, that they cannot deny them and they cannot stand up here and say that, you know, we were a careful corporation, we did our best because they were negligent. they cannot say that our products work, it was a good product, it was not defective, we did not manipulate the nicotine, the filters were, they cannot say that anymore because they were found to have done that. they cannot say they did not conceal important information, you know, they cannot say that about addiction. they knew about it. they talk about, oh, we cooperated with the surgeon general, we cooperated with nida. that is all been determined already, you know, they did not cooperate. we showed you that one 2215 document before '64 where they were saying, oh, we know about all these cancer-causing agents and then they go to the surgeon general and say we cannot find any. they were playing games, and that is why we played that one video for you where they said our lobbying forces are powerful and we go to capitol hill and we never lose a battle. they are powerful, and they know it. and that is why they have more responsibility, that is why they needed more compliance. there was no fda regulation of their drug, they could do whatever they wanted. mr. boyce: objection, your honor. the court: legal basis? mr. boyce: misstates the basis. there is fda regulation. the court: once again, folks, you will be guided by what the evidence in the case was. you did not hear evidence to it, you will disregard the remark. you may continue, sir. mr. paige: there was no fda regulation in the '40s, '50s, '60, '70s, '80s and '90s, zero. mr. boyce: same objection. the court: again, folks, you will follow the evidence in the case. overruled. mr. paige: they were free to do what they 2216 wanted, they did what they wanted, they did not share their internal research with the government, they did not come forward and tell the truth, and they lied and they lied for a reason. and they were probability. internally they never doubted what they were doing. so this is the first question you will be asked. this is one i think clearly you must find for the plaintiff. this is an engle finding, you know, they place cigarettes on the market, they were defective, and you are to find if he got lung cancer by smoking their defective product, they are responsible. they do not accept responsibility for it, but they are responsible by law. in order to be regarded as a legal cause, the defective product need not be the only cause, and that is what i was talking to you before, the comparative fault. you know, you can still consider the fault of jim schoeff, but that does not mean that they do not bear some responsibility. just because we accept responsibility and they do not, that does not mean they are not responsible. they do not accept responsibility, they do not. they have to be found responsible. so was there any other evidence of anything else other than their defective product that caused his 2217 lung cancer, there is not. so that is clear, that is one hundred percent clear. so now i want to talk about conduct, the conduct of the parties, what they were doing, you know, why we are here, what mr. schoeff did, what he did wrong, you know, when he acted -- at what point should mr. schoeff did something differently, and that is important in this case. and i accept that, and i agree with that. but this is, you know, there is two parties in this dance. there is really four parties, you know, there is r.j. reynolds, american tobacco, brown & williamson, and you have jim schoeff. you have jim schoeff and you have these three companies with all their money and all their power, all their manipulation of nicotine, all their marketing, all their lies, all their filters, and you have jim schoeff. so we are going to compare the fault of the parties, and it is up to you. what i suggest, you do not have to agree with, you do not have to agree with what i suggest, i'm going to -- maybe the numbers i give are wrong and you can fix them, whatever you want to do, but i'm going to show you how i see this. okay. so this one i submit to you is an easy question -- i have a certain amount of time, so at 2218 some point they cut me off, not like yesterday. i probably went a little too long, but today at a certain point -- the court: 33 minutes. mr. paige: -- i have to sit down, so i want to make sure i do not lose track. so here's how they started. this is the beginning of mr. schoeff, where he lived, what he was exposed to. this is in evidence, this is around the time he was born, but it shows what they were doing. and they were going after teenagers, let us line up the most popular students, let us line up the most popular customers. and they knew the key to their business. they know the key to their industry -- they know the keys. there is two keys to their business, really: nicotine and kids. mr. boyce: objection, your honor. the court: overruled. mr. paige: and so that is their business model: nicotine and kids. and even into the '70s, we are still talking about it and i believe with mr. boyce brought something up like: oh, we pulled the flintstone ad off the tv. and dr. proctor talked about, well, even into the '80 and '90s, we still have internal documents about how they teenagers with camel 2219 cigarettes. so they know the keys to success. they know it and there is no secret about it. they are well aware of it, well aware of it. hire is how they participated -- you know, this is the ftc report in 1967. it is in evidence. but it talks about: many youngsters consider smoking to be an acceptable, socially desirable activity. that is how jim schoeff -- you know, we talk about his fault. we have to talk about him. that is why we talk about presentism. we have to talk about how he grew up, what he saw. you know, this is 1967. they are talking about most youngsters are -- you know, they are not really understanding how dangerous it is, and by looking at the ads, they are not being told that once they start, they may never be able to stop. you know, they are not being taught that, they are not being told that. that is the responsibility of the cigarette company. that really is. it is their product. their product. you know, for somebody who has kids, if there is somebody who has kids, and there is a product that is being marketed to that child, they want product manufacturer to be honest and tell them what is really going on, and be careful about it, be careful about it. 2220 this is some of the ads that you have seen. i'll play a quick little -- ability.) male speaker: tens of thousands of doctors, doctors in all parts of the country, in every state of the union, doctors in every branch of medicine were asked: what cigarette do you smoke, doctor? the brand named most was camel. yes, according to this survey, more doctors smoke camels than any other cigarettes. male speaker: do you inhale? then you are better off smoking philip morris, and here's how you can prove it. light up a philip morris, take a puff, get a good mouth full of smoke and slowly let the smoke come through -- male singer: they are sure to please, besides they look so handsome under the christmas tree. so easy to give, so good to get, smoke camels. male speaker: do not miss the fun of smoking, do not miss the fun of smoking, smoking is a pleasure with pall mall. do not miss -- male speaker: the great outfielder mickey mantle. what do you say, mickey? 2221 male speaker: it is not hard to say why more folks enjoy camels than other brands -- male speaker: i got a better idea. let us take a winston break. male speaker: that is it. winston is the one filtered cigarette that delivers flavor 20 times a pack. winston has got that filter blend. male speaker: yeah, fred. female singer: why do not you settle back and have a -- female speaker: do you think cigarette manufactures had something to do with that? male speaker: yeah, i think. female speaker: cigarette manufactures do not make movies. male speaker: but what do you think? that the movie maker just showed marlboro on his own. female speaker: perhaps the movie maker was a marlboro smoker. (end of video.) mr. paige: so when you talk about negligence, were they acting reasonable? were they a reasonable corporation? were they doing things the right way? were they doing things the honest way? you know, it is sad what they did, and they had a 2222 trial about it and they were already deemed to be negligent. mr. boyce: objection, your honor. the court: okay. stick to the evidence in this case, sir. mr. paige: well, if he is a class member, the evidence in this case is that they were negligent, and they were not careful, they were careless, and that is a finding. you know, so they have this environment where they are portraying smoking as healthy and fun and safe. and we know that in 1953, there is this mouse painting study that comes out, and they are well aware of it, and they know about it. when we take about opportunities and choice and control, you know, they talk about: oh, mr. schoeff, he is not a class member because he was not -- remember he was saying, he was not a drug addict running around the streets out of control. you know, if that is what you have to be a class member, you have to be some drug addict running around the streets out of control, that is what they were saying, that they were out of control. when you talk about motivation, you have to think: what motivated them to lose control over what 2223 was right and wrong? why would they be motivated to do what they did? and so they hold this meeting, and you know, they know in the meeting -- they talk about how lucky they are that cigarettes are addicting. they talk about, boy, we should try to produce the first cancer-free cigarette. they know that in 1953. it is not a secret to them. you know, they have an obligation then, and that is what i'm talking about. at that time they had a choice. you know, they could have come forward and say: we might make less money, but let us work with the public, let us work with kids, let us work with smoking officials, let us get resources out there. let us make this about choice. let us not make it about addiction. let us not do that. so they issued a frank statement, and they say there is no proof -- this is what they told the public -- there is no proof cigarette causes lung cancer. and that is how they started. and it is like when you tell a lie and it keeps going and going and going, it gets worse and worse and worse. and it has a snowball effect. and it started in 1953. that is when they made the first choice to lie. 2224 and they had many opportunities, many times, that they could have, you know, changed their mind, you know, other people could have came in and told the truth. and they did not want to do that. so here is what they knew about smoking. this is in their internal documents. it is not like they did not know. this is all before the surgeon general report. carcinogens are found in practically every class of compounds. obviously the evidence accumulated to indict cigarette smoking is overwhelming. the evidence against it is scant. cigarettes have certain unattractive side effects. they call it an unattractive side effect is that they cause cancer. so internally, they know that. they know this internally. so they have this information. they know they are marketing to kids. they know their product is addictive. they know that kids are dying. and they have this opportunity to do the right thing. and internally, instead, they start talking about getting this ctr, the tirc, the ti, all those organizations that they try to tell you: oh, we were helping with research, we were cooperating. oh, we had all these scientists that were working for us, and they were really looking for the cure of cancer. 1 you know, this was -- it was a scam, and they know it. and inside they are talking about this. they talk about it. they are talking about it is a successful defensive operation. here is the one -- this is in 1964, when the surgeon general's report coming out: we have to give smokers a crutch and rationale to continue smoking. you know, dr. bernstein yesterday said that would be the worst thing to do to an addict. you do not want to tell an addict that it might not be proven, you will remove the dangerous things. they knew that. obviously, the key word is confusion. anything about that can work to our advantage. and this is in 1968. they knew that they were lying. they knew it. and they knew that one day -- they knew one day we would be here. this document, pt02130, they are talking about: one day, we are going to be subject to the charge and the finding that we are making false statements to sell cigarettes. and they did it on purpose. that is when we talk about do they do it intentionally or was this is mistake? they were doing it on purpose to sell cigarettes and make money. you know, they put profits over human lives, corporations. mr. boyce: objection, your honor. the court: overruled. mr. paige: corporations have responsibilities. you know, they have -- they are accountable. you cannot blindly just put profits over human lives. you know, these are people. you know, they are real people. jim schoeff was a husband. he was a father. you know, he had kids. you know, these are teenagers, they are marketing to, brothers and sisters. you cannot do that. you cannot, in our society -- it is not acceptable to put profit over human lives. you know, the important story is to cast doubt, and doubt is our product. you know, so they knew this. they knew it worked with addicts, they knew it would keep them out of trouble, and they knew this was for them, for their interest, they were motivated to keep this doubt and confusion going. that is what motivated them, and i submit to you that they lost control. they lost control over what was right and wrong, they had no why would what they were doing, and they wanted to make money. and here is some of their public statements. ability.) 2227 male speaker: if it was found by somebody looking under the tobacco industry research grant, it would be made public immediately and just as broadly as we could make it and then efforts would be taken to attempt to remove that substance or substances. male speaker: if we do find anything that we consider harmful -- and so far we have not -- we will remove these from smoke and still retain the pleasure of your favorite cigarette. male speaker: we want to be the detectives just as much as the surgeon general and the ama and we will cooperate in every way. well, obviously a filter takes out certain tar and nicotine. i do not think the industry admits there are any bad elements. if there are bad elements through our laboratories, through the surgeon general, through the ama, through acts of god and luck, we hope we may find them. and if they are found, they will be removed. male speaker: we do talk to the question of whether or not cigarettes are hazardous. we do not believe that cigarettes are hazardous. we do not accept that because when, as and if, any ingredient in cigarette smoke is identified as being injurious to human health, we are confident that we can eliminate that ingredient. 2228 male speaker: do you believe that cigarettes are safe? have they been proved to be safe, mr. cullman. male speaker: i believe they have not been proved to be unsafe. (end of video.) mr. paige: in all these statements they went on, i'm going to show you more, they went on to -- that was up until 1970, that last statement. but, you know, for somebody who is addicted, you know, they say: oh, jim schoeff, you know, i do not dispute this. he knew people who quit. he knew people who quit. he should have known better. you know, jim schoeff, he knew it was bad for him. he quit. once he quit, he should not have relapsed. but they know that these statements -- that is what you do to an addict, that is how you take advantage. that is how you take advantage. you know, jim schoeff, he is at fault, in part, but his fault, what he bears the responsibility for, was he had an addiction, he was weak, he was not strong enough, but he was not a liar, and he did not do it on purpose. and that is the difference between him and them. you know, that is the difference between him and them. they went out, they did this on purpose, they knew what they were doing, they were educated, they were 2229 more educated than him about this, and they did it on purpose. here's more, you know, i'm kind of trying to do this in chronological order, they talk about the ctr, you know, this is the ctr, this research, they are supposed to be looking for great things to help people. you know, all this money they are spending, you know, to raise awareness of cancer, so they say, let us face it, we are interested in evidence that denies the allegation that smoking causes cancer. that is why we showed you -- you might not remember this -- but there was a video of ducks getting cancer in philadelphia zoo, and they say it is really the pollution, pollution causes lung cancer -- i do not know if you recall that or not, but that is part of their research, that is what they would do. here, this is a really good document -- and you are going to get too much evidence to look at everything, but it talks about for 20 years, we have employed a single strategy to defend ourselves on three major fronts. so this was their strategy. they did not want to get in trouble with litigation, politics or public opinion. that is what they wanted to control. that is what they wanted to manipulate. that is what they used 2230 their power and resources for. and it is been a brilliant -- they call it a brilliant strategy that is been executed and helping them win battles, but they know it is not going to be a victory forever. again, they know we are going to be here one day. you know, they are building their companies. it is like in america everyone wants to work hard, we all want to work hard, and everyone wants to -- look, dr. bernstein said he was a truck driver at one point. i was a roofer at one point. we all want to work hard and get to where we want to be in life. but it does not mean you can do whatever you want. you cannot cheat and lie and steal and get to the top and say, hey, okay, i'm here, i mean, that is not right. that is not fair. that is not fair in the society of proper people. it does not work that way. so -- but they talk about here, it was really just a holding strategy, you know, and all that is going on, they are building their industry about creating doubt without actually denying it. they talk about the ctr and the tirc was really a shield, they acted as a front for them, and all along they know that nicotine is more addictive than heroin and they know -- this is the another thing where they are inconsistent. this is their lawyers in 1980. 2231 our lawyers are telling us we cannot really with a straight face -- cannot with a straight face -- legitimately tell the jury that is about free choice if somebody is addicted. they know that in 1980. that is 33 years ago. 33 years ago they are still arguing the same thing. still the same defense, still the same doubt and confusion, nothing has changed with the date on the calendar to them. the court: all right. mr. paige, is that a good place to stop or do you have something else you want to talk about? mr. paige: no, this is good. the court: why do not we take -- we are going to break this up so that we can take a stretch break and a restroom break and certainly let this young lady rest her fingers. so we are going to take a little shorter break if we can, this morning, ten minutes. please step back in the jury room. do not discuss anything we have been talking about in the jury room. we got quite a bit more to go this morning. so we will be in recess ten minutes, please. (jury out at 10:31 a.m.) the court: you have expired 49 minutes, sir. mr. alvarez: judge, i know you sustained a 2232 couple of objections regarding mr. paige is saying that the defendants are liars. there is case law -- the court: i did not say sustained an objection when he referred to the documents that called them a liar, sir. i sustained the objection when he gave a personal opinion about someone lying. personal opinions are not relevant. you can comment on the evidence and that they lied in these documents, but you can not say your own personal opinion about someone, how you feel someone might have lied or cheated or whatever. you can comment on the evidence. mr. alvarez: i missed the distinction. i apologize. the court: all right. other than that you are okay. we will be in recess. (a break was taken.) the court: how much longer are you going to go? you have 48 minutes. in 12 minutes i might give you a one-hour warning. mr. paige: i'm going to go an hour -- i mean, i was going to go an hour and 15, give him 15. the court: in 12 minutes i'm giving you a one-hour warning. so then if you want to take another 15, you will have an hour and 15. he will have 25 or 30 minutes. kevin is not going to take that long. 2233 mr. boyce: no, sir. the court: you have gone 48 minutes, in 12 minutes i'm going to give you a one-hour warning. mr. paige: i'll speed up. the court: you do not have to speed up, but that is the clock. bailiff: jurors coming in. (jury in at 10:43 a.m.) the court: okay. everybody is all coffeed up there, we are all ready to go. you can all be seated in the courtroom. mr. paige has the remaining time and we will hear from the defense. so mr. paige. mr. paige: so, you know, just to be clear. at this time they are internally discussing these things, there was no doubt in their minds, there was no confusion in their minds about how addictive nicotine was and that their product caused cancer, they knew it. they knew it, and they knew that they were getting people addicted. they knew about manipulation of nicotine, they knew those things. but what they were telling the public was a different story, because they knew with addicts this would work and with kids and teenagers and addicts that this story that they were selling would work. (at this time, a video was played in open court 2234 and taken down to the best of the court reporter's ability.) speaker: the cause of lung cancer is as yet unknown. in fact, no one knows what causes lung cancer. speaker: and as far as i'm concerned the bottom line is that we simply do not know. speaker: the case is still open. the jury has not come in. speaker: it may not be harmful, you are not convinced. speaker: it may be or it may not be. we do not know. speaker: it is not known whether cigarettes cause cancer, has not been causally established. speaker: do cigarettes cause cancer? speaker: i do not know if they do or not. speaker: i'm not in a position to give you a does or does not answer. speaker: we do not know what causes cancer in general right now, so i think that we may find out what causes cancer and we may find out some relationship which has yet to be proven. (end of video.) mr. paige: so there is really two things you can 1 take from this, you can take one thing away and say these people are much smarter than jim schoeff. and they do not know. they had their doubts, so how could they say that jim schoeff did not have his doubts. or you could say that they were lying, which is what the documents say, and they were doing it on purpose because they knew that they could sell their product, an addictive product, by creating doubt and confusion, and they knew that. and that is why they did it. there was no mistake, they knew, and they knew it worked. and they say, oh, there is no evidence that any of this worked on jim schoeff. they did not spend $250 billion, 250 -- imagine if they would have taken that $250 billion and taken half of it to educate people about the truth. if they would have taken half of that money to set up smoking cessations clinics, to take half of that money and look to inventing smoking aids to help people really have a choice. they do not care about that; that is the thing. they really do not care. they care about money, and they do not care about other people, other families. jim schoeff, they never cared about jim schoeff. they never cared about joan schoeff, and i want to say this, she is an elder lady, 79 years old, 80 years old and she is doing her best. she got -- cross-examination is not easy. kevin, it is his job, he did a good job, but some of the things that they said about her, you know, that you bought your husband cigarettes, you were buying him cigarettes and your husband knew and, you know, she was doing the best she can to recall anything. oh, your husband, he did not want to file a lawsuit in 1983. you know, the truth of the matter is if he would have filed a lawsuit in 1983, that would have been a decade before engle was even filed. he would have been probably the first successful suer of a lawsuit against a cigarette company. it was 20 years -- mr. boyce: objection, your honor. the court: sustained. once again, folks, this is not in evidence. you cannot discuss things that are not in evidence, mr. paige. mr. paige: i can tell you this, i'm proud of joan for bring this lawsuit, and i know, and i know, look, this is about justice, it is about doing what is right and wrong, and she would be the happiest woman in the world if her husband walked through the doors and they can leave here and leave us all alone. that cannot happen. her husband is probably looking down right now and he is proud of her for doing this right, for bringing this lawsuit. and i am proud of you for 2237 doing this. so the next question on the verdict form is about negligence. was there carelessness, you know, they were negligent. that is not in dispute anymore, they were negligent. they did not act like a reasonable drug manufacturing company, they did not act like a reasonable company that is selling an addictive drug, they did not do that right. so was that a legal cause? and it says here, it does not have to be the only cause, it can act in combination with acts of others, and that is what we are going to talk about, his acts, i promise i'm going to get there, it is next, i'm going to talk about it next. but this is where they say nothing they said matters, and it is interesting, this is the chart -- you look at the beginning, before they started all their conduct, before they started their lies, before they started their $250 billion advertising campaign in 1940, this is the lung cancer rate in our country. it is almost zero. okay? and for them to come in here now imagine in 1953 if they would have taken that $150 billion or $250 billion and helped people, we would be down here right now. and for them to now say that nothing they said mattered, nothing they said affected anybody, why in the world would they go to congress 2238 and lie under oath, why in the world would they spend $250 billion if nothing they said mattered to anybody. they knew from their own polls that there was 25 million smokers that did not believe that smoking caused lung cancer as late as 1964, and the other 25 million -- they had 25 million who had they had convinced and they had another 25 million they just had to give them some doubt, some reassurance, hey, even if you believe it, do not worry, we are working on it, we are going to remove it, we are going to give you a filter. they knew what they were doing. ftc report, 1967. they say nothing they said mattered. cigarette smoking -- cigarette smoking is without question the greatest single public health problem this nation has ever faced. this is what they created. they created this. the cost in human lives is staggering, it is staggering. 450,000 people every year, jim schoeff is one of them, just one, and they say nothing they said mattered. they do not think they could have done it, we could not have done any better, we did the best we could, we did all we could to help people. you know, we were responsible, we helped -- we put the warnings on the packs, you know, people -- nicotine is natural in tobacco. you know, they think they did the best they could 2239 with all their power, all their resources, you know, come on, come on. five decades, five decades of opportunity after opportunity, you know, we put warnings on them. well, they should have done more, they could have done a lot. they could -- again, it does not take a rocket scientist to figure out what is right and what is wrong here. so we submit to you respectfully that this answer is clear, that their conduct did matter. you know, their conduct did matter, and i submit to you that it is clear. i want to say this with the jury. there is seven individuals in the jury, each of you have your own minds, your own backgrounds, your own, you know, opinions, and i'm sure you all know this, you seem to all get along good. but when you go back in the jury room, everybody's voice counts, everybody needs to be heard, and i trust that everybody will go back there and work hard and follow the law and make sure that you work well with one another and follow the law. and if you do that respectfully we believe that these questions should be answered yes. now, i want to talk about jim schoeff's responsibility because when we filed our first pleading in this case, we said he accepted responsibility. and i want to be clear what that 2240 means because what we said is we accept some percentage of responsibility in relationship to what they did for the negligence and strict liability claims. the intentional torts when they lied, when they did things on purpose, that is a different ball game. but when things are done carelessly and with their defective product, we accept some responsibility. and i want to be clear what that means, though, because there were things that they did, you know, that were important, too. you know, they made a defective product, they knew it was deadly, they knew it was addictive, they manipulated the nicotine, that was important. that was a substantial cause of what happened here. you know, they talked about, well, if he would have quit in 1967, we would not be here today. well, we would not be here today if you did not market to kids and have nicotine in your product in 1945, we would not be here today if you would have told the truth and helped people. so they lied, they manipulated nicotine, they targeted teenagers, there is a lot of things that they did that played an important roles in causing this man's death. they provided filters that did not work as reassurances, you know, they did a lot. and i would say this to you and this is what i 2241 believe the evidence is, in my heart i believe this, but you may disagree with me and if you do, that is fine. some of the things i suggest is really what i think, what i think the evidence has shown, i could be wrong, i am wrong a lot of times, so you are not going to hurt my feelings if you disagree with me, but what i'm suggesting to you is if you break this case down into 50 years because we have 50 years of smoking, right, so if you take it the first 20 years represents forty percent of the time, the next 30 years represents sixty percent of time, if my math is right. so he started smoking in 1945 and the warnings, the surgeon general, all that happened around 1965, so the first 20 years, if you look at what he did wrong, he did nothing wrong. he did absolutely nothing wrong the first 40 years. i mean, the first 20 years. so the first forty percent of fault of apportionment of fault has to lay on r.j. reynolds, american tobacco, and brown & williamson, they have to be responsible. because they were the ones who got a kid hooked, they were the ones who lied, they were the ones who, you know, did the things that they did. and he did nothing wrong. if you think he did something wrong during the first 20 years, then apportion fault for that, but 2242 during the first 20 years he smoked, this is what the world he was living in was, he was living in that society, everybody was smoking, doctors were smoking. sixty percent of doctors smoked i think proctor said. athletes were smoking, people looked up to these people. willy mays, hank aaron, joe dimaggio, reputable people were all smoking. he was doing what everybody was doing. they did not have chantix and zyban and patches and gum. the first 20 years he did nothing wrong. after the first 20 years when we get to 1965 and we will use those as round figures, i think the warning -- the surgeon general report came out in '64, the cautions came out in '66, the warnings were in '70, but that was a time period where they both had choices to make, they both had opportunities. these are large corporations with money and responsibilities, and they had responsibility, too. so if you look at the next 30 years at sixty percent of the time, so how do you apportion the fault during the sixty percent of the time -- yeah, sixty percent of the time, how do you apportion that fault between three powerful corporations, american tobacco, brown & williamson, r.j. reynolds, and jim schoeff? how do you divide the fault? how do you divide the 2243 responsibility between somebody who has an addiction who is addicted and people who are fuelling the addiction? to somebody who has a disease and somebody who is manipulating nicotine to get the disease to continue, for somebody who thinks that filters are helping them, to the other parties who know that filters are a scam? so how do you apportion fault during the last 30 years, sixty percent of the time? and i submit to you respectfully -- well, let me show you. and, again, this is what they say about addiction. look, there are things that talk about, you know, smoking is your choice and smoking is -- you make the decision and i get that. i get that. any addict whether you are a heroin addicts, a cocaine addict, but when he was a 16-year old boy, he did not say, i want to be a 50-year long addict. he did not know what he was getting into. it is not fair, it is not fair what they did to him. the court: one hour and a minute warning. mr. paige: 15 more minutes; right, your honor? the court: whatever you wish to take. mr. paige: okay. here is what the '67 ftc government report says, you know, people do not realize when they begin smoking that smoking is no longer a 2244 matter of free choice. look, if somebody starts -- if i start -- not me, if somebody started smoking tomorrow who was an adult who knows everything we know now and they start smoking, that is a free choice. i get that. if somebody started smoking in 1945 when they were 16 years old, they did not know about arsenic and cyanide, they did not know the filters did not work, that was not an informed choice, that was not an informed choice. and if somebody wakes up in the morning and says, i choose to quit smoking, which jim schoeff did many times. he said i choose to quit smoking today, i want to quit smoking, it is not that easy when you are an addict. you know, some addicts they can do it, they can. other addicts -- everybody can do it, and he should have tried harder. i do not dispute that. we do not dispute that. every addict should try harder and bear their share of responsibility, but not when you get lied to over and over and over and over again; it is not right. the tobacco institute's own documents, their lawyers tell us it is not a free choice, and this is the '89 surgeon general report. you know, they show you the reports from '82, '84, '86. '89 they say two factors refute the argument that smoking is a free 2245 choice, most smokers start as teenagers, like jim schoeff, and then become addicted, like jim schoeff. and so he did have choices, but it is a choice that you make where you rationalize because you are addicted. it is not that easy. it is not that simple. that is why the cdc, surgeon general, all these governments are spending all this money researching it, they are looking into things like genetic factors and how can we help and what other aids can we get to help people quit. they are really spending a lot of time on this and they do not do it because, hey, it is up to you to quit if you want, do not quit if you do not want, it is not that simple. so you are going to have to apportion fault between r.j. reynolds and jim schoeff. and then what i submit to you is, again, the first forty percent of time, the first 40 points go to r.j. reynolds because he did nothing wrong, and the last 60 points, i submit to you, because they are three powerful corporations and he is one man, he should bear 25 percent of that fault. and if you take the math and you -- i think i did this correctly, if you take that math, it turns out that r.j. reynolds should be willing to accept 85 percent of the responsibility here. they should be willing to do that based upon the facts of this case. 2246 now, you may find that it is more or less, the numbers are different. i respect whatever you do, and so does joan schoeff. but i wanted to show you how i got to that number, i did not want to just throw a number on the board. these are the fraud findings. they cannot deny this anymore, you know, they purposely concealed information and they purposely entered into an agreement with the other tobacco companies to lie about the addictive nature of their product and the health effects of their product. they did it on purpose, they did it for money, and they did it all along knowing that people were dying. i mean, that is a poor business model. that is a socially immoral business model, you know, i do not know what is. i mean, this is a company of grown men who are going home to their families every night, and meanwhile when they are at work they are talking about how we are going to conspire to lie to people about how addictive and deadly our product is so we can make more money for our families. and these other families, you know, we do not really care what happened to them. so one of the questions is, you know, what did they do, what was some of their fraud, this is the 2247 filter fraud. they knew the illusion of filtration, they are calling it an illusion back in 1967. 1970's they know, this is an r.j. reynolds document. the smoker of a filter was getting as much or more nicotine as he would have got from a regular cigarette. he abandoned the regular cigarette, however, on the ground because he thought it was a reduced health risk. so that is what they did to these addicts, they say, hey, it is coming out, more people are believing it, we will give them this filter. but they knew it did not work. that was the lie, that was just another lie. the ftc commented on it, and it just -- they just said that the filters, you know, did not work, and in 2010 the surgeon general wrote, by the 21st century it was apparent that five decades of evolving cigarette design had not reduced overall disease risk amongst smokers and new designs were used by the tobacco industry as a tool to undermine prevention and cessation efforts. so they say he should have tried harder, he should have tried harder, he did not try hard enough, but they were using these filters to assure him that he did not have to try harder because it is removing the dangerous ingredients. that is their lie, that is 2248 another one of their lies, and they wanted people to believe them, and they knew people were believing them. we have to prove for the fraud claims, for the fraud claims we have to prove that there was reliance and we have to prove that there was some reliance still into the '80s and '90s. if he stopped relying before 1982, they are excused for all their fraud, that is the law in this case. and i submit to you that the evidence in this case is that their lies continued through 2000 and it would be -- he was smoking filters in the '80s and there is evidence and i'll get to it of his reliance even after '82 into the '90s. but here is what they said about people relying, and then i'm going to show you a gentleman who is a typical smoker in the '80s, what he believed. ability.) speaker: throughout your tenure with american, and it was not only american's position but your position that cigarettes were not injurious to health; is that accurate? speaker: through my tenure? speaker: yes. 2249 speaker: yes, that is so. speaker: that is something american tobacco wanted the public to believe; is that correct? speaker: yes. speaker: that is a statement that american tobacco takes great reliance on. speaker: we issued that statement, yes. we wanted them to believe it. speaker: and as far as you are concerned, a person is justified in relying on that statement? speaker: yes. speaker: truck driver dennis gaines, a grandfather said -- mr. paige: 1986. mr. boyce: just an objection on this one, relevance. the court: it is overruled. speaker: you know they say it cause cancer and heart disease, do you believe that? speaker: no, i do not. not in my heart, i cannot believe it. speaker: you cannot believe that it is bad for you. speaker: no. we look back at it, people that make the cigarettes and i felt like the one that make 2250 the cigarettes should know what they are doing. (end of video.) mr. paige: so that is an ordinary citizen in 1986. the prior person was a tobacco executive. they knew in 1982, '83, '84, '85, '86 people were relying upon them. if not why would they keep lying? why would they go to congress and lie in 1994? here is jim schoeff's reliance. he trusted r.j. reynolds, he rationalized his smoking and his failure to succeed by telling his family, you know, it was unproven when he would fail, you know, he would say, hey, it is not proven, it is not proven. we do not know for sure. you know, so he had doubt, and that is what they wanted, doubt. he smoked filters to keep himself safe in case it was ever proven, he smoked filters in the '80s and '90s, that is his reliance, he is relying upon them. they concealed and he did not understand how addictive nicotine was. he did not know, you know, you went to smoke enders, you went to the hypnosis twice, well, if he had known how addictive it was, what he was battling, he would have probably done a lot more or tried to at least. mr. boyce: objection. speculation. the court: overruled. 2251 mr. paige: he did not know that they manipulated the nicotine and ph levels to sustain his addiction. he did not know anything, so he is smoking these cigarettes, his smoking of the cigarettes is his reliance that they are giving him a safe product. and he has doubt and he does not know what they know. he does not know -- they want you to believe that he knew everything, that he had no doubt, no confusion. he knew that filters were safe in the '80s and '90s or not safe, that he knew they were not manipulating nicotine, and he had no doubt. when they had no doubt, when they had no doubt that it was okay to go to congress and lie in 1994. he did, you know, there is evidence that he did continue relying to some degree on some of the information they continued concealing. so these are the questions on the verdict form, they ask you about his reliance, and, again, did he have, it says, did they conceal -- did any of the concealment, any, see, that is the thing, any, did any of it occur after may 5th, 1982? and that is all that he has to prove. obviously he relied before '82, but did he still have some trust, some belief, some belief and misunderstanding based upon what they were doing after '82. 2252 and the same is true about the conspiracy, did any of the acts continue after 1982 that he relied upon, did anything, or did he know in 1982 that he would have been a man ahead of his time if he knew what we know now, but did he -- did any of the acts, anything taken in regards to the conspiracy regarding the health effects or the addictive nature occur after may 5th, 1982, or was he a cat out of the bag, did he know at that time that the filters were not working, did he know at that time that smoking definitely caused lung cancer, did he know at that time that nicotine was highly addictive, and did he know at that time that they were manipulating the nicotine levels by adding chemicals to the cigarettes? how much time do i have left? the court: you have taken an hour and 12 minutes. mr. paige: i have three minutes left. i might go a minute over, or two. the last question here is punitive damages are warranted. punitive damages are very important here because this is the thing where you say, are we going to punish a corporation, you know, the child does something wrong, do you pat them on the back and tell them, hey, it is okay, we are okay with your conduct, or 2253 do you tell them, look, you need to not do this. and punitive damages are important in our society because corporations need to know that they cannot just do whatever they want. corporations cannot just get a free pass. they are no better than anybody else. mr. boyce: objection, your honor. the court: sustained on that phrase. keep to the evidence. mr. paige: and so, you know, they need to know that it is unacceptable to choose corporate greed over human life. they need to know it is unacceptable to lie knowing that people are going to die just so they can make money. you know, just because a product is legal does not mean that you can manipulate, does not mean that you can lie, does not mean that you want to do with your power and your resources. you know, you cannot just tell them, if you pat them on the back today and tell them it is okay, it is a big misunderstanding, we forgive you, they get a free pass. other companies are watching, other cigarettes companies. one of the reasons for punitive damages is so other companies know they cannot get away with this. philip morris, lorillard, they were part of the conspiracy, and they are watching, they want to know 2254 what you are going to do, too, because they want to see if they get a free pass for this behavior, and it is to deter, deter other corporations from doing what they did. you know, this is the -- i just want to say by your verdict you can tell them that, you know, in our society are they really above the law or are they going to be held accountable. they have not agreed to be accountable for anything, so the only way they will be accountable is if you guys hold them accountable. here is, again, this is the nicotine stuff, and it just shows how intentional their misconduct was, how intentional their lies were. you go back in 1963, they know about nicotine, they know how addictive it is, and they go to congress in 1994. 1994 they will not even admit to being responsible for lying. ability.) speaker: if you raise your right hand. do you swear that the testimony you are about to give is the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth? (all said i do.) speaker: please consider yourself to be under oath. 2255 speaker: let me begin my questioning on the matter of whether or not nicotine is addictive. let me ask you first, and i would like to just go down the row, whether each of you believes that nicotine is not addictive. i heard virtually all of you touch on it, and just yes or no, do you believe nicotine is not addictive? speaker: i believe nicotine is not addictive, yes. speaker: mr. johnson. speaker: congressman, cigarettes and nicotine clearly do not meet the classic definitions of addiction, there is no intoxications -- speaker: we will take that as a no. and, again, time is short. i think each of you believe nicotine is not addictive. we would just like to have this for the record. speaker: i do not believe that nicotine for our products are addictive. speaker: i believe nicotine is not addictive. speaker: i believe that nicotine is not addictive. speaker: i believe that nicotine is not addictive. speaker: and i, too, believe that nicotine is 2256 not addictive. (end of video.) mr. paige: i think that pretty much -- and just so you know, american tobacco company, brown & williamson, they were all there, and that concludes my time. mr. alvarez, i have one minute here left pretty much, and thank you all. it is been nice meeting you so to speak, i have not really met anybody, but it is been a privilege to be here in front of you all. i really thank you, you have so much power, so much responsibility to do the right thing, to let them know that they cannot be excused for this. and i know alex has a little bit to say, but thank you all so much. mr. alvarez: thank you. good morning. i've only got 15 minutes, so i'm going to be brief. some of the executives that you saw were from other companies, but one of the instructions you are going to hear -- you probably heard that you will take it back with you -- is that r.j. reynolds is responsible for the acts of its co-conspirators that are done in furtherance of their agreement. okay? so whatever the other companies did, they are responsible for, as long as it is done in furtherance 2257 of the conspiracy. so i want you all to be clear on that point. there was another issue that you were probably looking at, which was on the verdict form that said, you know, may 5th, 1982, and you are probably saying: what happened on may 5th, 1982? nobody has heard any evidence about may 5th, 1982. well, it has some legal significance to the case, but it does not have any factual significance to this case. okay? so what we want you to do is look at the evidence before and after 1982, and we will submit to you before 1982 and even after 1982, he still relied. he still relied on the tobacco companies' statements and omissions about the health effects and addictive nature of smoking. he continued past 1982, may 5th of 1982 -- that is clear from the record. that is what ms. schoeff testified to, that is what the evidence in this case was. and the significance of that is, if you answer yes to that, you get to answer the last question, which is, through clear and convincing evidence, are punitive damages warranted? so in order to get to the punitive damages issue, you have to answer yes to either one of those reliance questions on may 5th, 1982. and i want you all to be 2258 clear on that. okay? now, gary did not have a lot of time -- or he had more time than me, but with regards to the burden of proof -- and we have the burden of proof. and we have to prove things to you by the greater weight of the evidence. okay? and i know some of you may have some questions about that. but just think about the greater weight of the evidence is who proved their case just slightly more than the other. mr. boyce: objection, your honor. the court: again, analogies are fine. you will stick to the laws and the instructions. go ahead. mr. alvarez: it is the greater weight of the evidence. whoever proves it that way has proven their case to you by the greater weight of the evidence. i submit to you that we have done even more than that. that if the scales of justice were here right now, we outweighed and met our burden more than we needed to, not just slightly. mr. boyce: same objection, your honor. the court: overruled. mr. alvarez: now, you also heard some instructions about it is legal to sell cigarettes, it is free speech and things like that. but if you listen 2259 very carefully, the last sentence of that instruction said what? it said: statements made by r.j. reynolds as part of the public debate concerning the health consequences or addicted natures of cigarettes are protected speech. however, false, misleading, or deceitful statements and misrepresentations made as part of a public debate regarding smoking and health are not protected free speech. you cannot lie and say false things. you could sell your product; you just cannot lie. and that is why we are here. okay. part of the strategy is to try to cast doubt in your minds about several things in this case; that is part of the strategy. cast doubt in your minds about several things. okay? cast doubt that smoking causes lung cancer. that was the whole purpose of the cross-examination of dr. via saying this lung infection, mai, was really the cause of his lung cancer, when there is no scientific basis or medical basis for that opinion. it is just to put and plant a doubt in your mind. the second thing that was done in this trial is that facts were misrepresented, whole statements were not put in context. we are going to talk about 2260 some of those in a few minutes. what they did is they attacked the credibility of ms. schoeff, and basically said: you did not -- you are not really telling the truth. you cannot tell us that he really went to smoke enders you cannot really tell us that he tried hypnosis. he really did not try. they attacked the credibility of this witness, attacking. what is the best offense -- i mean what is the best defense is a good offense, and they took it to her. and then the second thing -- or the last thing they did is they took extreme positions in this case. extreme positions like that medical causation thing, that lung cancer in this case was not caused by smoking but was caused by some infection when there is no medical basis for that. now, look at the instructions when you get back there about addiction and what legal cause means. and if you find one word in there about choice or control, then they are right. but you know what? you are not going to find it. you are not going to find a single word in the instruction that defines legal cause by that definition. this is the definition. legal cause -- addiction is a legal cause of loss, injury, or damage if it 2261 directly and in the natural and continuous sequence produces or contributes substantially to producing such loss, injury, or damage so that it can be reasonably said that but for the addiction, the loss, injury, or damage would not have occurred. there is nothing in there that says choice at all. now, let us compare the quality of the expert witnesses that you heard here. dr. proctor, extremely well-educated professor from stanford university. stanford is like the harvard of the west. in fact, he even taught at harvard. who has made it his life work to study the tobacco. he is published, he is hired by the government in cases against the tobacco companies, a man who knows what he is talking about. then dr. via, and who is dr. via? a man who went to harvard medical school, who trained at the nih, the national institute of health, who has six board certifications -- he is the only physician in the united states of america who has six board certifications. okay? who do they bring? they bring a doctor who advertises on the internet that he is an expert in 150 different types of fields, who has never written one paper, one article, one letter to the editor on nicotine addiction. not one. 2262 burden of proof. weigh the evidence. who do you believe more? who has more qualifications? and just because someone can come in here and testify does not mean that he is qualified. you decide that. you are the -- he is the judge of the law. and you know why we stand up when you all come in? because you all are the judges of the facts. you judge it. so they take these extreme positions that lung cancer caused an infection without any -- no medical doctor -- it is not like they do not -- they cannot call a doctor. they called no physician, no scientist, to say that his lung cancer was caused by something other than smoking. they did not. because if they could have, they would have. mr. boyce: objection, your honor. the court: overruled. mr. alvarez: and here is the -- this dr. bernstein that gary vigorously cross-examined is what we say in the legal profession -- you may call it something else -- okay, he basically -- his basic opinion is unless you are brain damaged, you are not addicted. that is an extreme position that no health authority in the united states of america or any place in the world accepts. so you got to wonder why would they call someone 1 with such extreme positions to come into court and say that? because he is beating their drum. this is the instruction you are going to get about expert witness: in this case you heard opinion testimony about certain technical subjects and about medicine. regarding experts, you may accept such opinion testimony or you may reject it. well, i think you should reject dr. bernstein's extreme opinions that are not accepted in the united states of america as mainstream science, or give it the weight you think it deserves considering the knowledge, skill, and experience, training or education of the witness. who -- he has none, he is never published one article on nicotine addiction. or the reasons given by the witness for their opinions expressed and all other evidence in this case. well, we know he has 80,000 or 70,000 reasons why he came in and testified the way he did. here is another red herring. this is subtle, the way it is been -- the way it is been done. they go: well, you know, in 1983, you know, your husband was not the kind of guy that would have sued the tobacco company in 1983 when he found out he had pvd. he is not that kind of guy. suggesting that she is doing something he would not want her to do. and that is a red herring. because in 1983, they were still beating that drum, and he was still believing that what he was smoking and what he was doing was not harmful to his health. but if it was, he was going to use filtered cigarettes, and who created that world? jim schoeff did not create that world; they created that world. spending half a billion dollars from the ctr, the tirc, and the ti to get that message out. and another 250 million -- billion -- billion dollars in advertising to cement it. so the law -- you all swore an oath to follow the law. that law says that under florida law, the decision whether to file a lawsuit for a wrongful death rests solely with the representative of the estate, which in this case is joan schoeff. misrepresented facts. they took facts out of context, they read her answers to interrogatories to say that. you did not think that she was addicted. you said he was not qualified, but they did not read the first sentence where it said: yes, i do think he is addicted, but i'm not a doctor. but they conveniently cut that part out. they misrepresent facts. that he relied on public 2265 statements in advertising. they make it seem, after they cross-examined her for an hour and a half, make her think that she did not say what she -- i had to read back in her depositions. she was there for two days, testifying. okay? that she did say that, and she did say it. they tried to make it seem that he did not go to hypnosis because she did not remember the address 50 years later of where it was, or that he did not attend smoke enders because she could not remember if it was two, three, four, five weeks that she said he went because she could not remember the exact date 30 or 40 years later. now, addiction does not require a medical doctor to come in here to say this person is addicted. mr. boyce: objection, your honor. the court: overruled. mr. alvarez: okay? that is not the requirement, you are not going to see it in any of the instructions because you are the judges of the facts. and you know who decides that? you decide that. and this instruction says, your job is exclusively to determine what the facts are. you may use reason and -- this is my favorite word because i use it over and over again -- common sense to reach 2266 conclusions. you may draw reasonable inferences from the evidence. it is your job to decide that. and you heard from dr. henningfield, who is one of the world's most well recognized experts on nicotine addiction. now, they did this declining risk argument to say: well, if he would have stopped smoking in 1966 or 1970, he would not have gotten lung cancer. do you remember that? well, guess what -- first of all, the risk still increases after you have been smoking at 40 years of age, which he was in 1970. okay? that is what the statistics show. but guess what? guess what also is important in 1966 and 1970? had they told the truth and come clean and told everybody and taken the nicotine to a lower level, they do not make their cigarettes addictive, you would not be here either. and why did they wait until 2000 to tell the truth? five years after this man died. now, if he smoked a pack and a half a day, okay -- you got to think there is 20 cigarettes in a pack, so that is 30 cigarettes in a day. let us assume he slept for eight hours. that means he is awake for 16 hours; right? if you are awake for 16 hours and you are smoking 30 cigarettes a day, 2267 that is about two cigarettes an hour. let us put it in context. that is like you are smoking almost two cigarettes every hour for 16 hours while you are awake. you are not addicted? i call this the hypocrisy of it all. for 50 years, they go to the public. they say: smoking, there is no proof that smoking causes cancer. we do not know. i mean, you heard them say it over and over again. we played those clips for you; right? we do not know, it has not been proven, we do not know what it is. over and over and over that is the message that they were sending everybody. and then they come into this court and they do a 180 and they say: well, you should have known that smoking caused cancer. well, wait a minute. you told people for 50 years that you could not prove it, it does not cause it, and then you come into court and you say that you should have known? that is the hypocrisy of it all. i'm going to talk to you about damages because at the end of the day, you have to decide whether to award damages to ms. schoeff and what is reasonable and fair in light of the evidence. okay? and the question is, question number 9: please state the total amount of damages sustained by joan 2268 schoeff for the loss of her husband's companionship and protection and for her pain and suffering as a result of james schoeff's lung cancer and death. well, i mean, this is the part we have to talk about money. i do not like to talk about money. we have to talk about money. but before we talk about money, let us look at the loss. okay? because everyone wants to have what they had. a long, loving, caring relationship and marriage. do you know how hard that is? do you know how hard it is to the married for 45 years to someone you still love every day? everybody wants that. she was privileged. she was privileged to have that. she met him when she was 16 years old, and they married at 18. they were together for 45 years. he was 63 years old when he died. that is two years before his retirement age. what people their age look forward to, what they work for, what they wanted, was to spend their golden years together. and there is nothing more beautiful than that, than watching a couple that has reached that plateau walking down the street and holding hands. there is nothing more beautiful in the world than that. and that was taken away from her. that was taken away from her. 2269 so i'm proud of you, too, because it is not easy for an 80-year-old woman to take on r.j. reynolds tobacco company. and we did our best, and i just hope it was enough for you and for this case. and i think -- we think that $9.5 million is reasonable and fair in light of the evidence. and you may think it is too much, you may think it is not enough. it is up to you to decide. to you, you, you, you, you, you to decide what is fair, right, and reasonable in light of the evidence. they showed you a picture of jim schoeff in the middle with the silhouette, remember, and they said: what is missing here is him. he is involved in this, remember? where is him. do you remember in their first slide they had like a silhouette of jim schoeff, where is jim schoeff in all this? well, when they started this conspiracy and they continued in 1994 with this conspiracy, he was right there. he relied, he listened, he believed. and do you know what that cost him? thank you. mr. paige: i remember my first trial -- well, you would not find that funny. but i always remember i sometimes say the wrong thing, morning and afternoon. but anyway, you know, mr. boyce had a lot to say and really, you know, they want this case to come down -- they want you to make a choice. they want to make it hard and fast. you cannot have it -- it is got to be addiction or choice. you know, you smoke because you are addicted or you smoke because it is a choice. and that is not the way it is. that is not the way it is, that is not the evidence, and that is not what the law says. and i trust that when you look at the law, you will see that his arguments, if you followed the law, his arguments do not even come into effect until you get to the comparative fault phase of the trial. but he did use an analogy that i thought was interesting, he said if you bumped into mr. schoeff during the years and you asked him how many times he quit during the 50 years, you know, you all heard the evidence. if you really believe that he only tried five times, you know, that is your right. 2354 but he is a very effective lawyer and he has a very effective way of saying things, but does not mean he says it does not mean it is right and does not mean that is what happened in the case. but could you imagine, can you put this up, please, if you bumped into a tobacco executive -- i want to use the same analogy -- you bump into a tobacco executive in 1947. and then you see him in 1953 and he says to you: we care about our customers, we care about our customers so much, their health is a basic responsibility of us -- to us. and then you bumped into that person 50 years later, in 2010, and you say: hey, what have you been doing for the last 50 years about that basic responsibility that you recognized? what did you do for the 50 years and you found out for 50 years they have been lying and cheating and watching people die. and they said: but, look, we should not be punished because in 2013 we now have it on our website. we put it on our website now, so do not punish us. that is not okay. that is not okay, what they did. it is the same doubt, confusion, you know, controversy, and that is what they did. they did not put it up on the website until long after the engle 2355 case. and now they come into court in these engle cases and say: look how good we are now. you know, we should not be punished. do not punish us. you know, we have changed. well, they need to be punished for their past conduct. you know, if you had somebody who did really bad things for 50 years and they came to court -- and they got away it -- and finally they changed their lives and they get caught and they say: but do not punish me, jury, please do not punish me because i'm changed. it is like, no, you have to -- in our society you have to accept accountability. it is like you cannot have -- you have to have the courage to follow what you did, and they do not want to do that. they have no courage and they will not accept responsibility and they have killed people and mr. schoeff is one of them. and when they talked about losing control and who was motivated, they lost all control. they were motivated by money, and i think that is so clear in this case. they talk about 1983, he did not file a lawsuit. that was 17 years before any of this conspiracy came out in documents. it was decades before engle was even filed. to this day, i will tell you i honestly 2356 do not think anybody has anybody recovered on a pvd case against a tobacco company. mr. boyce: objection, your honor. the court: sustained. outside the evidence. no personal comments. comment on the evidence. mr. paige: he would have been a pioneer ahead of his time, by decades, if he would have sued the tobacco company in 1983. mr. boyce: objection, your honor. the litigation goes back to the '50s. the court: stop, sir. what is your comment, sir? you made reference to this. mr. paige: for pvd and prevail, before the documents, the conspiracy and all that came to light. and it would have been -- you know, it would have been unheard of, and they know that. they know that. so when they sit up and tell you: oh, he did not sue in 1983, believe me, that is the lawyer talking. that is the lawyer talking. you know, i have a lot of notes. these guys give me notes. i know i'm not going to get through this. this is a note to me. i cannot even read it. talking about -- this whole thing about addiction not being a legal cause or a medical cause. there is things in the 2010 surgeon general report where they 2357 talk about there is a fundamental consensus that there is no real criteria for diagnosing addiction, and then they cite to the dsm, they cite to the fagerstrom, they cite to the heaviness of smoking index. there is all these different ways you can diagnose addiction. and there is no requirement that we have to bring a doctor report. it is not required. they know that. if we had to bring a doctor report to prove addiction, judge tuter would let you know, and he would let us know by throwing our case out of court. there is case law that we can use a generic deposition of dr. henningfield, just like we did, and the jury can determine whether someone is addicted or not. it is been affirmed on appeal and this is the way we do our case. and they know that. he knows that. but i also submit to you if you rely on dr. bernstein, i think clearly, when i went through the dsm through it with him, it was clear when i showed the examples from the apa, that our client met six of the seven criteria anyway. the next -- you know, they talk about -- this is it. this is the legal cause instruction. did the addiction play an important role? you will read it for yourself, and but for the addiction, would he have 2358 smoked. they talk about, you know, if he was strong enough to be a marine, he was strong enough to be a ceo. he was not. and this is one addiction he could not beat. it happens with successful people. it happens. people struggle with addiction who are very successful in our country. and i could name them. there are successful people. you know, it happens to everybody. it does not matter whether you are a man or woman, black or white, rich or poor, successful or not successful, addiction is a disease. you know, they say this person was not addicted. he was not forced to smoke, he knew people who quit. he heard smoking was bad. you know, they will say that about everybody, that is the point. they do not want anybody to be a member of the class. they create this class, they get people in the class, they get them addicted, and then they throw out the same excuses in every case and say, well, you cannot be a member in our class. mr. boyce: objection, your honor, move to strike. the court: okay. the comments about the class, i sustain. it is stricken. keep going, mr. paige. mr. paige: the next thing -- do i have another thing? they said something about filters, i'm going 2359 to go through this quick. i probably only have, what, seven minutes. they said they never advertised fitters as being unsafe -- i mean, as being safe. these are all their tricks about filters. it is all in evidence. you know, you will read these this if you like. can you go back out? the bottom two right, you know, viceroy is an r.j. reynolds product, talks about how safe filters are. you know, so they did that. and the instruction on the product defect specifically says -- this is the engle instruction. the defendant -- it does not say the defendant placed filtered cigarettes on the market that were defective. and, in fact, if you find for punitive damages, they will have a corporate representative here -- i cannot wait to ask him, if i get that privilege, if he will admit that filtered cigarettes were defective, because he will not. they will not admit anything is defective, i assure you. so did they place cigarettes on the market that were defective, or they did, that is the law. it does not only apply to filters, some filters, et cetera. they talked about premier and eclipse. this is what the surgeon general writes about premier and eclipse. you can do the last paragraph. you know, 2360 more recently tobacco -- this is their great invention, premier and eclipse. more recently they have been promoted these cigarettes, premier and eclipse, and then it says at the bottom: both human and machine testing indicate that these products provide no clear benefit to users over conventional cigarettes, and they found at the levels -- you know, they deliver the levels of key lung and cancer -- toxins. so, you know, a lawyer can say anything to you. he can stand up here and tell you whatever he wants. but that is the real deal about premier and eclipse. and if premier and eclipse is so safe, why not spend some of that $250 billion marketing premier and eclipse, you know? that is not reality. he talked about burden of proof. how much time do i have left? the court: five minutes, six minutes. mr. paige: he talked about burden of proof, and i just want to explain a little bit about burden of proof. if it was a criminal case, our burden would be beyond a reasonable doubt. and that is because somebody's liberty would be at stake. somebody would be going to jail. freedom. in this case, we are talk 2361 about money damages. there is no restoration. we cannot bring back mr. schoeff. it is not possible. so the only thing we have is compensation; that is what the law provides. fair and reasonable compensation. and when you have that, the burden of proof in a civil case is by the greater weight of the evidence. what do you believe more likely than not. if it was a criminal case, and i was a football player, i would have to get to the 99-yard line. in a civil case, i have to get across the 50-yard line. and that is the burden. nobody is going to go to jail here. i cannot even read it. this one is not easy. so punitive damages, the reason for them was to punish for past conduct, and he says: oh, you cannot deter us because we are already a better corporation. look how good r.j. reynolds is now. but that is not it. it is to deter others. it is to deter others. so other corporations see that you cannot get away with this. that is part of it. to punish them, if they deserve to be punished for what they did, and it is to deter. so other people do not do what they did. you know, they built their company on lies, they profit on lies, and it is the same company today, it is a different date. i look 2362 forward to talking to the r.j. reynolds corporate rep. i hope i do. the last thing i want to do is the psa -- they keep showing the psas. and remember in 1967, it was for a few years. they had to run the psas, three tv commercials, to one psa for a short period of time. tobacco then took them off the air and then they put their money in other advertising and that was the end of the psas. mr. boyce: objection, misstates the evidence. the court: overruled. the jury will be guided by what they heard from the evidence. mr. paige: now we have psas. so i want to show you the difference between what impact it has -- the three for one. i'm going to do a little clip -- not the whole commercial because i do not have enough time -- little clips of two commercials with the psa, and another commercial, and then what a psa today alone looks like. ability.) female singer: why do not you settle back, and have a full-flavored smoke. settle back with a marlboro. 2363 male speaker: like father, like son. think about it. male speaker: let us take a winston break. male speaker: that is it. winston is the one filtered cigarette that delivers flavor 20 times a pack. winston has got that filter flavor. male speaker: yeah, fred. male speaker: it is a winston cigarette. female speaker: it is a winston cigarette. female speaker: winston cigarette? male speaker: why, certainly. female speaker: i tell you, pearl, winston is good smoking. (end of video.) mr. paige: so that is how it was back in the day when they were running three to one. and now, since they are not allowed to have tv commercials, and it is all psas, this is what the young people of america are now being exposed to, thank god. ability.) (end of video.) mr. paige: thank you all very much. the court: thank you very much, mr. paige.