plaintiffs' closing arguments ms. barnett: good morning. in a little while, you will go back in the deliberation room and you will have three jobs. one is to answer the questions that are on the verdict form. second is to make sure that everybody on the jury follows the law as the judge instructs you on what the law is. and then third is, before you answer any questions on the verdict form, you will need to explain to each other why you feel the way you feel. so for the next 30 minutes, i'm going talk to you. i'm going to reserve hopefully 15 minutes. for the next 30 minutes, i'd like to talk to you about some ways to do that. as you recall, remember, we are suing the cigarette companies for three reasons. the first reason is they 7 violated the simple safety rule that a manufacturer can never lie about a danger it knows about in its product. and even those men from the cigarette companies who came on those videotaped depositions we showed you, even they agreed a manufacturer cannot lie. and let us look at what mr. colby said. let us look up on the screen. 9 can we put that on the screen? mr. colby said an individual -- cigarette companies have a duty to be truthful and a duty to not mislead the public. and let us look at what mr. jupe said of philip morris. individuals are entitled to know the truth about any product they buy. but the cigarette companies violated that rule. they lied about the fact that cigarettes cause cancer. they lied about the fact that cigarettes were addictive. they lied about the fact that the light cigarettes, the low tar cigarettes were not any safer. they lied about the fact that filters were not safer. and they lied about the fact that the low nicotine cigarettes, so-called low nicotine cigarettes, did not actually give any less nicotine at all, they were just as addictive. the proof of this, the proof of all of this comes straight from the cigarette companies' own records. they 8 should have simply told the truth. and the second reason we are suing the cigarette companies is because they violated the safety rule that a manufacturer cannot hide a danger it knows about in its product. and we know from seeing their records that the cigarette companies studied addiction and then they secretly rigged those cigarettes to make them as addictive as possible and as hard to quit as possible. and the proof of this came from the records. they never should have secretly rigged cigarettes for addiction. and the third reason we are suing the cigarette companies is because they refused to provide full and fair compensation for what they did so we were forced to bring them to trial. and remember what those men on those videotapes said. these are both statements from the '90s. let us look at mr. kornegay. he said there is nothing wrong with what cigarettes companies have done. and what about mr. brookes? they do not intend to change the way they do business, nothing needs changing. there is no activity in the last 25 years that is inappropriate. so i want to talk to you about the instructions and the verdict form. and i'll start first with the instructions that the judge is going to give you. ms. london is going 9 to hold these up, but you will get a copy these when you go back to deliberate. and the instruction on page 8 is an important instruction. and it says -- 6 can you make that bigger because i cannot read that. it says that we have the burden of proving our claims by a preponderance of the evidence, and it explains that. a preponderance of the evidence simply means an amount of evidence that is enough to persuade you that the plaintiffs' claim is more likely true than not true. it is what we have been talking about all along, more likely right than wrong. you can have doubt. you can have doubts on both sides, but at the end of the day when you weigh them out, if you find that we are more likely right than wrong even by just a little bit, then the law says you must decide that question in our favor. so if during deliberations someone says, "i'm just not sure. i'm not sure. i have some doubts about this," remember, you do not have to be certain. you do not have to be sure. you can have doubts. the question is, is it more likely right than wrong. and even just by a slightly amount if it is more likely right than wrong that we are right, then you need to answer that question in our favor. and that is right there on page 8 of the instructions. so let us look at the verdict form. these are the 10 questions you will have to answer. question number 1: was carol lasard addicted to cigarettes? and dr. burns and dr. cummings both concluded that carol lasard was addicted. they spent decades researching and publishing and studying in the field -- 8 can you take that down now? -- and working with addicted smokers trying to warn them, trying to help them quit. and they both explained that what they used -- their definition they used to determine whether she was addicted is the very same one published by the united states surgeon general and published by the national institute for drug abuse. and it is the one they use when they teach doctors and when they write about this and when they work with people on trying to help them quit, simply this: the chronic relapse in brain disease characterized by compulsive use despite harmful consequences. and they explained how -- dr. cummings explained how it is that smoking cigarettes, it gets into your lungs and goes to your brain and causes those changes to the structures in your brain, how it is that nicotine addiction in cigarettes causes a chronic relapsing brain disease. and he and dr. burns both explained from their different perspectives how they were able to conclude 11 confidently that carol lasard smoked compulsively and that she smoked despite harmful consequences and that is how she met the definition of being addicted. and you heard from her family that she smoked compulsively despite harmful consequences, one and a half to two packs a day, year after year, for more than 40 years. she had to smoke first thing in the morning before she got out of her bed. she had to leave family gatherings, including playing with her grandkids, to go outside and smoke. and when she struggled with copd, having difficulty breathing, she still smoked. and when she was dying of cancer and wasting away at the hospice, she is still smoking. that is the picture of addiction. that is not somebody smoking just because they like it and think it is fun. and remember what the doctors wrote in her medical record. do you remember it said she has been unable to quit. and carol's doctors -- not only were dr. burns and dr. cummings clear and firm about this. carol lasard's own doctors, the ones who saw her, who treated her and who laid hands on her, who helped her struggle with her copd, who gave her the nicotine patch and treated her for her cancer, they also found the same thing: she was addicted. and back in '96, they wrote that in her medical records, 12 "addiction, tobacco abuse." and in the face of all that evidence, the cigarette companies brought to you dr. samuel who disagrees with the family who thought she was addicted, he disagrees with dr. burns and dr. cummings, and he disagrees with carol lasard's own treating doctors. and again, he is never researched or studied or published anything on any kind of addiction, much less on nicotine addiction. and sure, he has four board certifications which is quite an accomplishment, but none of them are in addiction medicine or in addiction psychiatry. and he told us that 45 to fifty percent of his time is not treating patients, it is doing this forensic work with lawyers and lawsuits. and then at the time that he is actually treating patients, he said less than one percent of those patients were specifically to treat nicotine dependence. and it makes sense because people do not go to a psychiatrist to stop smoking, to try to help themselves get over addiction to cigarettes. and that book he used, he said it was old, the data was out of date, the research was old, and the criteria are being changed, there is a new one coming out next month in may. there is no -- 13 2 mr. geise: objection, your honor, relevance. the court: overruled. ms. barnett: -- comparison to his qualifications versus the training and experience and knowledge and work in the field of dr. cummings and dr. burns. and there is no comparison of his knowledge of carol lasard and her behavior compared to her treating doctors who knew her and who wrote that in her medical record. so the answer to question 1: is it more likely right than wrong than carol lasard was addicted? the answer to that question is yes. let us look at the second question. was carol lasard's addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine a legal cause of her lung cancer and death? there is what it looks like (indicating). and the important thing in the question is whether it was a legal cause, not was it the only legal cause. and to understand that, you need to look at instruction 11 -- i'm sorry, the instructions on page 11 in your instruction book in back of you, and it is kind of a long one. and can you make that a little bigger, please, ms. london. it says this: in order to prove that addiction to smoking cigarettes containing nicotine was a legal cause of carol lasard's death, the plaintiff must prove that such 14 addiction directly and in natural and continuous sequence produced or contributed substantially to producing such death so that it can be reasonably said that but for the addiction the death would not have occurred. in order to be regarded as a legal cause of death, addiction need not be the only cause. addiction may be a legal cause of death even though it operates in combination with the act of another, some natural cause or some other cause if the addiction contributes substantially to producing such death. so it is important. as i said, this instruction says addiction does not need to be the only cause of her lung cancer and death. it just must be a cause. so if you decide that you think either addiction was the only cause of her marked compulsive smoking, her lung cancer and death or that was one of many causes that contributed to her lung cancer and death, you must find for us and say, yes, it is more likely right than wrong the addiction was a cause of her lung cancer and death. so if in deliberations someone says, "i think carol's at fault here, too," or, "i think someone else is at fault here, too, and so i cannot answer this question," remind them that the question is not whether addiction was the only cause, the question is only whether addiction was one of the causes, a cause. 15 and we will talk about what to do with the other possible causes of her lung cancer and death in a minute later on in the verdict form. now, dr. cummings explained how people who become addicted, their brains become wired for nicotine, they crave nicotine in their body, the need for nicotine to fill those extra nicotine receptors that they have grown that make someone smoke compulsively year after year after year, day after day, decade after decade, just like carol lasard did. and dr. cummings and dr. burns explained clearly and firmly that addiction is what led carol lasard to smoke these defendants' cigarettes compulsively for all those decades. and dr. burns explained to us, he showed us those slides about cancer. do you remember those? and he explained to us that that is what it takes, the compulsive smoking day after day, year after year, decade after decade to slowly break down the body's defenses. it does not happen if you just smoke on the weekends or every once in a while, something like that. it is addiction that causes the lung cancer. and dr. burns showed you his conclusion that it is addiction that causes the lung cancer. it is not just his. it is published in the 2010 surgeon general's report. it is exhibit 237. it will be back there with you. it says 16 addiction is the fundamental reason that people persist in using tobacco products, and that is what causes these diseases. and if you remember that mr. gentry, on the video, he even said "a fundamental reason." he would not say "the fundamental reason." but it is the reason people smoke. it is the reason she smoked. it is how she got the lung cancer. so is it more likely right than wrong that addiction was one of the causes of her lung cancer and death? the answer to that question is yes. so if you answered yes to those questions, you pull out your sheet of the engle findings which will be page 12 of your instructions. we will talk about them. but let me just show it to you so you can see what it looks like. if you answered yes to those questions, these are the engle findings from that prior trial that you have heard about and the judge will instruct you about, they apply here, they are the law, and they cannot be questioned. and we will read through them in a minute. but question 3 is the next question on the verdict form which says: please state as to each defendant whether smoking cigarettes manufactured by the defendant -- i cannot read that, it is so small. -- were a legal cause of carol lasard's lung cancer and 17 death. and the answers to those are yes and yes. there is absolutely no dispute that the brands carol lasard smoked are manufactured by philip morris and by rjr, who is here. do you remember american tobacco, brown and williamson, and rjr all are now part of one company, rjr. you will see in the stipulations, the judge will read them to you, pages 6 and 7 of your instructions, set out exactly the brands she smoked and that these are the folks who made them. and dr. burns explained to you, it is perfectly clear, philip morris's cigarettes caused her lung cancer and death. and the reynolds cigarettes and american and brown and williamson cigarettes caused carol lasard's lung cancer and death. not one witness came in here and told you anything different. so the answer to question 3 -- can we put up question 3 again? wow. -- is yes and yes. now, i want to talk about questions 4 and 5 together because they really go together. and those are: please state as to each defendant whether carol lasard relied to her detriment on the defendant's concealment or omission of material information concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes and, if so, whether it was a legal cause of carol lasard's lung cancer and death. 18 and there is some follow-up questions i'll talk about in a minute. but let us look at question 5. can you just cover up the other so we can just look at the question, please. please state as to each defendant whether carol lasard relied to her detriment on the defendant's agreement to conceal or omit material information regarding the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes, and if so, whether it was a legal cause of carol lasard's lung cancer and death. now, there is a lot in there. that is a big long question. but here is what you do not have to decide. can you put back up those engle findings, page 12, engle finding number 4. the engle defendants, which includes these defendants -- whoa -- concealed or omitted material information not otherwise known or available knowing the material was false or misleading and failed to disclose a material fact concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes or both. and number 5, the engle defendants agreed to conceal -- agreed to conceal or omit information regarding the health effects of cigarettes or their addictive nature with the intention that smokers in the public would rely on this information to their detriment. 19 these two findings are the law and they cannot be questioned in this case. and it is important. it says what the defendants concealed and what they agreed to conceal and omit was not already known, was not available. so if in deliberation somebody says, "look, the information they had, that information was out there, she knew it. she -- her doctors told her to quit, her husband and daughters told her quit. she had family members die of cancer. she knew it was bad for her," remind them it cannot be questioned. it is already been found as a matter of absolute law of this case that what was concealed and omitted was not otherwise known or available. that is the law. it is right here on page 12 in the jury instructions you will have. and so if in deliberations someone forgets and someone says, "well, look, that was not a secret, that was not a mystery," remind them, just show them page 12. right here is the finding: what they hid was not known or available. and remember, too, nobody knew that the filters and that the light and the low tar cigarettes were not any safer. and nobody knew that those little nicotine cigarettes were just as addictive at regular cigarettes. the only question for you is whether it is more likely right than wrong the omission of those things was a cause of her lung cancer and death, and that is the legal cause question 20 again. and i want to look here, it is on page 14 of your jury instructions. it explains again what a legal cause means. and it is important. it is "a" legal cause, not "the" legal cause. page 14 says: in order to be regarded as a legal cause of death, wrongful conduct need not be the only cause. wrongful conduct may be a legal cause of death even though it operates in combination with the act of another, some natural cause or some other cause of a wrongful conduct -- sorry -- if the wrongful -- if the wrongful conduct contributes substantially to producing the death. so again, if you decide that the wrongful conduct, the omissions and the concealment, lies and untruth were the only cause of her lung cancer and death, or if you decide that was part of the whole picture and it was one of the causes, one of the many causes of her lung cancer and death, either way you must find for us and answer yes. and there is two ways we have heard about in this courtroom that these omissions caused her lung cancer and death. the first has to do with omission of cancer. dr. burns showed us the cigarette companies knew americans were starting to quit smoking because they were worried about cancer because all these reports came out, and the cigarettes companies made a choice. they made a choice to hide the truth, to lie about it, to hire these people to 21 create this fake controversy, this debate, the "can we have an open debate?" there was no scientific debate. and they also decided to market these low tar light cigarettes as safer, to keep people keep smoking, to intercept people who were worried. dr. burns showed us how these lies worked, not just -- not just on carol lasard, but on the entire generation of the girls and women who were born when she was born and started to smoke when she started to smoke. that is what that -- that is what that red line was. and he -- and what does the cigarette company man have the say on these videos? dr. heimann -- i'm sorry. mr. heimann said was not what they intended. cigarette companies intend for customers to rely on their advertising. it is our promise to the customer. and what about mr. schindler about whether it worked? he said, "yes, we spent" -- oh, i'm sorry -- "we spent $100 million on advertising to get people to switch." they know they worked. and by the way, i know it was hard to sit here and watch those videos, and i'm sorry we put you through that. it was long because we had the parts that we wanted to show you, and in all fairness we included the parts the cigarette companies wanted to see, too. but we had to show those videos because we were afraid that the cigarette 22 companies might not bring a single witness here to answer our questions about what they did. so that is why we played those videos. 5 mr. reilly: objection, your honor. the court: overruled. ms. barnett: dr. burns concluded, yes, more likely right than wrong that the omissions and concealment about cancer were a cause, a cause, one of the causes of her lung cancer and death. and we heard it directly from cheryl, carol lasard's daughter, and cheryl's ex-husband who said carol lasard smoked those low tar cigarettes because she thought they were safer, they were supposed to be safer. and in fact, even dr. samuel admitted that, if you remember. so that is how we know the concealment about cancer was a cause and that is enough right there to answer those questions 4 and 5, yes and yes. but there is more. because we heard from dr. cummings, too. and he said the second way the omission and concealment caused and substantially contributed, that was the lies and hiding and concealment about addiction. he explained how they secretly rigged those cigarettes for addiction to make them as hard to quit as possible and never told anybody what they were doing and how they sold those low nicotine, supposedly low nicotine, cigarettes as 23 something that had less nicotine when they knew that they were just as addictive and did not give any less nicotine. dr. cummings explained how he concluded, yes, the part he talked about is more likely right than wrong, the concealment and omissions about addiction of the nature of cigarettes including these so-called low nicotine cigarettes were a cause of her smoking and -- and -- and other -- smoking which is what caused her lung cancer and death. we know it not just from dr. cummings, but again, from cheryl searcy's ex-husband, jim. he came in here and testified she used those low nicotine cigarettes because she thought they would give her less nicotine, it would help her quit and wean and cut back. so either way if you find that it is more likely right than wrong that the omissions about cancer were a cause of her death, or if the omissions about the addictiveness were a cause of her death, or the both, and even if you find that there were other things also including carol's actions that were a cause of her death, you must answer that question yes -- those two questions yes and yes. and remember, they totally worked together on this, which is one of the engle findings. but you remember all those "we do not knows, it may be, it may not be"? they had the same script. they all gave the same message. 24 and in response, by the way, to all of that evidence that we showed you, where the cigarette companies could call any witness that they wanted to to explain what they did or to show you that they were showing you something wrong or incomplete or that we -- you know, there was other information, they did not call anybody. they just said, "well, people have known since the 1900s that smoking is bad for you and that it can be hard to quit." they pointed to readers digest and efforts by the surgeon general and others before. no kidding. we already knew about that from dr. burns who explained it is exactly that, it is these reports of cancer, it is this information coming out. that is why the cigarette companies had to work so hard. that is exactly why they did it. but also other people tried to warn carol lasard and get this information out. it does not help the cigarette companies escape responsibility in this case because it is already been determined in those engle findings on page 12: what was hidden and concealed was not known or otherwise available. and again, nobody knew filters and low tar cigarettes were not any safer. nobody outside the cigarette companies and certainly carol lasard did not know that those low nicotine cigarettes were not low nicotine at all, they gave us much more nicotine to sustain addiction. 25 dr. burns and dr. cummings were clear on how they concluded that these concealments were a cause. you heard it directly from her family and also even from dr. samuel. she smoked low tar, low nicotine. and she smoked those filtered cigarettes. they were sold as being safer. and she smoked the low nicotine cigarettes that were sold as having less nicotine to help her quit. and those are the cigarettes that killed her. so the answers to questions 4 and 5, more likely right than wrong did the concealment of the omissions and their agreement to do it together, were they a cause of her death? yes. now, the is a second question on those 4 and 5, and this should be pretty easy. did she rely on omissions that occurred before '82 and after '82? and let us just look at the timeline. right? they lied about cigarettes causing cancer before '82 and after '82. they sold cigarettes as being safer and having lower tar, the ones that carol lasard smoked, before '82 and after '82 and they never stopped. and the filters, too, before '82 and after '82, they never stopped and they never told the truth and they sold -- they -- they rigged the cigarettes to make them as addictive as possible before '82, after '82, they never stopped. and they sold those low nicotine cigarettes that were supposed to have less nicotine to help 26 you get off before '82 and after '82, and they never stopped. so the answer to those questions on part c there, both before and after may of 1982. and you have a separate question for rjr and a separate question for philip morris. there is no evidence that one of them stopped and the other one kept going on. they were right in those things together the whole way through. that is why we took all the time to show you each step of the way along that timeline. next on your verdict form you will see a place to write percentage of responsibility the cigarette companies had and that carol had for her death. that is question number 6. and here what is important to know. every person and every company has a responsibility to use -- you can take that down. -- to use reasonable care to protect themselves from harm and to protect other people from harm that is not necessary. and if you do not, you are responsible for the harm you could have avoided for yourself and for others. this case is different. the very thing that the cigarette companies did took away her ability to exercise care and to avoid harm. we already know the cigarette companies made defective and unreasonably dangerous 27 cigarettes, because that is in those engle findings on page 12, and finding number 3. and i know this is an awful lot of information, but you will have those instructions back there with you so you can look back at these things. the cigarettes were defective and unreasonably dangerous. and we know that those defective cigarettes killed her. and like any manufacturer, they are responsible for the harm that their product causes. what did dr. gentry -- sorry -- mr. gentry admit in that videotape? he said cigarette companies had the ultimate responsibility. and what about colby? he said cigarette companies have a duty to know the truth -- sorry -- to know about the health risks or health problems associated with their cigarettes. and finally brookes: a manufacturer has an obligation to test products and know they are safe. but this is worse than just a case where a manufacturer made a defective product that was unreasonably dangerous and kill somebody, which would be bad enough. it is worse because the cigarette companies made a choice to lie and hide those dangers and did it to keep carol lasard and millions of americans smoking, to keep them addicted. we saw from their records that cigarette companies 28 had -- what did they have? one hundred percent of the knowledge, one hundred percent of the knowledge their cigarettes caused cancer, their filters caused cancer, their light and low tars were not any safer, the low nicotines were not any lower in nicotine. and they did everything they could to keep carol lasard's knowledge and keep everybody's knowledge, including the surgeon general's, as close to zero as possible, to keep her smoking. and we saw that the cigarette companies had a one hundred percent of the power and control over how they designed those cigarettes. one hundred percent. and they made a calculated business decision to make those cigarettes as addictive as possible, as hard to quit as possible to suppress her control and to wire her brain and body for addiction, to strengthen and nurture and grow the power of addiction over her, set her up for failure when she tried to quit, keep the exit door for her closed and to turn her as much as possible into a lab rat or dog who kept pressing the lever for nicotine. you saw that in their own documents. and as i said, unlike the cigarette companies, listen, we agree, you should look at her responsibility, too. you should. unlike the cigarette companies, we have shown you a timeline that has both sides of the story. and one way of looking at it, this is just one way to 29 look at it in terms of coming up with a percent. you could start at 50-50: they made a defective and unreasonably dangerous product, and she smoked them. and if they were on equal footing, equal knowledge, power of control, 50-50 would be one way of looking at it. but as i said, it is worse because they did not just sell defective products that killed her. they lied about it and they hid it. so if you look at fifty percent to start off with, with carol lasard and divide that up with the basically 50 years she smoked, that is about ten percent, right, for every 10 years she smoked. and if you look, the first 20 years from about here to here (indicating), there is no warning on the pack. there is nothing. you cannot be at fault for using a product that does not even say "may be hazardous to your health." but the cigarette companies knew. they knew the products killed, and they sold them out there. so that whole twenty percent should go over to the cigarette company and bring them to seventy percent for those years she smoked when there was no warning on the pack. and then what about the last 30 years? there is no question by then there is information on the packs. first it says it may be hazardous. then it says it is proven to be dangerous. and i remember mr. reilly said in his opening, he said 30 the cigarette companies clung too long to the notion that smoking had not been proven to cause lung cancer. and maybe they did cling to that too long, and maybe carol lasard clung to that notion too long, too. that is certainly what the cigarette companies wanted her to do. but she moved to filters, which they say are safer. by the early '70s she is trying to quit. she tried to cold turkey, nicotine gum, nicotine patches. she moved to lights. you cannot see that. the light, the low tar. she moves to those things to try to quit. she is trying to do the right thing here. and what were the cigarette companies doing during that whole time? they were doing everything they could to keep her smoking. now, could she have tried harder? of course. of course she could have tried harder. every addict can try harder. but at least she tried to quit. the cigarette companies never tried to tell the truth, never once, or give her a chance. carol lasard, in those years, was reaching out for help. she did not have a death wish. and when she reached out for help, the cigarette companies put in her hand a pack of cigarettes that they said had lower tar and would be safer and a pack of cigarettes that they said had lower nicotine and would help her break her addiction, cigarettes 31 they knew were just as addictive and just as deadly. the measures, whether she used reasonable care to avoid harm, and the cigarette companies have to prove this to you how much -- how much fault should be on her. and you will see, you saw, she is just like -- she is just like all the other women born when she was born who started smoking when she started smoking, struggling, trying to quit, not having much success. and all they proved about that was, well, that is slightly less than half the women, 48.7, i cannot remember the percent, the majority did not smoke. but let us look at the other side. how reasonable were the cigarette companies' efforts to avoid harm? well, they did not have any efforts to avoid harm to others. they were doing everything they could to keep those women smoking, rigging cigarettes to make them as addictive as possible, as hard to quit as possible knowing it would kill her. and how do you divide up that last 30 years is up to you to determine based on what you think the cigarette companies have proved. but if you divide it up just equally, ten percent to her, ten percent to philip morris, ten percent to reynolds, that would give you a total of ten percent fault on carol lasard and ninety percent fault on them, on the two cigarettes companies. but whatever everyone agrees you think the cigarette companies have proved, you should write that down on this line. 32 but remember, the cigarette companies are 100-percent responsible for their lies and their concealment and their conspiracy. those are separate questions on the verdict form. now question 7 is how much money the verdict should be. and look at the instructions on page 19 that say -- pardon me -- you should assess the amount you find to be full, just and reasonable compensation. to figure that out, you take only one thing into account, the level of harms and losses the cigarette companies caused, nothing else. everything else is outside the box. so, for example, sympathy, of course you feel sympathy. you cannot raise the verdict because you feel sympathy. nor could you lower a verdict because, for instance, that money cannot bring carol lasard back to her family or that is just too much money for one person. they are lots of outside reasons, and jurors have to avoid them all. so if a jury uses an outside reason that is not about what is fair, reasonable and just compensation, what are the harms and losses, remind them that is an outside reason and show them page 19 of this instruction. the answer to question 7, the value of the harms and losses, you need to look at how bad the harm was and how long the harm was and the loss. 33 let me give you an example of measuring how bad the harm was. if someone causes your mother to have a bad sprained ankle, you might have to take care of her, you might have to run some errands for her, you might have to -- you would be worried about her because you see her in pain, but that would not be -- you know, there would be some money to make up for that loss, but not much. and it would be not too bad. it would be very, very low in the scale. kind of the case where i'd have to ask for a verdict in the thousands of dollars maybe. you move up to the scale and introduce worse, say her whole leg was crushed and she has to have painful surgery, be it a cast, going to physical therapy. and you are with your mom working with her, through those things with her and worried about her. that would be more. that would be more like a midlevel harm and the kind of case where i'd have to ask for a verdict in the hundreds of thousand of dollars maybe. but let us go up the scale to high. what happens when you watch your mother suffer a slow, painful death? there is nothing you can do. you cannot stop it. you have to watch her be confused, slowly lose her mind, watch her body waste away. well, that is the worst kind of harm, the highest level type of case, the kind of case where i have to ask for a verdict in the millions. 34 and you can do the same thing looking at how long the harm was. if you lost your mother for a few days, it would not be bad, it would be low on scale. if you lost her for a few years, that would be more like a midlevel harm, maybe hundreds of thousands of dollars. but what happens when they take away your mom for good, your last 20 years together? well, that is the highest level of type of harm. and this is that type of case. we heard from her family and from the medical records how carol lasard died. and we heard how her daughter stood right by her and tried to make her last months as best as she could make them. we heard from family how special carol lasard was. she and her daughter had the kind of relationship that mothers and daughters dream of, wish they had, loving, lifelong, very close relationship. and instead of enjoying their golden years together of retirement and trips and all the small special moments at the end of life, in the last 20 years, instead of that cheryl's left with the final memories of her mom as a shell of the woman that she was, weak and dying in a hospice, still need to be wheeled outside with a turban on her head, shaking in the cold, wheeled out for her addiction to nicotine. i told you based on a significant loss, i would have to ask for a significant verdict. when you consider what 35 happened to this family, i think it is more likely right than wrong the verdict should be $6 million. but it could be less or more. you are the ones to decide depending on what you think is more likely right than wrong, a fair and just amount for this loss. now, the final question is question 8, whether by clear and convincing evidence punitive damages are warranted. first, we are going to look very quickly on page 21 and 22 of the instructions have a ton of words, but what you are looking at are: were the acts -- no, no, down lower. -- were they intentional? were they in reckless disregard of human life? were they wantonly and recklessly disregarding the safety and welfare of the public? did they accommodate consciously indifferent to the consequences and was it an intentional violation? and we know absolutely their acts were intentional. we know from their documents. they speak loud and clear. no witness disputed it. and you will see -- i'm not going to show it now, but we looked at it before -- engle finding number 5, what they did was with the intent that people relied on it. everything they did was knowing, intentional, for profit. it was premeditated. and the cigarettes knew exactly that they had 36 engineered the cigarettes to make them hard to quit and intercept people with lies and with gimmicks to keep them smoking. oh, yeah, slow down any product like nicorette gum that might come and help you quit. were they reckless? did they disregard the consequences? oh, yeah. sure as i'm standing here today, they knew that their cigarettes would kill 400,000 americans every year. that is somebody in america every minute and a half dies from smoking, 40 to fifty percent of their customers, just from using their product the way it is expected to be used. now, if you look at instruction 21, and quickly and last, punitive damages are for punishment of the defendants and to deter others. they are important. they are not just to punish, but they are deter, to tell every cigarette manufacturer and every company in this country that you cannot lie about dangers in your products. you can never hide dangers in your products. we need you to be plain and clear, every cigarette companies are watching what you say here, every other company is watching what you say here. america needs you to be plain and clear. you guys have the power right here, right now, you have the power to tell these companies no, you can never lie about dangers you know about in your product, you just cannot do it, you can never hide dangers 37 you know about in your products, you cannot do it, not here in this community, we will not allow it. and so when you are deciding if punitive damages are warranted, the answer to that is yes and yes. 6 8 and thank you very much. ms. barnett: i know you are tired of hearing from lawyers, so i'm going to try to be brief. look, it is fine to defend yourself when you have done nothing wrong, but when you have done something wrong, you are supposed to stand up and admit it. that is what we all learned as children. and what you have seen here from these cigarette companies is they have refused to accept responsibility every step of way, in the '50s when they figured out that cigarettes caused cancer, during carol lasard's entire lifetime they avoided responsibility, refused to take it when she died. in the 15 years while this case, these claims have been pending, they have refused to accept any responsibility at all, and instead they just try to distract you with things like alcohol. how many times did those lawyers just now talk about her drinking? what does it have to do with the question on your verdict form? is that just an effort to distract you? and the timeline they put up that had divorces and coughs and everything but what the cigarette companies did 66 and the choices they made. you cannot let them take their act and their behavior off the table. they were up here for 45 minutes, and they said nothing about what they did, and then attacked dr. burns and dr. cummings, even though they have worked for decades with the surgeon general and with the national cancer institute, and dr. cummings donates half of what he is paid to cancer prevention. and they point to their expert, who said he spends 45 to fifty percent of his time on cases with lawyers, and just two cases for the cigarette companies were more than percent of his revenues, which they did not account for those revenues last year. and they kept saying, just answer these questions no, and you get to go home. well, i appreciate how hard you have worked and how much attention you have paid. and you are not that kind of jury who is just going to answer no so you can go home a little earlier on monday. they -- not our cigarettes? not our cigarettes was one of their arguments that was just made, it was somebody else's cigarettes that caused her cancer and her lung disease and her death. if that were true, the cigarette companies surely would have brought you an expert to come in here and say, oh, no, it was not philip morris' cigarettes that caused her lung 67 cancer and death. dr. burns was clear about that. every one of the cigarettes she smoked year after year after year contributed and caused, and you will see in the stipulations that virginia slims and benson & hedges cigarettes, for instance, that jim searcy saw her smoking in the early '70s were made by philip morris. and then, oh, she had all the information. remember, they argued that in the engle trial. they argued that everybody knew everything, and they lost. mr. reilly: i object, your honor. ms. barnett:: finally, in this case -- mr. reilly: i object, your honor. the court: overruled. ms. barnett: finally, in this case, which we showed you, and it is on page 12 under engle findings, when they did was concealed, was not known, and it was not available. sure, some things were noted and available. what they did was not. that is a finding as a matter of law that applies in this case. and then filters are safer? if there was a witness who would come in here and tell you that filters actually were safer, believe me, they would have brought you a witness in here to say that. and i want to show you, just very quickly because i'm 68 going to run out of time, exhibit -- the surgeon general's report. dr. burns was clear about this, and the surgeon general's report was clear about it, and you have seen it, and i do not want to read it to you because i'm going to run out of time, they have not reduced the disease risk at all. all right? now, they keep saying her choice, her decision. they made choices too. do not forget about those. you can take that down. why did they make those choices to reduce cigarettes? why? to make it hard to quit. why did they decide to sell them as low nicotine and low tar? to get people who were trying to quit, so they would use it and think it was safer. so they would use it and think that they could cut back that way and wean off. and did they know, by the way, that addicting people to cigarettes meant they did not have the same kind of free choice? they did. we showed you exhibit 94. let me just show you that briefly. the lawyers remind us, we cannot defend a case, we cannot defend a case on free choice if the person was addicted. and did not the lawyers just stand up here and try to defend their case on free choice? i want to say one more couple of things. what the lawyers say in this courtroom is not evidence. 69 and i just listened to -- you have got notes, you took notes, you heard the testimony. i felt like some of what they were saying, maybe i was in a different trial. i kept turning over to ms. london and saying, did that happen? did they say that? this thing about her saying over and over, this is my life, my body. did not she say, i'm trying to quit? i'm smoking these low-tar cigarettes because they are better? i'm smoking these low-nicotine cigarettes because they will help me quit. did not the doctor -- the doctors did not write in the medical records, we told her to quit, and she said, it is my life, my body, i'm not doing it. it says in the medical records, she is been unable to quit. do not just take cherry-picked things about testimony. this is about the airplanes and the church and because i did not hear any of that come in in this. look back at your notes. and the same for the law. what the lawyers say is not what the law is in this case. and legal cause, the judge will instruct you. mr. reilly just stood up here and said, we have to prove that she was an involuntary smoker. now, that -- you will not see that in the instructions. that is not what we have to prove. i was very careful to 70 show you what the instructions say, that addiction was one of the causes. so it does not have to be the only cause, and it certainly does not have to be that she was involuntary. what would that be, somebody in a coma? i mean, an involuntary smoker? 7 you will have the instructions and you can read them. and i want to close on this point. mr. reilly kept saying in his opening, were the cigarette companies in the mirror of the carol lasard, were they in the mirror looking at her? no, they were not in her mirror. they were off in their big labs with their scientists and researchers studying nicotine addiction and hiding that truth. reading the cigarettes to make it hard, impossible for her to quit. making the false debate, this whole controversy that they knew was not really a controversy, selling light cigarettes and the low-nicotine cigarettes just as she was reaching for help. selling them knowing people were trying to quit, and they could keep them a little longer if they could just sell them something they thought was safer and would help them quit. so i thank you very much for your time and for your attention. the judge will give you the instructions, and you have got your notes about what evidence you have heard. thank you.