defendants' closing argument mr. reilly: good morning, everybody. let me begin my closing argument by thanking you for your service as jurors. obviously our system does not work without you, and for it to work well, we need jurors who will pay close attention to the evidence when it comes in. you guys did exactly that. this is exactly how the system works at its best, so with that, philip morris, r.j. reynolds, and frankly everybody, we thank you for your service. okay. now, at the beginning of this lawsuit, in my opening statement, i said that this was a case that is not a class action. this is not a case about some -- the american public or anything like that. this is a case 38 1 about one person and one person only and her smoking. and 2 who was that? ms. carol lasard. 3 and so in all of plaintiff's counsel's closing 4 arguments, how much did you hear -- just like in her 5 opening statement -- how much did you hear about carol 6 lasard and the decisions that she made? because that is the 7 only person who was making the decisions that applied to 8 carol lasard in this case. 9 i also explained to you this is the lawsuit brought by her daughter seeking to recover money based only the decisions that her mother made, her mother made, about how she was going to live her life, the decisions she was going to make about -- and you heard this phrase during the course of this trial and i'll repeat it to you and show it to you just a little bit. "my life, my body, my business." that is exactly what mrs. lasard said to her daughter, said to her husband, whether it was smoking or drinking or whatever. she repeatedly, for decades, said, "my body, my life, my business." that is what this case is about. now, in this case, i said to you that the centerpiece of what this case was really going to be all about was going to be -- i said that judge moore was going to give you a lengthy set of instructions and a long verdict form. but i said, you know what? we can condense all this down into just two words. the evidence is going to relate to 39 1 just two words. and they were "control" and 2 "responsibility." "control" and "responsibility." 3 who was in control of mrs. lasard's decisions about how 4 she lived her life? and ms. barnett has now acknowledged 5 in so many words that mrs. lasard was in control of her 6 life, that she is -- was a legal cause, what we call a 7 legal cause, as why she developed her lung cancer and died 8 as a result of the decisions she made about her body, her 9 life, her decisions. i told you, though, that in this case the plaintiffs, mrs. searcy and her lawyers, were contending that there were other folks who were involved who also have responsibility in this case, and that was, they are claiming, philip morris and r.j. reynolds. i said that is what all this evidence is going to be about, that they were contending that philip morris and r.j. reynolds were legal causes, too. now, i'll talk about the legal cause issue in just a moment, but let us review where the evidence came from about what is the central feature about how mrs. lasard lived her life. well, we heard from six witnesses, six live witnesses all told, but we really had five principal witnesses, did not we? of course, the number one source of information about how mrs. lasard lived her life came from her 40 1 daughter, right? mrs. searcy. and most of it frankly came 2 from the cross-examination that i did of mrs. searcy. we 3 also heard from her husband, james searcy. he acknowledged 4 that his wife knew more about her mother than he did. of 5 course that would be true. 6 we also heard from three expert witnesses. we brought 7 you dr. samuel who is a board-certified psychiatrist from 8 down in boca raton. he left his patients to come and talk 9 to you to tell you what he thought about whether or not mrs. lasard was truly addicted or not, applying the same criteria he does with his patients day in and day out. we also heard from dr. burns and dr. cummings. those are the fellows who go from courtroom to courtroom testifying week in, week out and testifying next week, testified last week. dr. cummings rushed here from another courtroom. they made, what? you remember the number. together they made 3-1/2 million dollars testifying in cases just like this. and what do they find every time? every time. no exception. dr. burns, every time they find the smoker addicted. dr. burns said, "well, maybe one time i was not sure." dr. cummings said every smoker is addicted. everybody who smokes every day. if you smoke every day, you are addicted, in his opinion. 41 1 they made 3-1/2 million dollars coming to courtrooms 2 just like this and telling jurors just like you that very 3 fact. 4 all right. now, in this case, as i said, the plaintiff 5 is contending that they acknowledge that mrs. lasard was a 6 legal cause of why she developed lung cancer and death and 7 they are contending that philip morris and r.j. reynolds 8 are legal causes as well. mrs. barnett read to you the 9 lengthy and complex jury instruction on what is legal cause. i created this little diagram because i think it will help you to understand all that legalese. with law students, it took me three years to try to figure all that out, what all that means. and so i made this little diagram. in order for something to be a legal cause, there has to be a direct connection between the person and whatever it is that is being claimed as a legal cause. it has to be a direct connection. but it has to be more than just a direct connection. you will see the word "substantial" in there. you will see the words "but for." that connection actually has to have a substantial impact before something can be a legal cause. so of course in a situation like this where mrs. lasard is making the decision every day when she wakes up and 42 1 looks in the mirror every morning when she is deciding how 2 she is going to live her life, when she is telling her 3 husband or her daughter who wants her to slow down on her 4 drinking or quit her smoking and she says, "you know what, 5 my body, my life, my business." 6 of course she has direct connection with the decisions 7 she is making. and her decisions have a substantial 8 impact. she has a substantial impact on her choices, 9 right? there is no question about that. so then the question is, well, in this case with the evidence that was presented, was there really ever a direct connection between philip morris, r.j. reynolds and mrs. lasard and the decisions that she made such that it had a substantial impact on the decisions she made about how she was going to live her life? and only then can philip morris and r.j. reynolds be a legal cause of her developing lung cancer and dying, unfortunately. now, i told you that i said those words "control" and "responsibility" will not be on the verdict form and they are not. so what i'd like to do now is just walk you through the verdict form and let us see slowly, carefully what it is that you have to answer in this case and what the evidence was that addressed these questions. what i'd like to do is i'd like to put the first two questions up together because they are really 43 1 interconnected. can everybody see that? okay. well, 2 let us just read them together because they are pretty 3 simple. 4 was mrs. lasard addicted to cigarettes containing 5 nicotine, yes or no? and if at the end of this case you 6 guys have concluded that the answer to that is no, you know 7 what? that is all the work you do in this case. you check 8 no and you go home. you check no and you go home. 9 the second question is was carol lasard's addiction -- if you decided -- you do not even go on to question 2 if you answer this one no. but if you concluded that she was a victim, then you go to question 2 that says: was carol lasard's addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine a legal cause of her lung cancer and death? and we just went through legal cause. did it have a direct connection such that it had a substantial impact and actually caused her to smoke until she fell of lung cancer and died. now, what was all the evidence that came in, in connection with these two questions? oh, and by the way, if you answer that question no, it is not enough for the plaintiff to prove that mrs. lasard was addicted. they have to prove that her addiction was so strong that it made her involuntarily continue to smoke until she developed her lung cancer and died. 44 1 now, i'm going to address all the evidence that came 2 in, i think, on this topic and i'm going to do that 3 together and then go back to these questions. 4 now, in this case, we heard from three witnesses who 5 addressed the question of whether or not mrs. lasard was 6 addicted. and who were they? they were dr. burns, 7 dr. cummings, and dr. samuel, who we brought you. 8 now, although they disagreed on whether or not 9 mrs. lasard was addicted, they agreed on a number of points. and what were those points? they agreed -- well, at least dr. burns and dr. samuel, for sure, agreed that not all smokers are addicted. i think they all agreed on that one. they all agreed on that. as a matter of fact, dr. burns explicitly said to you that he could not tell whether somebody was addicted or not just by knowing that they smoked, what did he say? a pack and a half a day for 20 years. he said, "i have to know more than that they simply smoked a lot of cigarettes over a long period of time." and that was their expert that said that. their expert. now, they also all agreed that all smokers can quit. and they can. they said that not all smokers want to quit and that became, i think, abundantly apparent in this courtroom when you heard from decades, '60s, '70s, '80s and '90s, mrs. lasard said to her husband and her daughter, "my 45 1 body, my life, my business." 2 so the smoker does not want to quit, they do not quit. 3 people decide whether they want to quit. and they also 4 agree that smokers were the ones responsible for making the 5 decision to quit. it is up to each individual to look in 6 the mirror and say, "this is how i want to live my life." 7 and there was no debate about any of that. 8 now, dr. samuel said, you know, "in order to really 9 determine whether or not somebody is addicted, we physicians look in this diagnostic and statistical manual, and using this as our guide, we determine whether or not somebody really meets the criteria so that we can write down the official diagnosis of whether someone is what this book calls nicotine-dependent." and he said that is synonymous with addiction. and he went through this criteria. i'm sharing this time, and i do not have enough time to go through every one of the criteria with you. but he went through this criteria looking for -- and one of the major overarching considerations was did her smoking interfere with how she lived her life to what they called a clinically significant degree. in other words, did she change her life, how she lived her life, to accommodate her smoking? he looked for indications of whether or not when she quit smoking on that one occasion in the early '90s when 46 1 she quit, did she show symptoms of withdrawal? 2 and after looking -- and by the way, he looked at all 3 the evidence in this case. he read all the depositions of 4 all the family members. he looked at all the medical 5 records. he did not have plaintiff's counsel cherry-pick 6 for him like dr. burns did, "send me, lawyers, what you 7 want me to look at." he did not do that. he did not do what 8 dr. cummings did which was use a word search to look for 9 the words he wants to find in the depositions. he did not do that. he read it all. it took a long time. it was painstaking. we had lots of deposition in this case. after doing all of that, he concluded that most -- and he looked at the medical records. and in those medical records he said, look, there is not a diagnosis here of addiction. they talk about substance, they talk about tobacco abuse. that is not diagnosis. you can look in here, it is not a diagnosis in here of dependence. it is different, it is in here different. as a matter of fact, specifically it says in here that is not a finding of dependence. not a finding. bottom line, he concluded that most probably she was not addicted. so he did not -- since she was not addicted, in his opinion, there was not any way that addiction could be a legal cause of why she developed lung cancer and died. now, dr. cummings and dr. burns took a different 47 1 direction. their focus was generally on a question of 2 control. and ms. barnett said compulsive. she said 3 compulsive disorder. 4 so now the question was what evidence occurred in this 5 case to indicate to you guys -- what concrete evidence was 6 there to suggest to you whether mrs. lasard was smoking 7 compulsively or because it was her decision whether she 8 smoked or not. 9 and neither did dr. cummings nor dr. burns, because of their limited review of the evidence in this case and the testimony in this case, focused on what i think are some of the most compelling pieces of evidence about whether or not mrs. lasard was actually compelled to smoke. and what do i mean? let us start with what i think is probably the most amazing fact in a case where someone is claiming they were compulsively smoking. mrs. lasard went on those months-long road trips with her husband in the rv and never smoked in the rv. think about it. mile after mile, hour after hour, day after day, week after week, month after month. they went for, what, three or four months at a time? and there was no evidence that she failed to comply. as a matter of fact, the evidence from mrs. searcy was she complied, she did not smoke in the rv. could she control her smoking when her husband said, "i do not want you smoking in the rv"? sure. i'm sure that 48 1 was not a popular thing for her -- for her -- for 2 mrs. lasard. but she -- they worked out the arrangement. 3 he always told her, "do not smoke. slow down your 4 drinking." 5 6 7 she always said, "my body, my life, my business." he said, "okay. fine. but no smoking in the rv." and is that compulsive smoking? did she avoid things 8 like -- did she avoid going on the rv trips? no. that is 9 what dr. samuel was talking about. did this alter her life? did she not go on the rv trips? of course not. did she not go on the airplane trips out on the west coast, hours at a time on airplane, cannot smoke. no. no. she took all those trips. there are lesser indications. you know, it did not mean -- did not get up from a movie or meals to go smoke, on occasion went to church. but i think these two, and especially the rv situation, is so powerful, speaks volumes. when mrs. lasard quit smoking, did she have withdrawal symptoms? well, the only time that we know -- as a matter of fact, on cross-examination it took me a bit of time to get mrs. searcy to acknowledge that she really only knew of one instance when her mother actually tried to quit smoking. that was with the patch in the early '90s. she said, "my mom wore the patch for two or three 49 1 months." did she really want to quit? you remember the 2 evidence. did she really want to quit? she did not stop 3 buying her cigarettes. 4 mrs. searcy said, "my mother only did it because my dad 5 was haranguing her so hard at that point." 6 and did she stop buying cigarettes? no. did she throw 7 her cigarettes away? no. did she put her ashtrays away? 8 no. had she ever gone to the smoking cessation clinic? 9 has she ever gone to a hypnotist? ever gotten any smoking cessation devices of any kind? no. did mrs. lasard ever really want to quit smoking? or as she said to her husband, and mrs. searcy said in this courtroom, just like whether she slowed down her drinking, she said, "look, my body, my life, my decision. not yours." not meanly. she was not doing it meanly. she was just being blunt about whose decision it was whether she did what other people wanted, her husband and her -- her husband, her daughter and her doctor, or whether she did what she wanted to do. is not that what everybody gets to do? when she quit, she quit for, what, a day or two or five? did cheryl searcy see withdrawal symptoms? did jim searcy see withdrawal symptoms? she did not become anxious and irritable, she was very pleasant. she was happy and healthier. she had no irritability, no anxiety, no 50 1 agitation. she appeared to be her normal self. 2 and then of course here's what i've been talking about. 3 when mr. lasard said -- you remember he quit smoking in the 4 early '60s, sometime in the mid '60s, and he wanted her to 5 follow suit, right? and so mrs. lasard did not think it was 6 mr. lasard's business to tell her whether she could or 7 could not smoke, this was her body, her life, she was going 8 to do what she wanted to do and not what he wanted -- what 9 mr. searcy wanted her to do or her doctors wanted her to do. she felt the same way about her drinking, her body, her life. these were -- these were questions that i posed to mrs. searcy, and these were the answers that she gave remembering those repeated conversations between family members. these were her decisions. and cheryl searcy -- oh, and, yes, back then, back in the day, cheryl searcy said, "i respected my mother's decisions back then." but today she is brought a lawsuit and wants to be compensated. we have heard $6 million. $6 million for her decisions that her mother made and she respected back in the day. so now, yes, you guys have to decide what is the answer to these first two questions. and as i said, i'm going to go through the whole verdict form, but as i said, if you answer either one of those questions no, your work here is 51 1 done and you go home. all right. 2 3 now, let us walk through the rest of the verdict form. question number 3 asks: please state as to each 4 defendant whether smoking cigarettes manufactured by that 5 defendant was a legal cause of mrs. lasard's lung cancer 6 and death. 7 and i do not want to get distracted too much by this 8 question, but i will observe that their expert, dr. burns, 9 said that by 1981, in his opinion, it was more probable than not that mrs. lasard was going to develop her lung cancer. and the only evidence in this case as to when philip morris manufactured cigarettes was in the late '80s or early '90s. so i'm not really sure how the answer to this question could be yes for philip morris. but as i said, i do not want to get distracted from what the main theme here is, and that is whose decisions really determined whether mrs. lasard smoked or not. so let us go to the next two questions because i think they, too, go together. and let me get my marker over here. anything will do. these two questions basically ask whether or not -- as to philip morris and r.j. reynolds, whether mrs. lasard relied to her detriment. in other words, relied to her detriment, was she listening to -- was there evidence in this case that mrs. lasard was paying any attention to 52 1 philip morris or r.j. reynolds, any attention at all? 2 because if she was not, then remember this requirement: 3 philip morris and r.j. reynolds have to be a legal cause of 4 why she smoked and continued to smoke, got her lung cancer 5 and died. these two questions are basically the same and 6 they both have this "relied to her detriment" requirement 7 in order to be a legal cause. 8 now, the evidence that relates to these two questions 9 and that emphasis on "relied to her detriment" is all about what did mrs. lasard know in order to make her decisions as to whether or not she was going to smoke. did mrs. lasard have the information that she felt she needed in order to decide whether she was going to smoke? or was she waiting to hear something? did she hear something that influenced her from philip morris or r.j. reynolds? or was she waiting to hear something from philip morris or r.j. reynolds? that is really what this is all about. well, let us see. we already know that from the '30s, '40s, '50s, we know about information that was already out there before anybody really meets ms. lasard. we know it was out there. we saw it -- you saw the reader's digest, you saw the articles in the newspapers and magazines. you saw the barrage of information. and there is even more in evidence if you want to look through it, the barrage of information that begins in the 1950s, 1950 and on, the 53 1 public service announcements, the television programs, all 2 of that informing the american public that smoking is bad 3 for you, in the '30s, '40s, and causes lung cancer in the 4 '50s and on. 5 and you heard dr. burns, their expert, agree that as 6 of, what, mid 1950s there were polls that were taken of the 7 american public and it said ninety percent of us, we know, 8 we have heard that smoking causes lung cancer, we have heard 9 that. was mrs. lasard any different? you heard that 13 million americans quit smoking in the '50s, 13 million people. you heard that mr. lasard quit smoking himself, quit smoking cigarettes in, what? his sister thought it might have been as early as the early '60s, right? and he encouraged his wife at the same time. he was quitting because -- he was quitting smoking cigars because he was worried about the health risks of smoking. and from the early '60s on, he is encouraging his wife, "please give up smoking. please give up smoking." mr. lasard was quitting smoking cigarettes because of the health risk. that -- and told mrs. lasard. and of course in '64, you had that surgeon general's report. you saw all the news coverage of that. you got the warnings on the packs in '66. and it just goes on and on. new warnings in the '70s. no advertising in '71. it 54 1 just goes on and on and on. 2 mrs. lasard -- and that is when it came from 3 mrs. searcy, mrs. lasard knew cigarettes were deadly 4 because mr. lasard told her so much. mr. lasard placed 5 pictures of diseased lungs around the house and would say, 6 "you should quit smoking." mr. lasard said to mrs. lasard, 7 "those are cancer sticks. those things are going to kill 8 you. those are coffin nails." 9 and mrs. lasard never said in response, "oh, no, i'm confused," or, "no, i do not know about that," or, "this is" -- you know, or philip morris or r.j. reynolds told them no, it is not so. or no testimony in this case about that. this is her husband talking to her. and of course you know about her cough that started in the '50s, in the early '60s and just got progressively worse. just imagine having a husband who is always after you. and mrs. searcy heard it over and over and over again when she was there. just imagine what it was like when she was not there. mr. searcy -- mr. lasard tellings his wife to stop smoking. but on top of that, her stepfather, jim mccarthy, dies in 1966 from lung cancer from his smoking. in fact, dr. burns says that is a huge impact. did mrs. lasard change her mind and say, "no, i'm going to quit smoking," or even try to quit in the '60s? no. 55 1 1975, it seems to be uncertain, too, whether or not her 2 mother died from lung cancer. her son-in-law said yes, her 3 daughter said no. i'm not sure it much matters because of 4 what happens with jim mccarthy, but here in 1985 her 5 mother-in-law, mildred lasard harris, dies of lung cancer 6 as well. did mrs. lasard indicate she was going to change, 7 made a decision to change? these are hugely impactful 8 events. 9 how about waiting to hear from philip morris? there was no testimony in this case that mrs. lasard ever said she received any messages from philip morris other than the warnings on the packs. she never said she heard any message from the organization that had any connection with the cigarette company. she never said, "i do not have enough information about the health risks that i'm undertaking." she never said, "i'm waiting" -- i asked these questions specifically of mrs. searcy: did your mother ever say any of these things, any? did your mother ever say, "i'm waiting to hear something from philip morris or r.j. reynolds about health risks of smoking before i'll make a decision whether i smoke or do not smoke"? the answer was no. now let us talk about filtered cigarettes for a minute 56 1 because ms. barnett keeps saying that filters do not work. 2 that is a fraud. 3 but you remember, it was the very last topic i talked 4 with dr. burns about when he was sitting right here. as i 5 brought out the publication by the world health 6 organization, the international agency for the research of 7 cancer, and in evidence you have the institute of medicines 8 position, right here in the united states, position on 9 whether the use of filters including ventilation has resulted in a reduction in the risk of harm from cigarettes. and their answer is yes. there is no filter fraud. did anybody ever say that filtered cigarettes were going to be safe? no way. no way. but, you know, nobody ever said they were going to be safe, but the international agency for the research of cancer, which dr. burns said is a very authoritative source, the world health organization and the institute of medicine all agree that filters do reduce the risk of harm. but on top of that, i asked mrs. searcy: did your mother ever -- did you ever ask your mother why she smoked lower tar nicotine cigarettes? she said no. i asked her: whether or not, mrs. lasard, your mother ever spoke to you about why she chose any of the brands that she smoked? 57 1 2 and she said no. i asked her, did mrs. lasard know that all cigarettes 3 were no good for her? yes. that actually came from james 4 searcy, as i recall. 5 and mrs. searcy told me that her father told 6 mrs. lasard that cigarettes were going to kill her 7 regardless of the brand. regardless of brand. 8 so is there any reliance in the face of all this 9 evidence? and this is about mrs. lasard's decision, not a 10 class, not a public. in light of all that testimony that you heard in this 12 courtroom, was there any detrimental reliance on the part of 13 mrs. lasard in deciding whether she would smoke or not? it is inescapable that the answer to these questions 15 are no. if you answered these two questions and these two 16 questions no, that is all you have to do. you do not have to 17 go to all these subparts. that is what the instructions tell 18 you. let us move on to the verdict form. question 6 states: state the percentage of any fault 21 that was a legal cause, a legal cause of mrs. lasard's death 22 that you charge to mrs. lasard, rj reynolds, and philip 23 morris. now, ladies and gentlemen, when mrs. lasard was a 25 smoker, mrs. lasard said to her husband, she said to her 58 1 daughter, this is my body, my life. when they were saying 2 to her, we want you to stop smoking, slow your drinking, 3 stop drinking, she said, this is my body, this is my life, 4 this is my business. 5 she did not say, hey, by the way, people that make the 6 alcohol that i drink or the cigarettes that i smoke, i think 7 they are partially responsible for the decisions that i'm 8 making. she never said that. 9 she told her family flat out, this is my body, my 10 business. and that came from mrs. searcy in this trial. so why in the world -- and mrs. searcy then said, i 12 respected her decisions. so why would we think that anybody else was a legal 14 cause of mrs. lasard's death? why would we do anything 15 except accept what mrs. lasard accepted, which was, this is 16 my body, this is my life, this is my business. and why would we -- why would we pay money, why would 18 we award money to a daughter who accepted and respected her 19 own decisions, her mother's own decisions, back in the day? 20 why would do you that? this is only one smoker's case. one smoker only, not 22 a class. all right. let me go to the last question. only -- 24 you only answer question number 8 if you have answered those 25 questions, these two questions 4 and 5, yes. then you have 59 1 to decide whether or not, by clear and convincing evidence, 2 that punitive damages are warranted against either philip 3 morris or rj reynolds under the circumstances of this case, 4 not some class, not some other case, not somebody else's 5 case, but this case. 6 what does clear and convincing evidence require? 7 clear and convincing evidence is evidence that is more 8 persuasive, more compelling, it is evidence that is precise, 9 explicit, lacking in confusion, and of such weight that it 10 produces a firm belief or conviction without hesitation 11 about the matter in issue. there is no evidence in this case that mrs. lasard was 13 waiting to hear from philip morris or rj reynolds to make a 14 decision about whether she would or would not quit. there is 15 no question about that and there is no clear and convincing 16 evidence in this case. all right. we have shown you what the evidence shows 18 in this case. i'm about to make the board fall over. i'll just 20 stand here and hold it because i'm about done. that is the evidence in the case. those are the 22 questions on the verdict form. again, on behalf of all of us, we appreciate your 24 efforts. now mr. geise is going to get up and talk to you 25 for a little bit, and then, as you know, ms. barnett has the 60 1 opportunity to speak to you again. why, because she has the 2 burden of proof. she gets two bites at the apple. and i 3 will not get back up, i cannot get back up, and these two guys 4 cannot get back up and respond to whatever it is that she 5 says. 6 so i'll only ask, and i do not know what she is going to 7 say when she gets up, but i would only ask that you keep 8 this in mind: whatever it is she talks about, does it 9 actually have a substantial impact on mrs. lasard, who told 10 everybody, my life, my body, my business. thanks. mr. geise: good morning. happy easter. i'm still wearing my easter tie from yesterday. just as i was in opening statements, in closing i'm going to be brief as well. but i do want to start this the way i started my opening, and that is by thanking you. this is one of those rare trials where we started on time every day and even started early most days because you all were here early most days. so thank you. you obviously took your jury service seriously. we did our best to expedite this trial because we know your time is important. so thank you. and again, mr. reilly covered most of the points i would want to make, so i'm just going to hit a few points 61 1 in my few minutes' talk to you. 2 the first thing i want to talk about is the experts you 3 heard from. and specifically, ms. barnett talked to you 4 about pages of the jury instructions. i'll invite you to 5 look at page 5 of the jury instructions when you get back 6 there. 7 if we could look at page 5, i want to point out to you 8 that the court is going to instruct you that you should 9 view with caution the testimony of such a witness where court testimony is given with regularity and represents a significant portion of the witness's income. that instruction is important. it applies directly to dr. burns and dr. cummings. they testify regularly and they make a lot of money doing it. you heard both of them testify multiple times last week. mr. reilly told you that dr. burns has earned two and a half million dollars doing this and dr. cummings almost a million dollars. now, compare that to dr. samuel. he testified, he said, about once a year, and this was the first time he is ever testified in court in a tobacco trial. and instead of having to juggle other trials if he is going to appear in be here, he had to reschedule his patients. patients he treats every day right here in the state of florida for substance-dependence issues including nicotine addiction. 62 1 and he told you how psychiatrists in the real world use 2 the data and consider all the evidence to make a decision 3 about whether somebody's addicted. he told you that based 4 on that, that he did not think mrs. lasard was addicted. 5 now, when he was on cross-examination, instead of being 6 crossed with that opinion, doctor, what do you really look 7 at when you are sitting there face-to-face with a patient? 8 he was asked and he was read testimony he gave in 9 depositions in this case and in one other case where he said the same thing in deposition that he told you on the witness stand. compare that to dr. cummings. how many times did i have to show him and how many times did he try to tell you something different than what he told one of those other dozens of jurors? that is something else that can you use to view the testimony with caution. also, with regard to dr. burns, remember his statements in 1975 and 1981, i think he said like 95 percent of americans were thoroughly aware of the risk smoking, not partially, not something else, thoroughly aware. well, that was 1975 and 1981. two-and-a-half million dollars later, he comes into court and tries to tell you something else. please keep that in mind. mr. reilly talked about questions 4 and 5 on the verdict form regarding the question and the need for 63 1 reliance, the need for proof of reliance. i do not want to 2 repeat that, but i agree that the answer to those 3 questions, it has to be known, it has to be known based on 4 the evidence in this case. it has to be known because 5 mrs. lasard had the material information about the risk of 6 smoking. she had it. she had it from a variety of 7 sources. 8 and we know that that information never made a 9 difference to her. we know that. if you do not care what your loved ones tell you for decades, does it make any sense that a statement from a stranger would make a difference, would matter? of course not. and of all the witnesses you heard from in this courtroom, the words that matter the most are the words from mrs. carol lasard. this case is about her and no one else. and her words prove that she understood the risk, prove that she had control of her smoking, prove that she was solely responsible for her decisions. when her husband quit smoking and he harped on her to quit, he showed her pictures of cancerous lungs. he told her, your cancer sticks are going to kill you. did she say, oh, i do not think smoking is harmful? no, she did not. she acknowledged the risk and she told him and anybody that it was her decision whether to smoke or not. now, you do not have to take mr. reilly's word for it or 64 1 my word for it, the word of somebody representing a tobacco 2 company. take mrs. lasard's word for it. 3 now, when ms. searcy and james searcy told her that 4 smoking is causing that smoker's cough, it is going to kill 5 you, did she say, no, i do not think it is proven yet. i 6 do not think so. of course not. she knew. 7 not only did she not need to be told about the risk, 8 she did not want to be told. remember her response? she 9 was offended, and she said, as mr. reilly pointed out, it was her body, it was her life. she was going to do what she wanted to do despite the risks. and again, you do not have to take my word for it. take carol lasard's word for it. when it came to choice, when it came to responsibility, that is what she said. with smoking, with drinking, it is obvious that she made her own decisions. and ms. searcy told you that she respected her mom, and most importantly, she respected her mom's decisions. even though she did not like those decisions, even though she did not like that her mom chose to smoke, she respected that it was her choice to make, not a choice she could make for her, not a choice her father could make for her. and ladies and gentlemen, i submit that we should respect her decisions too and put the responsibility for her choice to smoke and choice to continue smoking where 65 1 mrs. lasard put it, on herself. 2 3 4 thank you.