closing statement mr. furr: please the court, counsel. good morning, ladies and gentlemen. mr. gdanski: judge, may i approach for the court: for what purpose? no. we the court: all right. let us go, get there is only one possible place to start day after day after day of generic and that is to thank you by being so patient for these past five weeks, but i want to look a little closer at why you have had to be so patient. this case took way too long to try, and it took too long to try because you have listened to weeks of evidence that had nothing to do with mr. shulman. testimony, and mr. schlesinger said something very interesting this morning. he said: we do not have to re-prove the engle findings, and i agree with him, they do not have to re-prove the engle findings. they have to show how those findings relate to mr. shulman. instead of doing that, they spent day after day after day re-proving those findings. mr. schlesinger: judge, i object. that attacks the plaintiff's case. they say you cannot attack what the defendant did. you cannot attack what the plaintiff did, saying we took too long to try the case, and i object to that and move to strike it, that it is our fault. i object to that. the court: i'll sustain it with regard furr: there is been day -- the court: and i'll ask the jury to mr. furr: there is been day after day because this is a case about to the time period but not as to the evidence that was put on by them. disregard that -- the issue regarding the timing. after day of generic evidence that did not relate to mr. shulman, and that is what is consumed so much of the time we spent here in trial. mr. shulman. refocus on what this case is really about. this is a case about the choices that mr. shulman made about cigarette smoking and who is responsible for the choices that he made. plaintiffs have proven to you that the defendants did something wrong that is a legal cause of mr. shulman's injury. it is not working. can i go back to my first slide, please? okay. sorry about that. this is a case about mr. shulman. let us it is all about mr. shulman. it is not a this is also a case about whether the no wonder she wants nothing to do with a generic case. it is not a case about other plaintiffs. it is not even a case about mrs. shulman. you have heard she is making no claim in this case. now you did hear from mrs. shulman, and we are going to look at her testimony, but what you heard mrs. shulman tell you was that beginning in the 1930s, she was telling mr. shulman that smoking was dangerous, bad for his health, and addictive. lawsuit based upon a claim -- strike. objection. move to strike, judge. i'll stand. there is no evidence of that and that is not appropriate. he said that in opening. i objected. you struck it. he is saying it again in closing. no one ever said that. it is just -- i object and i move to strike, with all due respect. the court: i'll sustain the objection. the jury should disregard the comment regarding the nonparty. testimony. you know that she knows that she warned mr. shulman in the 1930s, and you know that mr. schlesinger: excuse me, move to mr. furr: mrs. shulman, you heard her now the plaintiff has the burden to mr. schlesinger: objection, judge. mr. furr: your honor, you sustained my she is made no claim in this lawsuit, and you can figure out why. prove their case. they have the burden. doubts are not revolved in mr. shulman's favor. objection. you said i could not talk about that. they absolutely are resolved in his favor. if we are going to have a debate about it, we can debate; otherwise, it should not come in. objection to that. cannot make the argument either. argument. i need this on, please, baron. the court: okay. i'll sustain the objection regarding the reference to doubts. that was on during mr. schlesinger's. please. the jury should disregard it. mr. furr: i just need the monitor on mr. schlesinger: put it on for him, mr. furr: hope this does not count mr. schlesinger: that is right. so he mr. furr: i'm making the opposite schlesinger: no, give him the other and hold his time. i agree. this is my thanks, baron. mr. furr: i'll start talking again is that okay? the court: all right. that is fine. i'll try to use the time we have. okay. they have the burden to prove against my time, your honor. one. i need him. glitch, not his. while they work on it. maybe they will get it done by the time i need my next slide. mr. shulman's claims with evidence, with evidence, not with lawyer rhetoric, not with argument, not by trying to generate anger, not by trying to generate sympathy. hopefully they will get this stuff fixed. primarily, a case that mr. -- you even heard mr. schlesinger argue this morning that mr. shulman was a typical smoker, that he was like all the other smokers exposed to the same things, it is the evidence that matters. i'll keep talking for a minute. what you saw was a generic case but mr. shulman is not a generic smoker. believed the same things, and affected the same way. he is simply not. you know enough about mr. shulman now to know that, and i want to start by saying, i hope that you believe we have treated mr. shulman with dignity and respect throughout these proceedings. i have nothing bad to say about him. i hope i never said anything that you thought i was trying to say something bad about him. nothing bad to say. he is a brilliant man. he is a successful man, strong man, tough man. he was a highly informed man, one of the most early and best-informed smokers you could ever imagine. and now i do need my slides, your honor. mr. gdanski: give him this one. just turn it. we will figure it out on the lunch break. i'll look up here. it is all good. can you see that, jeff? mr. furr: yeah, thank you very much. thank you very much. but most importantly for our purposes, okay. i want to spend a few minutes of you heard it again during closing what we have left this morning. i want to begin comparing for you the generic case that was put on by the plaintiffs to the actual facts of mr. shulman's case, because it is the facts of mr. shulman's case that really matter, and i want to start by looking at -- you heard this many, many times during the trial. argument, this argument that smoking was normalized, that everybody was doing it, and that nobody thinks there was anything wrong with it. plaintiff's generic case, everyone smoked everywhere and smoking was normalized. that is what you heard, but you know that is not mr. shulman's case. opposite, that his parents did not want him smoking, that his mother was antismoking, that his siblings, both sisters and his brother did not smoke. he got punished many times in high school for smoking. he told you about that. mrs. shulman, of course once he met mrs. shulman, she was against his smoking, her parents were against his smoking. he went to work mr. shulman's case was exactly the 1 at watertown arsenal and got reprimanded for smoking and also the next place, i cannot remember the name of it that he went to during the war, the other place where he was working on assisting in developing machinery for the war, he got reprimanded. everywhere mr. shulman went, he got reprimanded and was told not to smoke, and, in fact, rather than smoking because it was normalized and okay, mr. shulman told you that he joined the group of kids that were smoking because it was frowned upon and they were doing it in defiance of social norms. environment, what was normal in his family, friends, school, and workplace, smoking was not normalized. it was disapproved of. this morning about concealment, about the concealment of information regarding the dangers and addictive properties of smoking. who basically said: it is a falsification of history to say that people knew that smoking was dangerous and addictive in the 1930s. plaintiff's generic case was dr. proctor so when you look close at his micro lots of information -- lots of argument that is what dr. proctor said to you. let us look at what mr. shulman's case a. yes. q. and when you told mr. shulman that (video clip played as follows:) q. going back to when you were dating but you know by virtue of having seen this evidence, that is not mr. shulman's case. is. mrs. shulman did come and testify, and here's what she said to you. mr. shulman, you told him that cigarette smoking was not good for him then? cigarette smoking was not good for him, you meant that it was unhealthy? mr. shulman, you told him that you thought he was addicted to cigarettes? mr. shulman, you told him that you thought he was addicted to cigarettes? cigarettes were unhealthy for him and that you a. yes. q. and going back to when you were dating a. say that again, please. q. going back to when you were dating a. yes. q. and when you told mr. shulman that a. no. is there any way we can improve the (video clip played as follows:) thought he was addicted, he did not try to argue with you, did he? (video clip concluded.) mrs. shulman, from the time they were dating, she was telling him it was bad for him, that it was unhealthy for him, that he was becoming addicted and he never disputed anything she said. sound quality? but it did not stop there. you heard mr. shulman testify. remember, we are comparing this plaintiff's generic case. q. you told mr. hammer that you thought that you were addicted to and were hooked on cigarettes in the 1940s, right? smoked, all the people around you, your family members were warning you that you should quit smoking because it was bad for your health, were not they? a. yes. q. sir, from the 1940s on, while you a. yes, that is true. (video clip concluded.) in the 1940s, mr. shulman believed he was addicted and his family members were warning him that smoking was bad for his health, and he was very forthcoming in admitting that on cross-examination. and, you know, when you take a step back from this and remember that the claim in this case is that the concealment that smoking is dangerous and that smoking is addictive was a cause of mr. shulman's injuries, you now know everything you need to know to reject that claim. you know that he had been told in the '30s by his wife, that he never argued with her about it as mr. shulman just told you, at the time he began smoking he thought he was addicted. you cannot conceal something from somebody who already knows it. if somebody already knows it you cannot harm them by attempting to conceal it from them. 1940s, he believed he was addicted and that everybody was telling him, his family members and everybody around him was telling him that smoking was bad for him. and mr. shulman just told us that in the you simply cannot harm somebody by let us look closer. there was a lot of nicotine in cigarettes hijacks the brain addicted smokers cannot quit. addicted smokers continue to smoke until concealing information from them if they already know it. discussion in this case about addiction. here was plaintiff's generic case on addiction. and produces a powerful pressure on a person to smoke over and over again. they develop a smoking-related disease. case because you know this is mr. shulman's case. when his daughter-in-law, yvonne, challenged mr. shulman to quit, he took the cigarette out of his mouth, threw it down and never smoked again. no medication needed, no counseling needed, no help from any other family member. he made up his mind, took it out of his mouth, threw it down and never smoked again. and as you now know given the concession by mr. schlesinger this morning, mr. shulman quit smoking 40 years ago. 40 years ago, in 1975 he quit smoking. but you know that is not mr. shulman's you also know that he quit 20 years let us look at the next issue. let us and you know that that was the only occasion that he had ever gone even 24 hours without a cigarette since he began smoking, and he could have quit anytime that he chose to. before he was diagnosed with bladder cancer, and because you know when he switched to filtered cigarettes in 1960, you know that -- that was 35 years before his bladder cancer was diagnosed, 35 years. look at plaintiff's generic case on advertising. here is the advertisements he is put in front of you. advertisements depicting men and women enjoying cigarettes together, advertising making smoking look glamorous and fun. these were the ads they showed you for lucky strike, men and women having a good time, smiling, enjoying cigarettes together. case. mr. shulman's case was the opposite. first, you know because he told us that the only reason he began smoking was to be part of the defiant gang that he was hanging out with. advertising had nothing to do with that. but you know that is not mr. shulman's they were not enjoying cigarettes but you also heard that not only did she wanted no part of it. do these second, you know that from the 1930s on, mrs. shulman constantly warned mr. shulman and asked him to quit. she told him she hated his smoking. he told you she was on his case all the time. together like this generic advertising campaign. his smoking was a point of dissension in their marriage. mrs. shulman hate smoking, you heard dr. seidman explain that by 1943, around the time of the birth of their first son, bruce shulman, who is departed now, by that time, mrs. shulman had put her foot down and refused to buy him cigarettes anymore. pictures depict the shulman family? is this how the shulman family thought about smoking? opening statement and throughout this trial, you heard smokers try and try and try and try and they quit and relapse and relapse because they cannot get the monkey off their back. addicted smokers suffer severe and painful let us talk about this relapse issue. in plaintiff's generic case, dr. seidman: the woman who shared his life, who lived withdrawal. relapse is a hallmark of addiction. that is what dr. seidman told you, but you know that is not mr. shulman's case. dr. seidman also told you that mrs. shulman did not see mr. shulman suffer any withdrawal symptoms. with him, who shared their bed together at night for 73 years never saw mr. shulman have a withdrawal symptom, never saw it. and you now know, they have admitted it now, we will talk about it a little bit more, but mr. shulman never smoked again after the mid 1970s, and as harvey told you, when mr. shulman quit, he never looked back. smoker who relapsed. plaintiff's generic case on advertising -- excuse me, on smoking and disease because here's the case plaintiffs put on. in fact, you saw a version of it. we took it down. you saw another version today of this chart correlating cigarette consumption with lung cancer. this was the sort of -- this was the mr. shulman was simply not an addicted i want to talk to you next about lung cancer rates rise, but what does string that tied together all of dr. proctor's testimony. during mr. gdanski's examination of dr. proctor, they went back and back and back to this chart to demonstrate how lung cancer rates rise with cigarette consumption. that have to do with mr. shulman's case? this is not a lung cancer case. he had bladder cancer, and on cross-examination, you saw how i cross-examined dr. proctor, and he admitted that: bladder cancer rates remain steady. the bladder cancer rates did not change. no matter how many people smoked and how much they smoked, it was a straight line. that was because the influence that controlled the incidence of bladder cancer over the years was not the amount of smoking that was being done, it was occupational exposures, occupational exposures. that is what dr. proctor told you. more. dr. proctor testified for seven days, seven days of generic testimony, untied in any way to mr. shulman. and, yes, dr. proctor has been paid over and dr. proctor explained to you that let us talk about dr. proctor a little on my cross-examination, he admitted 27 and what he did with that information is (video clip played as follows:) q. you do not know anything about what a. yes. you said it better than i could, $3 million to provide this generic testimony in engle litigation. different times that he knows nothing about mr. shulman, and then i asked him this question to try to sort of tie it all up together. mr. shulman knew, when he knew it, and what he did with any information he acquired about the dangers of smoking, right? and i tried to say it 12 times, but you put it all in one basket. dr. proctor, but the bottom line is what mr. shulman knew, when he knew it. what this case is all about because unlike this generic case, when you get your verdict -- you have your verdict form. i forgot. you already have it. when you study it a little bit closer, and we will look closer as we go along today, when (video clip concluded.) i appreciate the compliment from plaintiffs cannot prove what we spent a long time during this you study it closer, you will see that every question on that verdict form either has mr. shulman's name in it, or it relates to mr. shulman because it is related to a question that had his name in it. it is all about mr. shulman. mr. shulman's case with generic evidence. he is not a generic smoker. trial doing is looking at tobacco company documents that have nothing to do with mr. shulman. and you heard that the tobacco companies have been in business for a long time, that there are -- dr. proctor told you there are over 80 million pages of those documents. and i will tell you straightforward, i'm not here to defend some of the statements in those documents. some of the statements in those documents were bad. they were stupid. they were offensive. they were rotten stuff. no one is going to try to defend some of those statements, but that is not the question you have before you. that case has already been what you are here to try is how that in fact, you have this in your -- you tried. the class action about tobacco company conduct in general has already been tried. conduct relates to mr. shulman. have this in your jury instruction. engle findings: these findings do not establish any defendant is liable to plaintiff in this case, nor do they establish whether plaintiff was injured by defendants' conduct, nor to the degree, if any, to which defendants' conduct was a legal cause of plaintiff's injury. those are the questions that you are here to answer. when you see your verdict form, you will see it is all about whether we -- whether the defendants are liable to mr. shulman, whether he was injured by our conduct and whether the conduct was a legal cause of his injury. those questions. so while the findings have a role in this lawsuit as you have been instructed on by the court, they do not advance the ball very much. that is what you are here to do. break in a couple minutes, so i do not know, the engle findings do not answer any of the court: we are probably going to mrs. shulman was warning him. her you heard his daughter-in-laws got whenever you are -- a good breaking point is. mr. furr: yes, sir. thank you. i want to go back to something i showed you in opening statement. in opening statement, we began talking about how mr. shulman was bombarded with information from the time he began smoking. parents were against his smoking. his co-workers were urging him to stop. he was lucky to have that dentist that was treating both him and harvey and telling them both about the dangers of smoking. harvey would go home and tell mr. shulman about it. involved. dr. seidman explained to you how his sons began warning him in the 1960s, and that is just mr. shulman's specific warnings. mr. shulman also of course, as a member of our society, was exposed to all the information contained in these red boxes and was living in the same information environment as others and obtaining the warnings about the dangers of smoking just like everybody else. what i'm going to do now with the time then we will talk about what he did with and we will start with this, with we have left, i'm going to start just sort of going around this circle a little bit, reminding you on what the evidence was about mr. shulman and what he knew and when he knew it. it, because we are going to keep coming back to that theme. dr. proctor. dr. proctor is going to -- as dr. proctor testified, that by not the 1960s, as mr. schlesinger suggested to you today, but by the 1950s, the american public was being bombarded with information about the dangers of smoking. that there were literally thousands of scientific articles about the dangers of smoking? '30s and '40s, and they accelerate in the '50s, and by the late '60s, there is already many thousands of articles. all the way back to the 18th century. q. it began in the '30s and '40s, right? a. sure. i mean there is some -- they go q. and, sir, would not you agree that beyond (video clip played as follows:) q. during those decades, would you agree a. yes. yeah, they really begin in the a. that is right. yeah, it is big news. (video clip concluded.) by the 1950s, the message was and let us back up a little bit. (video clip played as follows:) q. although you tried to hide your smoking the scientific -- the thousands of articles published in the scientific literature, that there are many times that number of stories published in the popular press about the dangers of smoking? everywhere. mr. shulman knew from the time he first tried a cigarette that he should not be smoking. from your parents, they found out about it, did not they? really got after you, did not they? cigarettes, were not they? a. yes, they were. point? a. yes, they did. q. and when they found out about it, they a. yes, they did. q. they were very upset about you smoking (video clip concluded.) the court: is this a good breaking do not communicate with anybody else the bailiff: ladies and gentlemen of mr. furr: anytime, your honor. i'm the court: all right. let us go ahead fine when you are. and break right now then. all right. ladies and gentlemen of the jury, we will have you report back at 2:00. do not communicate with each other about the case. about the case. do not do any independent research or investigation of your own. do not go on any social websites and communicate about the case. thank you very much. the jury. [#deleted recess#] closing statement, continuing mr. furr: one of the things we did during lunch was we got some new speakers. obviously, the sound quality was not very good before lunch. glitch we might have is that some of the videos were recorded at a little bit different volume than others. when mr. shulman and i were having our very quiet conversation, when we play that, we will try to turn that down so it is not too loud in your face, but if it is too loud, please just let us know. okay? talking about how the generic case that plaintiffs put on simply does not fit mr. shulman's case. one of the things we talked about was how, unlike their generic case where smoking was normalized and everybody smoked, in mr. shulman's group, nobody smoked. it was disapproved of. and we talked about all the people who were urging him to quit from the beginning. when we broke this morning, we were we then talked about how in plaintiff's of course, we know in mr. shulman's generic case, nobody knew anything about the dangers of smoking. case, he was extraordinarily well informed, and he was informed at a very, very early time beginning in the 1930s. and he was informed constantly and consistently with clear, graphic warnings from then on. and then we talked briefly about the sources of warnings that mr. shulman got. we talked about his circle, acquaintances, family, friends, dentist, relationships. we talked about how he would have been exposed to the public health message. beginning to review with you some of the specific evidence that came in this case. and, again, i'd ask that as you listen to this, you keep in mind those questions that i posed to you earlier: what did he know? when did he know it? and what did he do with that information? you listen to our review of the evidence, i believe that will be of assistance to you when you if you keep those questions in mind as and we got to the point where i was those are the questions that deal with (video clip played as follows:) q. and from the time you began dating her go to answer questions 4 and 5 on your verdict form. the issue of concealment and agreement to conceal. okay. we were up to this. we were up to beginning to talk about what the evidence was with respect to how mrs. shulman warned mr. shulman. in the 1930s, ethel had asked you to stop smoking, right? stop smoking, right? case constantly, right? a. she was what? q. she was on your case, right? a. yes. smoking beginning in the 1930s and constantly on. a. correct. q. i think you said that she was on your a. yes. q. in fact, she asked you constantly to (video clip concluded.) mrs. shulman was after him to stop so now let us go to -- that was before (video clip played as follows:) they were married. so now we will go to how that pattern continued after they were married. they were married in 1941, you might recall. q. now after you got married, mrs. shulman kept getting after you about your smoking, right? a. constantly. q. throughout your 73-year-old marriage, from the time that you were a smoker, she was constantly after you, right? in 1975, he was constantly after her, but that was not the only people talking to him. testimony about how harvey would go to dr. jacobs, their dentist, who gave him very clear, very specific warnings about the dangers of smoking. and he would go home and talk to his father about those warnings. q. this requires some more testimony, sir. will you please turn to page 73, lines 7 through 10? (video clip concluded.) from the time he met her until he quit you might recall his son, harvey's, a. yes. (video clip played as follows:) you were asked the following question a. that is what it says here. q. okay. answer: every time i saw dr. jacobs. did i read that correctly, sir? a. yes. q. and you had the same conversation with and you gave the following answer: question: and how many times did you talk to your father about dr. jacobs talking to you about not smoking? your father about every six months, correct? specific over time. the health risks relating to smoking after you quit smoking in the 1960s? conversations with your father about this topic? a. yes. q. and you would talk to your father about things -- about the health risks of smoking such (video clip concluded.) and then those conversations got more (video clip played as follows:) q. and you also talked to your father about a. yes. q. you actually had a passionate a. yes. (video clip concluded.) you might remember that harvey did a. yes. q. and you also talked to your father about as the fact that smoking causes cancer, correct? the fact that smoking could cause heart disease and stroke and things like that, correct? follow in his dad's footsteps with his love of aviation. he wanted to be a pilot. he became involved in the process, and harvey recognized early on that his smoking was inconsistent with the state that he needed his health to be in to be a pilot. as -- he had only smoked for a couple years, late teens, early 20s, and after that he began warning his dad very specifically about the types of diseases that mr. shulman has claimed in this case that he did not know about, cancer and cardiovascular disease. and then of course, mr. shulman, as we have talked about from opening statement on, mr. shulman, he is obviously a very intelligent, aware man, plugged in, consumer of information, and so he stopped smoking, and then decision-maker, accustomed to gathering large amounts of information, making decisions about how to run his business. and one of the things he did during the course of his life is he read. he liked to read the newspaper, and he specifically recalls reports about the 1964 surgeon general's report. (video clip played as follows:) q. sir, you remember hearing about the surgeon general's report in 1964, do not you? a. oh, yes, i do. q. and you recall at that point in time the surgeon general made remarks about smoking being bad, right? about the consequences of smoking. talked about the content of what you breathe in when you smoke a cigarette, right? a. yes. q. and he -- a. i do not know if he said that. he talked q. the consequences of smoking? a. yeah. q. okay. and the surgeon general also a. i think so, yes. q. you also recall there being stories in (video clip concluded.) did not stop there either. two years the newspapers about the 1964 surgeon general's report, right? a. yes. after that of course the first caution label went on the packages, and mr. shulman remembers the caution labels and warning labels on the packages. not only did he personally see them, but his sons would talk to him about those labels. you might remember harvey's testimony. he said when that label first went on in 1966, he took it to his father and said: see, i told you so. i told you so, and here's mr. shulman's recollection. you learned about the warnings, that caution warning coming on the cigarette packs? even pointing that out to you? me constantly about it. a. yes. q. okay. and do you remember your sons (video clip played as follows:) q. now did there come a point in time when a. i do not remember when, but they warned (video clip concluded.) his sons warned him constantly about it. i'll show you one more video that has to deal with this idea that smoking had been normalized within his group and that everybody was smoking, everybody approved of it. friend, the pharmacy owner, mr. shulman told us that he told -- he was always after him to stop and that he was disgusted with mr. shulman for continuing to smoke, and this was very early on when he began running his clean brite janitorial company. the wall street journal, did not you? a. i do not know -- i do not know if i read it at that time, but i did read the wall street journal. listen to the radio or read newspapers, you would see stories about the horrors of smoking, correct? a. q. and you read the boston globe, right? a. yes. q. and when you would watch television or (video clip played as follows:) q. are you read national newspapers like you will remember that mr. shulman's yes. (video clip concluded.) wrong clip. i got ahead of myself. that was the clip where mr. shulman specifically remembers reading stories about the horrors of smoking, which of course was the title of the 1959 reader's digest article. and now we will take a look at the clip that i meant to look at before where his friend was after him all the time to stop smoking. q. what did you do? a. so i called this man and asked would he open the store, i need a package of cigarettes, and that was a disaster. i called him at 10:00 at night. with me for smoking cigarettes in the first place. he always told me he -- even though he sold cigarettes in his store, he told me -- he was a friend of mine: stop, stop, stop. that is all i heard from him. q. why is that? a. first of all, he was very upset because (video clip concluded.) one of the arguments made to you this (video clip played as follows:) the second thing is he was disgusted (video clip played as follows:) q. mr. shulman, the stories you saw are a. yeah, it did. (video clip concluded.) scared the hell out of him. does that morning was that although mr. shulman heard all of this information, he did not accept it. he rejected it. he did not believe it. he was confused, but here's what mr. shulman told you. about the health consequences of smoking, in your words, scared the hell out of you, right? sound like someone who is confused when they stopped or does not believe the information? of course not. he understood it. he incorporated it into his understanding of smoking and it scared the hell out of him. he knew that smoking could be addictive and dangerous to your health. that question also, from the 1930s on and throughout his life, his marriage to ethel, his life with his family, his life in this world with warnings on the side of packages, stories in the when did he know it? we just answered so what did he know from the 1930s on? but what did he do with that unlike what mr. schlesinger argued to media. he always knew, and it scared him. information? he kept smoking. he kept smoking. against that background, i want to turn to talking with you about the specific verdict form questions that you are here to answer. because we are in a court of law, you have rules to follow. there are specific issues to answer on your verdict form. you this morning, this is not a moral referendum. it is not a question of whether or not you think the tobacco industry conducted itself morally or not. it is simply not the issue. the issue is the specific legal claims that have been made. the first question on your verdict form reads like this: was robert shulman addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine, and, if so, was such addiction a legal cause of his bladder cancer, coronary artery disease, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease? of when the disease manifested and whether mr. shulman was a resident of florida at that time. the second question deals with the issue those two questions, taken together, are so i have taken those two questions and the class membership questions. when you answer those two questions, you will be determining whether or not the plaintiff has proven to you, because it is their burden to do so, that mr. shulman was a member of the engle class. tried to combine them for you to break out the component parts, because although it is a single sentence, embedded within that sentence are actually several different subquestions that you have to answer to answer the overall question. hurdles because it is plaintiff's burden to prove all these things to you. they have to prove that mr. shulman met the florida residency requirement. subject with you during his closing argument. i will not address that any more. plaintiff must prove that cigarette smoking was a legal cause of mr. shulman's engle-qualifying disease; in other words, medical causation. they have to prove to you that, in fact, smoking cigarettes was the medical cause of his disease. and it is like this. i depicted these as mr. brenner is going to address that but then they have to prove that then finally, separate and apart and i'm going to talk about each of they next have to prove to you that he was addicted to nicotine in cigarettes. that is the addiction requirement that they have to prove. from whether he was addicted or not, they have to prove to you that addiction was the legal cause of his qualifying disease. those diseases with some specificity, but before i even get to that, there is an issue in this case that, in essence, answers all of those questions for you without having to look at anything else, and that is this: throughout the plaintiff's case, they fought like crazy about the day, the year that mr. shulman stopped smoking. evidence from harvey, saying that mr. shulman quit in the 1990s. mr. shulman himself testified that he quit in 1995 when he was diagnosed. who worked this answer into everything i asked him, no matter what i asked him, if i said what time of day is it, he would say: mr. shulman quit in the 1980s. and dr. seidman, their addiction expert, he was so committed to trying to prove you will recall that they offered you mr. furr: that is exactly what happened, mr. schlesinger: your honor, objection. the court: all right. i'll sustain the mr. schlesinger: objection, your honor. that fact, i mean we had to get his testimony struck. he could not remember the questions i was asking him. objection, judge. move to strike. your honor. move to strike. we have to get his testimony. it is the evidence that is in. it is not the evidence that is out. objection as to the reference to the striking of testimony. you can refer to the testimony that is in, not the testimony that is out. the jury should disregard it. mr. furr: you saw dr. seidman, an evasive, unresponsive witness who worked into every answer: he quit in the 1980s. was introduced on that issue, and today, mr. schlesinger conceded that mr. shulman quit in the 1970s, around 1975. the evidence. the evidence is overwhelming that but then what happened? the evidence why? you know the answer. you have heard so after fighting like crazy during it does not matter anyway. it does not and as i'm about to demonstrate to you, mr. shulman quit in the 1970s. trial, conceding it today, what did you hear next? matter. it does not matter. if it did not matter, why would they have fought so much about this issue? it does matter. it is actually the threshold defining issue for class membership. this is the one that answers all the questions, because the science of medicine is that if mr. shulman quit in 1975, the plaintiffs cannot meet their burden of proof by a preponderance of the evidence to demonstrate that he got a smoking-related disease 20 years later, and that is because, and i'm going to review this evidence with you, when you quit, your risk starts declining. smoking. if you are not sick and you get you sick, the likelihood of getting sick goes down immediately and continues going down with each year that you are a nonsmoker, and we will look at that. that is why doctors tell you to quit the first thing we had were the medical but i'm going to show you, as quickly as i can, what the evidence was with respect to when mr. shulman quit. records. and, you know, today mr. schlesinger also said: we embrace every statement in the organic medical records that were created in the process of mr. shulman seeking and being given treatment. we embrace and accept every statement in those records. over 20 different records that were introduced to you and read, i cross-examined dr. seidman on these, over 20 different records indicate that mr. shulman quit in the mid 1970s. multiple different providers, different locations, over time, different numbers, so it is not just a matter of one person copying down the record of another. these were records created pursuant to mr. shulman providing the information to these providers as he went to get healthcare over time. and no matter how you do -- what number he provided, when you do the math, if it is 2002, you do the math, you are back in 1970. if it is 1995, you do the math, take 20 years off, you are the organic medical records created in back in 1975. the process of obtaining treatment without any eye towards this litigation all converge on the mid 1970s with a few outliers that apparently plaintiffs have abandoned because they recognize that those 2015 records that they pointed out to you, those were created in the context of mr. shulman sadly going to the memory and wellness center because his memory was fading. which those two 2015 records were generated that the plaintiffs abandoned this morning in their argument. was not just the records. mr. shulman's own witnesses put the nail on the coffin on this issue. review of the case, mr. shulman quit between 1975 and 1980. that is their expert. but maybe the most important witness on this was dr. bernsley. this was the doctor that treated mr. shulman. this was the doctor who looked him in the eye, asked him questions, and dr. soloway indicated based upon his and that was the circumstance under but it was not just the records. it he told us that based upon his now i'm going to look at one more clip recorded information in the process of providing him urology treatment post-surgically, beginning about 2000, i believe it was. discussions with mr. shulman, that he concluded that mr. shulman quit smoking in 1972. with you because a question was asked this morning as to why we did not bring dr. hoge. there were a couple reasons why we did not bring dr. hoge, the addiction psychiatrist. but one of the reasons was that the evidence that you would have heard from dr. hoge was introduced through cross-examination of either the plaintiff's experts or of mr. shulman himself. mr. shulman gave a compulsory medical examination interview to dr. hoge. each day, a very thorough interview conducted by a clinician, not by the lawyers, by a clinician, dr. hoge who asked mr. shulman questions. and we played this during mr. shulman's cross-examination. i'm going to show it to you again. it is as you heard during the trial, it was over two days, a couple hours it took that long to get the whole story a little bit long. it is three or four minutes. i apologize for that. out, but as you listen to this, i'd ask you to listen to this dialogue and ask yourself three questions. one question is: when did he quit? and the key to that question in the dialogue you hear will be where he lived when he quit. quit? and the third question will be: did he ever relapse after he quit? started talking to you about these bad things that had happened -- answer: yeah. question: -- in her family. someone had -- someone in her family had died. was it from cancer? answer: yeah, her father. question: father died from cancer? answer: yeah. here is mr. shulman's testimony. (video clip played as follows:) the second question will be: how did he q. on page 22, line 1: question: all right. and so she now just so -- again, so i'm clear, did answer: no. question: many times? answer: many times, but it was never she talk to you -- was this one time that she grabbed you at home? so -- never so intense other times, but this time, this particular time, it was. it rattled -- really rattled my brain. question: okay. and it -- it -- it -- the -- what she told me was so hard to compute in my mind and so devastating that she challenged me to throw the cigarettes away which i had. i was smoking at the time. were talking to her? challenged you to quit right there? my mouth. i remember this vividly. took the cigarette out of my mouth and started to think -- and i loved this girl, and i wanted to please her. answer: yeah. question: and what did you do? answer: um, i took the cigarette out of question: you were smoking while you answer: yeah. question: and then she -- she so i took my cigarettes, threw them question: was this at your home? answer: yeah, at my home. question: and where were you living at into -- into the waste basket, and i told her i would never smoke again. this time? answer: winthrop, massachusetts. question: this is when you lived in winthrop. okay. so you threw them away right there while you were talking to her? that, sir? did not you just -- did you never -- did you ever have another cigarette? turkey? you know what i mean when i say "cold turkey"? me, cold turkey just means you stop. answer: no. question: never had another one? answer: never had another one. question: just went cold -- cold answer: yeah, she asked me to. question: and then what happened after answer: no. question: cold turkey means -- excuse answer: yes. so this is -- this is a current memory question: that is what you did? answer: yeah. question: did not taper them down? answer: no. question: and you never had one again? answer: right. question: and you mentioned in the course of telling me this that you had a vivid memory. of yours? me. was in the 1980s? that i read mr. shulman's transcript correctly because obviously it was a little difficult for answer: i'm not certain. did i read that correctly, counselor? mr. hammer: yes, sir. (video clip concluded.) you might recall mr. hammer stipulated answer: it is, yeah. question: okay. very clear -- excuse question: okay. answer: very clear. question: how certain are you that it but what you heard was that mr. shulman second, you heard where he lived when he mr. shulman, using a magnifying glass, for him to follow along quite that rapidly. has a clear, vivid memory of how he quit. took them out if his mouth, threw them in the trash can, did not need counseling, did not need nicotine replacement therapy, did not have to do anything, cold turkey. did it. he lived in winthrop. and as i'm about to remind you the real estate records that we have, as well as mr. shulman's testimony, demonstrate unequivocally that mr. shulman last lived in winthrop in 1979 or the early 1980s, perhaps, when he stayed in an apartment for a couple months. and, finally, you just heard mr. shulman tell you that he has a vivid, clear memory that he never smoked again, and he never relapsed after that night. evidence. it demonstrates -- because you might remember also that you heard that, not only in his deposition, which we also played for you -- we will not do that again now -- mr. shulman was very the real estate record will be in as i said, the evidence is overwhelming specific that he quit when they lived at one grovers avenue in winthrop, massachusetts, which the real estate records demonstrate that they sold in 1979. so he quit in 1979 at the latest. that mr. shulman quit in the mid 1970s. the organic medical records that mr. schlesinger embraces and does not reject anything in them demonstrate that unequivocally. mr. shulman's testimony that we just looked at as to where his conversation with yvonne took place, his expert, his treater, the evidence all congeals in one direction, that he quit in the mid 1970s. where i'm at time-wise? minutes. minutes. it. mr. furr: well, thank you very much. okay. why is it so important when he the court: you are about 52 minutes into the sale of the real estate in 1979, mr. furr: your honor, may i inquire the court: you are -- mr. schlesinger: an hour and 45 mr. furr: i thought it was about 35 quit? why did the plaintiffs fight so hard about when he quit? why did we go through those mental gymnastics about when he quit? why did the plaintiffs offer you evidence, maybe he quit in the '70s. well, maybe it was '80s. no, we think it was the '90s. why did we go through that drill? because when you quit smoking, your risk of developing a smoking-related disease begins to drop, and here's the evidence that you heard from qualified medical doctors in this case. her later, the occupational medicine specialist who devotes her career to helping people with occupational diseases, including bladder cancer, testified that your risk returns to baseline approximately 20 years after cessation. she explained to you what that means is approximately 20 years, give or take, your risk is back to the same as someone who never smoked, who never -- with respect to developing bladder cancer from cigarette smoking. the way, the only pulmonologist you heard from, a dr. mcgregor, and we will talk more about dr. farber, the pulmonologist who, by i wrote 10 years here. that is a gentleman in his mid 70s, long distinguished career, has treated, he told you, thousands and thousands of people with copd, told you that smokers do not develop copd caused by smoking 20 years after they quit smoking. never seen it. does not happen. dr. dan, we will stop there. dr. dan, the cardiologist -- the only cardiologist that you saw who has treated, again, thousands of cases of cardiovascular disease, of cad, told you that your risk returns to baseline approximately 10 -- mistake. as i recall the testimony, it was 10 to 15 years. i want to be fair about that. -- 10 to 15 years after cessation. that is why when mr. shulman quit is the defining issue in the case, because the evidence demonstrates overwhelmingly that he quit at a time where the declining risk from that disease, the way his body would have healed itself over those 20 years, as he got farther and farther and farther away from his exposure to cigarette smoke, his risk dropped and dropped and dropped until it was that of a never-smoker for developing those diseases from cigarette smoking. that is why plaintiffs cannot prove any of we will start with bladder cancer. both there are other explanations as to why these diseases, none of them. but there is a lot more. he might have developed these diseases for some of them and for others, whether he ever even had the disease. so i'm not going to stop there. i'm going to walk through with you what some of the other medical issues are and the evidence that you heard. dr. soloway and dr. bernsley, taken together, testified that there are other known risk factors for bladder cancer, including smoking. of course smoking is one. nobody is hiding that. but they told you the chemical exposures, age, race, and gender are all risk factors for developing bladder cancer. then dr. proctor, we looked at this in one context. let us look at this in another. on my cross-examination of dr. proctor where they spent all this time talking about how lung cancer incidence changes with the amount of cigarettes bought and smoked, bladder cancer does not change. dr. proctor went further. on dr. proctor told you that it is driven by bladder cancer does not change. it is a straight line. this blue line is how many cigarettes are sold, and you see that as the blue line goes up and up and up, the bladder cancer rate stays the same. it is not driven by smoking. occupational exposures, occupational exposures. cross-examination, he told you that there are plants -- there have been studies where there are plants where 19 out of 20 workers got bladder cancer as a result of exposure to chemical carcinogens in the workplace. that is their expert, dr. proctor. now, again, continuing with the organic medical records that were created in the process of mr. shulman seeking medical treatment, which mr. schlesinger embraces as accurate and does not back off of any of them. we have dr. benedetto, the oncologist's record that addresses what types of occupational exposures that mr. shulman might have had based on the history that mr. shulman gave. 12-20-95, this was -- you might recall they told you they sought out as above, he has extensive exposure to the context. mr. shulman had had his surgery. there was an issue as to whether or not he should also have chemotherapy as a follow-up treatment of his bladder cancer. dr. benedetto, the university of miami, because of his knowledge and his expertise in this area, and this is the history that dr. benedetto took from mr. shulman. cleaning compounds both as a janitor and a mechanic. for many years with exposure to a number of solvents. expert. this is what he does, and their witnesses told you he was an expert. dr. soloway said: he is a very well respected oncologist. oncologist. he took these histories because occupational exposure is something meaningful that you have to evaluate when you are treating somebody who has had he was an engine mechanic and janitor dr. benedetto is no hack. he is an dr. bernsley said he is a superb then why did he take these histories? bladder cancer because of course, if they have had occupational exposures that are causing their bladder cancer, the first thing you want to do is get them to stop those occupational exposures, remove them from the cause. that is why they take these histories. but we went further than that. we brought you dr. mcgregor, dr. mcgregor, who provided the forensic files moment of this trial, the moment when you watch forensic files where they use the science to tie together the physical evidence. that there are tests called audiograms where they test somebody's ability to hear different frequencies of sound. explained to you that there are characteristic profiles of audiograms that are rated to particular types of exposures. work done in the occupational context, there are audiograms for the -- that demonstrate how someone's hearing decreases if they have been exposed to solvents. do you remember she explained to you and they graph those out, and she and because there is been so much of this she then graphed mr. shulman's hearing mr. shulman's audiogram demonstrated and this is what she showed you. she showed you -- on the right hand, you see -- not related to mr. shulman. you see blue is normal here. the orange is the pattern of hearing loss that you get when you are exposed to certain types of toxins and solvents. loss against that pattern, and as you can see, they parallel each other. the shape is the same. that he had a hearing loss that matches the type of hearing loss that you get from occ- -- from exposure to solvents. type of exposure. that exposure leads to this loss of memory. now, just so you know. mr. furr: thank you very much. now i would have thought there would be no confusion about this. no one is claiming that hearing loss causes cancer. and if anybody suggests to you that dr. mcgregor stood up here and told you that hearing loss causes cancer, you know that is not it is almost like a fingerprint for that the court: counsel, you are at an hour we asked dr. soloway and true. what she did was explain that exposure to certain substances results in a characteristic pattern of hearing loss, and that is one way -- you can look somebody with hearing loss and project backwards in time and project what it is they might have been exposed to. that is what this tool is used for. dr. bernsley, the plaintiff's experts, whether or not occupational exposures caused mr. shulman's bladder cancer, because, remember, the plaintiffs have the burden of proof here. they have to prove "but for" causation, that but for the smoking, the disease would never have resulted. treater whether occupational exposures played a role in his bladder cancer and here's what they told you. facts to rule out the possibility that mr. shulman's occupational exposures were a substantial cause for his bladder cancer. dr. soloway: i do not have enough of the so we asked their expert and their dr. bernsley told you he: cannot rule even their own experts cannot exclude and then a very interesting question was out that occupational exposures were contributing causes of mr. shulman's bladder cancer. occupational exposures as the cause of mr. shulman's bladder cancer. asked of dr. soloway, and that is this, he was asked: now, sir, when you looked through mr. shulman's records, you did not see any record that one of mr. shulman's doctors said that smoking caused mr. shulman's bladder cancer, correct? smoking caused his bladder cancer. smoking was not even part of the picture for mr. shulman in 1995. he had stopped smoking 20 years earlier, in 1975. so of course the doctors in 1995 are not going to say it is caused by smoking. he quit too long ago. he quit too long ago, so none of these treaters ever, never said that smoking was the cause. it was too long in history, too far back. okay. there is another question on your verdict form, question 3 -- i do not think i'm doing that next. let me see. answer: correct. of course no one concluded that his we also asked the plaintiff's experts even the plaintiff's experts admit that okay. yeah, i should do this first. we also asked -- you know, i showed you the declining risk statements from dr. soloway, dr. dan -- excuse me, from dr. dan, dr. farber, and dr. mcgregor about how your risk goes down over time. about that. and we had to cross-examine on them, but here is what they admitted. the risk of developing bladder cancer declines when someone stops smoking and that the longer a person goes without smoking, the lower their chance of bladder cancer. plaintiff's experts made. there is another issue here, not only do the plaintiffs have to prove to you that addiction to nicotine in cigarettes caused his diseases, but they have to prove to you that the products made by each defendant were a legal cause of disease. you will see this product use causation instruction in your instructions when you read them that reads: the next issue you must determine is whether cigarettes manufactured and those are the concessions that the so you are going to have to examine sold by each defendant was a legal cause of injury to the plaintiff. the brand history and what you know to be the brand history to determine whether or not the cigarettes made by rj reynolds or philip morris or liggett were a legal cause. the brand history was for the rj reynolds' cigarettes. the other lawyers will talk about the cigarettes manufactured by their company. what you know. and i take all this from that beautifully written sheet on the side where i attempted to track mr. shulman's answers for you, but you know that mr. shulman stopped smoking cigarettes made by rj reynolds at least 35 years, 35 years before he developed bladder cancer. evidence that after 20 years, the risk of developing bladder cancer from smoking declines to baseline. forget 20 years. forget 30 years. he stopped smoking reynolds' cigarettes in 1960. he smoked from reynolds were unfiltered how do we know? the only products that so i would just simply remind you what but with respect to rj reynolds, here's now, remember, we just showed you the cigarettes. he never smoked a reynolds' filtered cigarette. the evidence is absolutely clear on that. mr. shulman tells us that he switched to filtered cigarettes in 1960. 1995 disease. 1960 quit reynolds' products, 35 years later, 35 years between the time that he smoked reynolds' products and the time that he developed bladder cancer. and you also saw that mr. shulman, we do not really know how much he smoked of reynolds' products even when he was smoking them because obviously he said on multiple occasions that lucky strike was a regular brand of his from the mid 1940s until 1960. on cross-examination, he admitted he really did not know how much. and perhaps most importantly, he admitted that even when he was smoking lucky strike, that he would always buy something cheaper if it was available. mr. shulman had a remarkable business career, but like most people, his career started off slow. he worked hard. he made something of himself. changed his life as he went forward in time. but in the early years when he was so when you get to this question 3, i starting out his career, he has kids in the house, he would always buy whatever was cheapest. always buy whatever was cheapest. so we do not know even those years how much he smoked lucky strike versus another cheaper brand on sale. submit to you that the evidence demonstrates unequivocally that his smoking of rj reynolds' cigarettes 35 years before his bladder cancer could not have been a cause of his disease. i'm going to go to the coronary -- the evidence with respect to coronary artery disease. and i'll start this way: where was plaintiff's cardiology expert? they bring before you a claim for cad, for coronary artery disease, for which they are asking you to award him millions of dollars in combination with the other diseases, and they do not bring to a cardiologist. nobody. instead they have a urologist, dr. soloway, testify about cardiology. would find common ground on something. i too encourage you to look at the last instruction in your packet called the believability of witnesses and i knew that mr. schlesinger and i that tells you that you may reject expert testimony. and i put experts in quotes here because i submit to you that if there is any testimony you want to object, it is when someone testifies outside their specialty. when a urologist comes in here and tries to become a courtroom cardiologist, that is a good time to reject that testimony. but we brought you the cardiologist, dr. dan. you know that he treated thousands of cad patients during the course of his life and that mr. shulman first presented with cad in 2003, 2003. twenty-eight years after he had stopped smoking in 1975 was when mr. shulman underwent, i believe it was the quadruple bypass surgery that he had, 28 years later. so we explored with dr. dan, what are the causes of coronary artery disease, and how does it affect your risk of developing coronary artery disease from smoking when you stop smoking? explained to you that mr. shulman had multiple significant risk factors for coronary artery and here was the testimony: he you know, as mr. schlesinger explained he is lived a long life, outlived his disease, diabetes, high blood pressure, high cholesterol, age, gender. to you, mr. shulman does have the gift of longevity. expectation, outlived all his peers, but along the way, as many, many people do, we all know as people get older, they acquire one after another medical problem. and that is what happened to mr. shulman during the years as he was going through his 70s and early 80s and approaching that age of 83, he was accumulating multiple medical problems that are known to be causes of coronary artery disease, diabetes, high blood pressure, high cholesterol. 2003, quadruple bypass, how does that relate to quitting smoking in 1975? dr. dan explained to you that his -- mr. shulman's risk of developing cad from smoking started decreasing as soon as he quit and it fell to baseline. here i got it right fortunately, fell to baseline within 10 to 15 years after he quit smoking. 1990 at the latest, 15 years after 1975, put it altogether. that means that by copd. copd, another instance in which i mr. shulman's risk of developing coronary artery disease from his cigarette smoking would have returned to baseline. submit you should read that believability of witness instruction and consider whether or not to reject the only expert testimony plaintiff's brought to you on copd. who brought you their copd testimony, a pulmonologist? no, they did not bring one. they did not bring a pulmonologist. instead, dr. soloway, the urologist, also provided their only testimony on copd. the very, very important opinion that you got from dr. dan was that mr. shulman would have developed coronary artery disease even if he had never smoked. cardiologist that you have before you in this case. again, in quotes, that plaintiffs brought, and, look, obviously he spent a lot of time in urology. mr. -- dr. soloway testified at length i should back up because the final -- that is the only opinion from a dr. soloway, the only expert that, i submit this is another opportunity about what he is done in urology, but, but how did he prepare to testify about pulmonology in this case, about copd? he told us he googled it. he googled it and studied it. you know, google is a good source for lots of information. i mean, most of us use it for a variety of sources, but that is not how you become an expert and come in and offer testimony in a courtroom. that you might want to consider rejecting that testimony. did bring -- we brought to you dr. farber, a gentleman in his 70s, a long distinguished career, treated tens of thousands of copd patients, and here's what dr. farber told you. he told you that mr. shulman had never been treated for copd, never. imagine that. the claim is that mr. shulman developed copd in 1995. and here we are in 2015, and mr. shulman has never been treated for copd? dr. farber explained to you that mr. shulman has no symptoms of copd. we did bring to you a pulmonologist. we dr. farber explained to you that the that you heard from the deposition plaintiff's claim in this case about doctors who treated mr. shulman never worked him up, never worked him up for copd. testimony that mr. shulman did not even know or think that he had copd. look at the medical records. i'll go through these very quickly. dr. farber reviewed with you because -- let me back up. copd is based upon two, two medical records from 1995 stemming from an oncology report, neither of which was the result of a copd workup or pulmonary function testing. ice that they base their whole case on about copd. look at what happened subsequent to the creation of those records. when mr. shulman was having his -- getting ready to have his bladder cancer surgery in the anesthesia questionnaire, he checked off that he had no problems breathing. he continued to do that. he never had shortness of breath, that he had no treatment for copd, that he sometimes -- in some of those forms, they would be written out, and he you will see throughout these records that that is the narrow, thin read, the thin so what did dr. farber explain to you? you have them breathe into that would be asked: do you have shortness of breath? do you have emphysema? he checked "no" every time. denies emphysema. denies copd. all those records are in there. the point being that in the decades following those two offhand recordations of copd in the medical records, you never see it again. you never see it again. you do not have to guess as to whether or not somebody has copd. all you have to do is administer a pulmonary function test. apparatus, take the biggest breath they can, breathe it out as fast as they can. the doctors measure all that and they compare it to standards. and they can determine whether or not you have obstructive lung disease that rises to the level of being copd based upon how you compared to others of the same gender and age. dr. farber told us. mr. shulman's single pulmonary function test that we have, the results from that test were normal, normal for men of mr. shulman's age. that is how you diagnose it. here's what dr. farber told you that based upon it might stop getting worse, but it having treated thousands of patients and interpreted thousands and thousands of pfts, that mr. shulman did not have copd now, and that means he could never have had copd because when you get copd, it does not go away. the decrease in lung function remains with you for the rest of your life. it is not a disease that can be cured. it does not go away. if you have it, it stays with you for the rest of your life. does not go away. and so if he did have it in 2015 when he did that pft, he could never have had it. so i'm going to suggest to you that when you go to your -- oh, another important point. another important point. notwithstanding those results in the 2015 pft, which plaintiffs cross-examined him on at length, at length, about whether or not those are consistent with copd or not, dr. farber explained to you that the internist, the doctor who was taking care of mr. shulman day-to-day, the man charged with laying his hands on him, listening to dr. farber also explained to you that -- it never happened. the copd diagnosis his heart, listening to his lungs and interpreting the results, has never diagnosed mr. shulman with copd and has never treated mr. shulman for copd even after that pft test. was -- is one that does not exist outside this courtroom. it just does not exist. so the plaintiff has failed to prove to you that mr. shulman had any of the diseases that he claims to have had caused by his addiction to nicotine in cigarettes. question, question 1, for each of those diseases, right there, you put a "no" because he did not prove it was caused by smoking. your verdict form that in between the questions, there are instructions. sometimes. we do the best we can with them, but those instructions tell you that if you say "no" to all the subparts of question 1, you sign your verdict form, and that is the end of this trial. address as part of the class membership is not the second -- the second issue i want to when you get to your verdict form and when you put a "no" -- you will see on they are not that easy to follow if i get click happy, i'll get lost and medical. we just addressed medical causation, but you might remember that -- alecia, is there any way that you can bring up that first hurdle, the first chart with the four hurdles, and let me have that back for just a moment, and then we will go back to this. we will never find it. introduce this issue of class membership. what i neglected to tell you here was that the plaintiffs have to prove each of these things to you. proving one of them is not enough. two of them is not enough. three is not enough. these things with you, then your answer has to be a no, and the case is over. we just got done addressing the medical causation, the very first issue. mr. brenner is going to address florida residency. i'm now going to talk with you, and i'll do this at the same time to get this done a little faster. plaintiffs have proven to you that even if i'm going to talk to you about whether okay. here was the diagram i used to if they fail on proving anything of okay. alecia, i will probably -- thank all right. so the next two hurdles are so i'm going to suggest to you that one cigarettes were a medical cause of his disease, have they proven to you that addiction to nicotine was a legal cause of his disease, so we will look at that evidence. you. addiction and addiction/causation. kind of odd concepts, addiction/causation. probably not something that you thought about very much before this trial. of the ways to think about this question is whether plaintiffs have proven to you that mr. shulman was an involuntary smoker that was unable to quit smoking, an involuntary smoker who was able to quit smoking. addiction caused the disease. let us look at what the evidence says. we will back up a little bit. and, again, i told you we did not bring dr. hoge because we did not need to because we got out of their witnesses all of the evidence that you needed to make your decision on cross-examination. okay. if they prove that to you, maybe between dr. seidman and dr. henningfield, here is what you now know through the cross-examination of these two individuals. we know that the dsm-5 is the official diagnostic approach of the american psychiatric association for diagnosing addiction. you further know that the dsm-5 explains that fifty percent of daily smokers are not addicted. so if someone is a daily smoker, it is literally the toss of a coin as to whether they are addicted or not. dr. seidman told you that is not enough. you cannot make a decision on whether someone is an addicted smoker based on whether they smoke daily. it is a toss of a coin. you just cannot do it. dr. seidman also explained to you that smokers smoke for reasons other than addiction, for reasons other than addiction. you several times that, would he ever have smoked that much if he were not addicted? well, let us look at what dr. seidman says about that issue when he is outside the courtroom and writing books for other doctors to read for them to help their patients quit smoking. i mean, the argument has been made to dr. seidman told you, quote: it is used as a tension reducer in anxiety-provoking situations. it is also pleasurable for many people, and this pleasure is reinforced when smoking accompanies activities such as a meal, coffee, or sex. that is what dr. seidman tells you outside the courtroom. you can use your own recollection and compare that with the testimony he gave here in the courtroom. now something very interesting happened during this trial with respect to addiction, and that is plaintiffs have spent a lot of time looking at old documents, eliciting testimony from their witnesses within the courtroom, trying to prove to you that smoking is not a choice, that smoking is not a choice. cigarettes do not light themselves and jump in your mouth. nobody holds a gun to a smoker's head and forces them to smoke. it is a personal choice that people make, and outside the courtroom, dr. seidman agrees. cross-examination of an internet online site that of course smoking is a choice. we played a video during his (video clip played as follows:) mr. seidman: urges and cravings to he has put up to help smokers quit. and as you listen to this very brief clip -- i'd ask you to listen carefully -- you will hear dr. seidman use the word "choice" three times in about less than one minute to describe what cigarette smoking is all about. smoke are not choices. however, the action you take in response to the urges and cravings is a choice. the cigarette has no magical power except which you give it. when not acted on, urges to smoke, no matter how powerful, occur less often and become easier to ignore. by not acting on the urge to smoke, you choose voluntarily to protect your body and your health. you choose not to act on the urge to smoke because you truly believe this will make life better. uses the word "choice." a choice. you can choose not to smoke. you can (video clip concluded.) three times in 45 seconds, dr. seidman how you respond to urges and cravings is okay. let us look at what else choose to protect your health, or you can choose to gain the benefit of whatever it is you get out of smoking. that is a choice that people make. and yet inside the courtroom, plaintiffs do everything they can to disassociate themselves with the concept that there is choice involved in smoking. dr. seidman said, because he spent a lot of time telling you what a hard core group of patients he has, patients that have failed elsewhere, who cannot quit, who have all kinds of severely addicted problems with smoking. says: oh, yeah, at least sixty percent of my patients quit, sixty percent of my patients quit. smokers that they cannot quit? do you ever tell smokers they cannot quit? and here's what they -- here's what he said: it is their decision. it is their decision. sometimes they might decide to smoke or not. sometimes they might decide to smoke or not. courtroom. it is their decision. it is a choice that is what dr. seidman says outside the and then i cross-examined him, and he and i asked him: do you ever tell that people make. and you saw on the video, the cigarette does not have any magical power over you other than what you choose to give it, as dr. seidman just explained. let us focus back on mr. shulman and ask yourself: was mr. shulman some type of gullible, impressionable, weak-minded individual that was unable to make decisions for himself, unable to interpret information, unable to control his impulses? was he -- have some kind of an addiction personality? was he any of those things? here's what you know about mr. shulman: he was brilliant. one word, brilliant. he taught himself how to fly airplanes at the age of 14. he taught himself how to build radios and tvs. he told us that amusing anecdote of how everybody in the neighborhood thought it was so funny to hear a young jewish child reciting mass in latin. he taught himself how to speak french and italian. he built businesses with thousands of employees, and most saliently, for our purposes, he quit smoking by taking the cigarette out of his mouth, throwing it on the ground, and he taught himself how to break horses. harvey told us: we used to go up and mr. shulman lived a big life. he made looking at yvonne and saying: i'll never smoke again. he was a very capable man. but dr. -- mr. shulman made his choices. he chose how to live. here's what harvey told us about what type of man mr. shulman was. that is a picture of harvey and mr. shulman beside the plane. turn it upside-down and laugh, get it totally out of control, and we used to laugh, and he would fly and practice landings in it. his choices. he chose to fly. he chose to do aero stunts. he chose to ride his motorcycle and drive his boats and go skiing and everything else he wanted to do. the benefits of doing those things, and he made his own choices, and he did the same thing about cigarettes. there was nothing special about the way mr. shulman quit, no counseling, no medication, no treatment of any kind. he just decided: i'm committed to quitting, looked yvonne in the eye, gave her the commitment, and that is what he did, he weighed those choices and then risked as dr. proctor explained to you, by and he could have done it at any time. and what we know is that while he was continuing to smoke, millions and millions and millions of americans made the other decision, and that was to quit. 1965, one year after the surgeon general -- excuse me, after the surgeon general's report came out, 17 million americans that smoked had quit. now here's an interesting statistic. you have heard over and over -- you have been shown that ftc report over and over from 1966 that says that warnings are not effective. of course, only two years -- it was only right after the warnings going into effect, did not have time to measure the warning yet, but look at what happened between 1966 and 1970. in the four-year span after the warnings went in effect, 13 million people quit. heaviest rate of quitting before or since in the united states ever. ftc report, that the warnings were not effective when millions of smokers were running for the door and yet you are being told, based on some dr. proctor told you this was the you know that mr. shulman was not an in fear of their lives, as dr. proctor explained to you. so to sum up this class membership issue, you know that the plaintiff failed to prove to you that mr. shulman even had a disease caused by smoking. involuntary addicted smoker. he quit. he quit 40 years ago, the first time he went 24 hours without a cigarette and he never relapsed. and you have been told -- the evidence has demonstrated absolutely clearly that mr. shulman, like everything else in his life, mr. shulman was a master of his life. there is no doubt about that. mr. shulman smoked when he wanted to smoke, and mr. shulman quit when he wanted to quit, and the plaintiffs have not been able to prove to you that mr. shulman has a disease that was caused by his addiction to smoking. and so when you go to your verdict form, i suggest that, although one x is enough, one x is enough, one x, you go home, for each disease. should be three x's on each disease line on the all the evidence in the case that there no medical causation, no addiction, no i'm going to go to questions 4 and 5 on verdict form, not literally. when you put one down, that is all you have to do when you fill it out, but for three different reasons there should be an x on that verdict form, for bladder cancer, cad, and copd. addiction/causation, and later mr. brenner is going to talk with you about whether or not plaintiffs have even fulfilled their residency requirement, but i'll leave that to him. your verdict form, the concealment question, whether mr. shulman developed a smoking-related disease because the dangers and addictive properties of smoking were concealed from him. on fraud and concealment in your instructions: the issue for your determination on plaintiff's fraudulent concealment claim is as to each defendant, whether plaintiff reasonably relied to his detriment on any statement made by each defendant that intentionally omitted material information concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes, and if so, whether such reliance was a legal cause of injury here's the instruction that you will see plaintiffs have taken on the burden of the trouble is, and i alluded to this and you will have a subsequent instruction to mr. shulman. that defines for you material information. it says: material information is information that is of such importance that the plaintiff would not have acted as he did but for the concealment or omission of information. trying to prove to you that the concealment or agreement to conceal of material information has been linked to mr. shulman's engle qualifying disease. early on, you cannot injure somebody by concealing information from them that they already know. if they already know it, you cannot conceal it from them. specifically. this is a very interesting part of the case. mr. shulman developed bladder cancer because the defendants had information about bladder cancer that they concealed from mr. shulman. so i asked dr. proctor about it: did it let us talk about bladder cancer the plaintiffs are claiming that (video clip played as follows:) q. with respect to bladder cancer and a. that is correct, yeah. (video clip ended.) the companies did not have any happen? did the defendants conceal information about bladder cancer? smoking evolving to bladder cancer, none of these tobacco companies had any information that the public health community did not already have, correct? information -- i approach? sidebar:) judge. you get back up there. line. i mean -- you will cover that. mr. furr: i did not cut it off. the court: when you get up there, mr. schlesinger: excuse me, judge, may (the following discussion was held mr. schlesinger: he cut off the answer, the court: well, you will cover that when mr. schlesinger: well, i mean page and the bailiff: the jurors need to use the mr. schlesinger: i did not mean to walk mr. schlesinger: okay. mr. furr: what am i on, your honor? the court: you are an hour and 32 mr. furr: thank you. (the following discussion was held minutes thus far. sidebar:) restroom. away, judge. i thought we were done. into it. on your part? mr. furr: yes. the court: okay. so let us go ahead and give the jurors a break now then. i was going to break the -- when you guys were breaking, but if they need a break now, we will do it now. minutes in between. mr. furr: i just asked about time. the court: he asked how much time. mr. schlesinger: oh, okay. the court: he is an hour and 32 minutes on your part, you still have some more mr. brenner: i just need about two mr. furr: he is going to take a break mr. brenner: i know, but i cannot do the court: because he still has more on the court: i'm sorry. mr. brenner: i just need about two mr. furr: yes. the court: all right. ladies and minutes in between to switch computers. now. that yet. his portion. gentlemen, we will give you a recess. do not discuss this case among yourselves. do not discuss it with anybody else. do not use any electronic devices about it. do not do any independent research or investigation. thank you. the medicals or no? have not i? mr. brenner: i was just trying to do that before i close. it is hard to close without (jury exited courtroom at 3:30 p.m.) mr. furr: are we in recess, your honor? the court: yes. mr. brenner: any chance you got through the court: i've been here with you, the court: you think i'm going to be mr. brenner: it is really -- it is really (recess taken from 3:31 p.m. to 3:46 the court: i do not know that that is mr. brenner: okay. the court: we will see. mr. gdanski: and that other document knowing what is in evidence. able to go through this before you -- five group -- that is what i was trying to tell you. it is like six stacks of paper. they are all in groups, but -- possible. that is to come in? p.m.) the bailiff: all rise. come to order. court is back in session. i'm leaving again, but i ran in real quick. the evening? take my lunch break. because things move a million miles an hour, that the court: i got it. mr. gdanski: just real fast, just the court: okay. you are leaving for the bailiff: no, no, no, i'm going to the court: i'm -- i'm aware that -- of let us go. you guys should have -- should have done mr. gdanski: we anticipate using it. mr. brenner: they are not in evidence. the court: if they are not in evidence, one document that we have pending to come into evidence -- these things, but you guys have given me this stuff at the last minute. i'll do the best i can. this stuff a lot easier. they are your fault, not mine. in the restroom. courtroom. thank you. gentlemen. the trial, though. we will take a step back. home stretch. a very telling moment in the bailiff: judge, we still have one the court: all right. the bailiff: jurors entering the (jury entered courtroom at 3:48 p.m.) the court: all right. have a seat. you may proceed. mr. furr: welcome back, ladies and the plaintiffs have claimed that mr. shulman developed bladder cancer because information about the dangers of smoking were concealed from him, but as dr. proctor just told you, the -- the tobacco companies did not have any information about bladder cancer that was not already possessed by the public health. and you saw dr. proctor up here seven days, seven days of generic testimony, and not only did he not talk about mr. shulman, he did not talk about bladder cancer. seven days of generic testimony, and dr. proctor did not discuss one tobacco company document that mentions bladder cancer. he did not show you a single statement about bladder cancer by a tobacco company spokesperson. anybody denying that smoking causes bladder cancer, and as a result, on the evidentiary record that you have before you, there is zero evidence that mr. shulman relied on tobacco company statements about bladder cancer. it is just not there. the evidence put on for you. he did not show you a single statement by inexplicably, it simply was not part of more broadly, i want to look at this issue a little more closely about whether mr. shulman developed any smoking-related disease because the dangers and addictive properties of smoking were not known to him. i'm not going to review what we have already looked at, but i will remind you what dr. proctor's testimony was about how prevalent and powerful and impactful the evidence was in the mid 1950s. dr. proctor told you that the health news scared millions of people into quitting in the early 1950s, that they were fleeing from cigarettes, fearing for their lives, fearing for their lives. people started fearing for their lives. scared millions of people. smoking, started cutting down, quitting, and he told me on cross-examination that quitting was driven by people's fears and concerns about the dangers of smoking. that mr. shulman got the message. specifically. you have an instruction in your i want to talk to you about the warnings the message was out there, and you know millions of people quit, started you heard that congress determined package about the warning labels that appeared on packages of cigarettes. and you will see in that instruction that, notwithstanding all the sideways attacks that have been made on what the warning labels said after 1969, you will see that, as a matter of law, the defendants had no obligation to place any additional warnings in their packages and advertisements. that is federal law. those warnings were sufficient as a matter of law and cannot be challenged. the size, the location, the language of the warning. you were shown the warnings that mr. shulman would have been exposed to when he was smoking: caution: cigarette smoking may be hazardous to your health, and: warning, the surgeon general has determined that cigarette smoking is dangerous to your health. every package of cigarettes that mr. shulman would have picked up after 1966 had one of these warnings. every advertisement that he was seeing after 1971 had one of these warnings. and as dr. proctor freely conceded, and mr. shulman told us that he saw (video clip played as follows:) a. please try to understand me, okay, i was a. i do not remember when, but they were on q. okay. and what did you do when you a. yes. q. okay. and do you remember your sons those warnings, and this is how he felt about them. q. did there come a point in time when you learned about the warnings, that -- that caution warning coming on the cigarette packs? even pointing that out to you? me constantly about it. started hearing about caution -- you remember the caution label said: caution: it may be hazardous to your health. what did you think when you heard that? at a point in my life where i thought nothing could hurt me, nothing. there was not anything damaging, so i defied the warning and so forth, and i think that -- that is what happened. mr. hammer. you could probably tell by listening to the voice who asked that question. (video clip concluded.) that was testimony elicited by with respect to the warnings, he is not being criticized for that in other words, he decided to smoke mr. shulman did say he did not see them. he did not say he did not understand them. he did not say he did not believe them. he said at that stage in his life, as a 46-year-old healthy man, he simply did not believe that anything could hurt him. nothing could hurt him, so he took his chances and continued smoking. and as he said it, as he was trying to explain, he said: i defied the law. notwithstanding the warning that he was given. he had every right to make that choice. choice, but if that choice and the consequences of that choice are his responsibility, because responsibility for your choices is what comes with freedom of choice in this country. i showed this to you once before. it was back when we did not have too good of sound quality going on before lunch, so i'm going to show you one clip again. you think about questions 4 and 5 on your verdict form, about whether mr. shulman was hurt and and, again, i submit to you that when (video clip played.) a. yes, that is true. here is what the evidence was. (video clip concluded.) mr. furr: that is true, and he said developed disease because he did not know that smoking was dangerous or addictive, you do not have to look any farther than this single question and answer that mr. shulman gave us. q. so from the 1940s on, while you smoked, all the people around you, your family members, were warning you that you should quit smoking because it was bad for your health, were not they? that is true from the 1940s on. evidence with respect to mr. shulman relying on statements made by tobacco companies or by organizations that represented tobacco companies? mr. shulman never heard or relied upon the frank statement or a ctr statement or a tirc statement or a tobacco institute statement or ti, tobacco institute, press release or tobacco industry white papers or tobacco industry interviews or statements or tobacco company statements about smoking and health or tobacco company statements on the other hand, what was plaintiff's that is the list of all the conduct that about smoking and addiction. dr. proctor spent seven days talking with you about as part -- as the activities of the tobacco companies. but they never linked it. they never connected it to mr. shulman's injury. they had the conduct. they had mr. shulman's injury. they never provided you the chain-links in between to link up that conduct with mr. shulman's injuries. it is just not in the record before you. the record before you is very clear that mr. shulman knew that smoking was dangerous in the '30s. think about that. i mean, we are talking about 75 years ago. 75 years ago, mr. shulman knew that smoking -- 85 -- i'm sorry. i got the math wrong. 85 years ago, he knew that -- addicted in the '30s. he warned his sons that smoking was dangerous and addictive. and all these times that his son or his wife would confront him with information about the dangers and addictive properties of cigarettes, he never disputed any of that. he never disputed any of that. you simply cannot injure someone by they did not provide to you the evidence that is your concealment question. okay. the next question is whether concealing information from them that they already know and believe. to link up the engle findings with an engle qualifying disease, and, therefore, when you go to the verdict form, the answer to question 4 -- this should be for all the companies -- there should be a "no" for each of the companies on question 4. mr. shulman was injured by an agreement to conceal, an agreement to conceal. he was not injured by concealment, then some abstract agreement to conceal could not have been the cause of his injury. if the concealment did not injure him, the agreement to conceal could not have injured him. that is the first point. case that plaintiffs attempted to put before you, because during his -- during his closing, mr. schlesinger said that there was an engle finding about an agreement to conceal information and it is probably pretty obvious, but if but let us look a little closer at the moreover, the court's instructions please, when you get back to the jury related to the marketing of filtered cigarettes, the marketing of filtered cigarettes. room, look at your instructions. look at the engle findings. i promise you there is no engle finding about the marketing of filtered cigarettes. it is simply not there. define the findings. the court tells you what the findings are. the lawyers continue cannot tell you what the findings were. we -- we cannot read the minds of the engle jurors. the finding -- the findings mean only what they say and say what they mean. that is the law. with respect to filtered cigarettes. that the tobacco companies never said that filtered cigarettes were safe or safer, never said it. you can look at all those ads that you have in evidence. you will not find a filtered cigarette advertisements saying that filtered cigarettes are safe or any safer. now but there is more about this issue first is dr. proctor freely admitted notwithstanding that we are all sitting moreover, the filtered cigarettes and the ads after 1971 always carried exactly the same health warnings as all other cigarettes, as all other cigarettes. now with respect to this agreement to conceal, here's what the evidence was again from dr. proctor. here this table together in this lawsuit, rj reynolds, philip morris, and liggett are competitors, there is nothing they like better than taking customers from each other. they are business competitors. told you that reynolds, philip morris, and liggett never conspired to market filtered cigarettes, never conspired to market filtered cigarettes because that was a competitive activity. they were not working together on their marketing plans. customers with their marketing plans. no conspiracy. respect to whether rj reynolds made fraudulent statements about filtered cigarettes in his most importantly, though, dr. proctor they were trying to take each other's and finally, dr. proctor admitted with and, finally, with respect to rj he stopped smoking lucky strikes in advertisements, he admitted in cross-examination that he had seen internal documents in rj reynolds indicating that the scientists at reynolds believed that filtered cigarettes were better for health. reynolds, whom i represent, again, mr. shulman never smoked a filtered cigarette made by rj reynolds. 1960 -- before 1960, he told us, when he switched to filtered cigarettes. ladies and gentlemen, that the only possible answer for rj reynolds on question 5 has to be a no. it just simply has to be a no. now i am obligated to discuss some other issues with you that i do not think you should ever reach. defense on class membership, but if you reach these issues, i'm obligated to discuss with you that if you ever get here, some thoughts about how you might consider the issues of how to allocate fault and damages. so i'm briefly going to so when you go to question 5, i submit, there should be a verdict for the the first thing to understand, you will address those. see this in the instructions, is that the assignment of fault relates only to actions that were a legal cause of mr. shulman's diseases. no matter what you might think about some of the actions of the tobacco companies and how wrong headed and bad you may think those actions were, if those actions have not been linked up to mr. shulman's disease, they cannot be considered by you as a matter of law when you determine what amount of fault to assign to the companies. same principle stated another way, the defendants cannot be assigned fault for actions that were not a legal cause of mr. shulman's disease. this instruction earlier, the engle findings themselves do not establish, do not establish that the defendants are at fault for mr. shulman's disease. proof. the engle findings do not do that job for them. that is what they had to do here with the and finally, you will see, we looked at for example, this morning how did he prove that? he just pulled next, there is no presumption that the defendants were at fault. the defendants' fault starts at zero. the plaintiff has the burden to prove to you each percentage point of fault, each percentage point of fault. mr. schlesinger suggested to you that rj reynolds was 35 percent at fault. that number out of the air. they have have to prove to you one percent, two percent, three percent. they have to prove that to you. this, my time is short. you know if there is one fact in this case, you know that mr. shulman knew smoking was addictive and knew smoking was dangerous and he knew it very early going all the way back to the 1930s. comparative fault question, this is the way it should be looked at: the only legal cause of any smoking-related disease that mr. shulman got, if you think he got one, was his choice to smoke in the face of consistent, repeated warnings -- and we have talked already, i will not review so i suggest that when you get to this mr. schlesinger: objection, judge. i the court: uh-huh. (the following discussion was held apologize. may i approach? sidebar:) mr. schlesinger: i'm sorry, judge, but that is -- that is inserting, it is conflating class membership and comparative -- and comparative fault, which is exactly what you said not to do. it violates the instructions. it is not closing argument. it is conflating fault and class membership. he said. objection. court:) mr. furr: may i proceed, your honor? the court: yes. mr. furr: as i was saying, if you find that mr. shulman had a smoking-related disease and if you get to this question, the only legal cause of any smoking-related disease was his choice to smoke in the face of consistent, repeated warnings the court: um, overruled. (the sidebar discussion was concluded if you read it, you will see. read what mr. furr: i do not even understand the said differently, if he had a let us talk about damages. the most that started in the 1930s and continued throughout his marriage to mrs. shulman. smoking-related disease, only mr. shulman could have made the choice to stop smoking, as dr. seidman told you during his testimony. only the smoker can make the choice to stop. no one can make it for him. important principle in damages in your instruction is this: any damages must be fair and just in light of the evidence, fair and just in light of the evidence. to you each and every dollar of damage, each and every dollar of damage. about the evidence before you with respect to even if you believe, if you determine that bladder cancer, copd, and cad that mr. shulman had were all caused by smoking, even if you find that, i want to talk with you with what the evidence is about how that affected mr. shulman. and i'm not disparaging mr. shulman in any way or trying to minimize the impact of those again, plaintiff has the burden to prove i want to talk with you a little bit the first fact, with respect to bladder copd, dr. farber, mr. shulman has never diseases on him. i'm simply going to review the facts before you to remind you of what the facts are. cancer from dr. soloway and dr. bernsley, mr. shulman's cancer was cured in 1995, 20 years ago. he is never had a recurrence. effectively one can say he is cured and dr. bernsley said: i am impressed with how well he is doing. been treated for copd. mr. shulman has never taken any medications for copd. mr. shulman had no symptoms of copd. and during -- during this trial, not at the beginning of trial, but during the trial, you saw mr. shulman begin appearing in the courtroom with an oxygen tank. that, but what you did not get, what the plaintiffs did not bring to you was any explanation as to why he has that oxygen tank. they had the opportunity to put on an expert witness, or even mr. shulman, to explain when he acquired that oxygen, how he acquired that and i'm not being critical of him for i'm not criticizing him for having oxygen, why he was using it, what symptoms it was being used to treat, whether it was related to any smoking-related disease. they did not put that in front of you. that tank, not in any way, but the presence of that tank means nothing for your deliberations because you were not given any information about any of those issues related to that tank. let us look at cad. here's what dr. dan told you about his cad. mr. shulman never had any symptoms of coronary artery disease before 2003. he had successful bypass surgery in 2003, and he has not had a heart attack or restenosis or surgical intervention since 2003. revealing facts in this case with respect to how his disease has affected mr. shulman was this medical record from dr. bernsley that is in evidence. his medical problems -- he is going to see a urologist. the doctor asked him: tell me how bad your problems are on a scale of one to ten with on november 1st, 2002, mr. shulman rated and perhaps maybe one of the most i do not have time to go through them ten being the most severe, circle the number that best describes the problem. mr. shulman circled one. just the facts. that is how he described his medical problems to his doctor outside of litigation. but you saw a lot of medical records that we cross-examined dr. bernsley and dr. soloway on. all, but from 1995 to 2014, what you consistently see is mr. shulman is doing well, he appears well, he is healing well, he is extremely well overall, he is doing very well for his age of 91, he is doing extremely well. one thing we can all agree on is mr. shulman is extraordinary for a 94-year-old man and a 94-year-old man who is going to turn 95 next week. he is done extraordinarily well in his life. asked you for $8 million, $8 million, and then in the same breath, mr. schlesinger said: or maybe $500,000, maybe $500,000. that would be okay too. $8 million or maybe $500,000. and perhaps dr. soloway did say it best, notwithstanding that, the plaintiffs their request for $8 million defies last issue, if you get to this issue, as the bottom line is that nobody should be common sense. it just defies common sense. no basis for it in the record, especially when you retract it in the same breath: $500,000 would be okay too. rewarded even $500,000 for choosing to smoke for over 40 years while your wife and children and friends and coworkers and everybody in your life was telling you: stop, stop, stop, and protect your health. i think you know, the last issue on the verdict form is plaintiffs have asked you to find that they are entitled to come back next week and have another mini trial that will last two to three days. three more days, and ask you to award them punitive damages over and above, over and above what you decide compensates mr. shulman, if you decide to compensate him. trial. so i've got to talk about that. the first thing you need to know is that the last question has a different burden of proof. they want to come back next week, two to they want to come back and have another it is called clear and convincing evidence. and it is evidence that is precise, explicit, lacking confusion and of such weight that it produces a firm belief of conviction, without hesitation. in other words, the highest burden you can have in a civil trial. they have to prove to you a higher burden in order to bring you back here next week. just a couple things for you to think about, i'm not going to go through these in any detail, although i will talk about this one. the other instruction you are going to see is that the engle -- in determining whether punitive damages may be warranted, that is that final question, you may not consider in any way the findings regarding defendants' conduct from the prior lawsuit. considered by you when determining whether or not to award punitive damages. this very quickly, with respect to the question of not compensation. dr. proctor, i'm going to go through so the engle findings cannot be but what did -- on top of that, the he told you about the council for but you heard that the council for defendants need to be punished with a civil fine, dr. proctor told you that the defendants spent a fortune making 50 to 100 different modifications of cigarettes to try to make them less hazardous. tobacco research. they call it leakage. they call it leakage. tobacco researched funded and published thousands and thousands of high quality studies, including by researchers that became nobel prize winners and that they funded research concluding that smoking causes addiction, copd, and lung cancer. with respect to reynolds, dr. proctor talked to you about the premier cigarette, the heat but not burn technology. reynolds spent a billion dollars, a billion dollars trying to make a safer cigarette from the early 18- -- 1980s to 1990s. dr. proctor admitted less risky for lung cancer, but consumers rejected it. and interestingly, dr. seidman told you that, in fact, reynolds had spent $40 million to buy a company that manufactures nicotine gum that is used to help smokers quit. reynolds is trying to help smokers quit, and they want you to i would like to be robert duval, but i'm come back and punish us. you have also been told that the fda has regulatory power over the tobacco industry since 2009 and that -- and i'm not wistful about this. not wistful about this, as mr. schlesinger suggested to you. the tobacco-burning cigarette market is in a period of collapse, as dr. proctor told you. smoking prevalence is dropping. it dropped two percent just last year, and that is among adults. it is dropping even faster among youth. plummeted since 1997, down 66 percent since that time, that smoking has been denormalized among youth. smoking is not cool. it is not glamorous. it is not sexy among youth. it is stigmatized. the tobacco issue is under control, under the fda control. smoking has been denormalized. smoking rates are dropping to the floor. there is simply no need for punishment in this case even if you get to that question. none of us need to come back next week for another dr. proctor told you that it has i'll just remind you of a couple three-day trial. i have two minutes. okay. okay. sometimes, after all this, it comes down to something pretty simple, and the simple truth is that smoking is, and has always been, viewed as a choice that each of us as an adult in this great country gets to decide for ourselves, and then take personal responsibility for that choice. things. so the question here, of course, is that when you get to question 8, for all the reasons i just stated, the answer here is no, and whatever the rest of your verdict is, we all get to go home for thanksgiving next week. if you say "yes," we will see you next week. of, really, what do you boil all -- this case all the way down to? you saw this from "see it now", one of the prominent cancer researchers in 1955. he got it right. he got it right. (video clip played as follows:) voice: good evening. this is "see it now" produced by the partnership of friendly and but back to this question, this issue here is dr. hammond reporting on the voice: it is now established, in my murrow. tonight the first of two reports on cigarettes and lung cancer. voice: in 1952, drs. hammond and horn of the american cancer society began an extended study of the smoking habits of american men. results of the first two years. opinion, beyond a reasonable doubt, that cigarette smoking greatly increases the probability of developing lung cancer. in my opinion, people should be warned of the dangers, and they are being warned. what they then want to do, whether they wish to smoke or not, is their own business. it is their own business. out. you saw a clip of harry reasoner discussing the release of that report. smoking and health, the findings of the surgeon general's committee. (video clip concluded.) 1955, they get to make their choice. (video clip played as follows:) voice: this is a cbs news extra on 1964, surgeon general's report comes voice: almost from the moment that cigarette smoking is a significant cause cigarettes were introduced, they were attacked, but the attacks took a new turn ten years ago and culminated in today's report by the surgeon general's committee. this, in summary, is what the committee says: cigarette smoking is a major cause of lung cancer in men, and data on women smokers points the same way. of cancer of the larynx and probably the most important cause of chronic bronchitis. other lung diseases. rate from heart disease, although it is not proven that smoking is the cause. committee says there is no evidence they do any good, but it did not exclude the possibility that an effective filter might be developed. in short, the committee says: if you smoke cigarettes, you increase your chances of dying early. the sooner you start, the more you smoke, the more you inhale, the worse your chances male smokers have a much higher death cigarette smoking may be related to on the question of filters, the in this kind of a country, it comes down and it is now quite clear that no one is are. to you, whether you like it or not. no one is going to forbid an adult to smoke. going to tell him it is good for him either. the decision is his, the decision and the health that may depend on it. this is harry reasoner. good night. (video clip concluded.) choice and personal responsibility, two principles that fit hand in glove with mr. shulman and the way he lived his life and what he taught his family. here's what harvey told us. harvey told us that mr. shulman was a controlled, independent man who believed in responsibility, and he taught his sons responsibility. ladies and gentlemen, you have been very patient with me today. it is been an honor and a privilege to try this case before you. you have given us. the only thing we ask of you is that when you go back there to deliberate, you apply i appreciate all the attentiveness closing statement mr. brenner: five weeks. it is our we started this trial. the plaintiff and i know i do not speak for just any -- livelihoods. and you guys do it as a service, a service to your community and your sense of civic duty. just my client, i speak for all the defendants. i'm sure i speak for the plaintiff and his counsel as well, just -- just a simple thank you. your commitment has been -- has been fantastic. had two really lengthy witnesses. and one was dr. proctor. i'm going to talk a little bit about mr. --dr. proctor. going to get into a whole tit for tat with dr. proctor about things he said, but i will touch a little bit about them. but his whole testimony was every smoker is the same, right, because what he does, and you saw it, is he makes sure that he never knows anything about the smoker. that did not work so well. so now he makes sure he knows nothing about the smoker so whatever you ask and mr. furr talked a lot about him. but i promised you in opening i was not he used to do it, and then he realized just think about that when you him about why his opinion does not apply to, in this case, mr. shulman, he says: i do not know. so why does he do that? why -- the man makes literally millions of dollars, literally millions of dollars, and he does not do the simple step to see if what he is talking about has any connection to the plaintiff in the case. evaluate dr. proctor's testimony and how it fits into the case. but dr. seidman, i did not think i'd start off my closing with -- agreeing with the plaintiff's expert, but i do. this was -- he comes in here and this was one of his first answers, one of the first things he told you. all smokers are not alike. some are like apples, and some are like oranges. time with you talking about, is how does all this fit in with mr. shulman? the plaintiff has made sure you know about the generic case about smokers in general and the you know all about the generic smoker. he says: not all smokers -- he says: and your job, as mr. furr spent some 1 tobacco companies. but your job, as mr. furr pointed out, is to go through the verdict form and figure out if any of it applies to mr. shulman. and mr. furr explained it really does not. it really does not. he is an extraordinary man for lots of reasons. mr. furr told you i am going to cover the issue of residency, so let us get into that first. please, mr. witt -- oh, we have a change in clicking. first of all, this is a question on the verdict form. i think you all still have your copies. it is fair to say that the plaintiff's treatment of this issue in their closing argument was -- was one of dismissiveness, as if it does not exist. promised to essentially mock whatever i say later. but for an issue that does not really exist, it is the second question on the verdict form. it is absolutely part of the engle class okay. thank you. all right. so it is fair to say that -- so you can bring up the next slide, in fact, i think mr. schlesinger the engle class is specifically limited and you are going to have to decide what membership definition. to florida residents, no doubt about it. mr. schlesinger showed it to you. that means here for mr. shulman, but we spent a lot of time litigating an issue that the plaintiff says does not matter. and what do i mean by that? think about the testimony of both harvey shulman and his father. the condo we bought in 1983 was a permanent residency. kept saying it. any -- it was almost any -- it was a permanent resident. we meant to be a permanent resident. bit. please. this is the timeline of robert shulman, of mr. shulman's life. no dispute here. here's what he is. they could not get that out fast enough. okay. let us talk about that a little they could not say it enough to you: you can bring up the next timeline, the shulmans, mr. and mrs. shulman, are we are going to talk about that home, lifelong new englanders. okay? they were born in the boston area. they lived there exclusively from 1920, in the case of mr. shulman, until 1979. successful man. and in 1979, he sells his house in boston, in winthrop, and at the same time, he buys a home in maine. but remember when we talked about the home, how the plaintiffs kept insisting that i call it a cabin as if to indicate to you that it was really this little cabin? well, they buy -- and we will talk about what it really is, but they buy the home in maine because they want to be near their son, harvey. harvey also has a home in maine. an apartment, first in winthrop and then in a town called malden, i think he said, in the boston area. he is still working at the time. they are still in new england, no doubt about it. and they are going back and forth between new england and -- i mean, excuse me, between maine and boston. and in '79, although mr. shulman keeps he builds up a business, a very in 1983 or shortly before, harvey buys a -- and for the next 14 years, no place in florida. harvey tells you he becomes a snowbird. okay. no doubt about it. harvey gets a snowbirding place. you are from palm beach county. you know what snowbirds are. and mr. shulman and his wife first come to stay with harvey a couple times, and then they buy a condominium, a one-bedroom condominium in lighthouse point. question about it, they have, whatever it is, the one-bedroom condo in lighthouse point and they have the cabin or home in maine. no one is disputing that. the question for you is, during this period, right? if the -- if the question was: did the shulmans own some property in florida since 1983, no one would be asking you the question on the verdict form. no one is disputing that. that is not the question. time -- approach? and the class cutoff period is 1996. so here is the question: during this mr. hammer: objection. can we the court: stop the time when they (the following discussion was held mr. hammer: judge, the fact that -- the defense is disputing that. that is approach up here. sidebar:) what mr. brenner just said is, no one is disputing that. why it is an issue. if it was a simple issue of they bought a home down here, they had -- they were snowbirds, they could -- the words "no one is disputing." said -- he is telling you what i'm disputing. i'm not disputing that they bought a place in lighthouse point in 1983. there is nothing to strike. this is a nonsense objection. there is nothing to strike. disputing that -- what did you say exactly? mr. brenner: i said: no one is disputing they bought a place in lighthouse point in 1983. i do not understand the objection. the court: what is wrong with that? are the court: well, i could just strike mr. brenner: no, no, no. no, no. i the court: the fact that no one is they are claiming mr. shulman is not a the court: if the question was -- they disputing that they bought one in 1983? mr. hammer: no. no. what the -- what mr. brenner said is: the plaintiffs are making a big deal about this residency. this is their defense, residency. they are claiming that mr. shulman is not a resident. resident. it is usually not even an issue in these cases. they are making it the issue. here's what he said: if the question was: did the shulmans own some property in florida since 1983, no one would be asking you the question on the verdict form. no one is disputing that. the objection, your honor. the court: it is not that they owned -- so he is just saying no one is disputing that they owned property in florida since 1983. for this objection. it is disruptive. the court: that is a correct statement -- mr. hammer: judge, the fact is -- the court: -- is not it? mr. brenner: right. i do not understand mr. brenner: right. there is no basis the court: no, no. all they are saying mr. hammer: that is accurate. mr. brenner: wait. just so mr. hammer mr. brenner: yes. mr. hammer: the fact is if it was not an issue -- it is only an issue because the defense is creating that issue. so to put the burden on the plaintiffs that they are creating this issue is inaccurate. is that no one is disputing that they owned a condo since 1983. is not that an accurate fact? knows -- that are really nonsensical. want to come up again. i do not want to come up again. inappropriate. it is part of their proof of being a class member. court:) the court: so that is overruled. that is overruled. let us try to avoid these are objections mr. brenner: excuse me though. i do not just so mr. hammer knows, it is not the court: all right. let us go. (the sidebar discussion was concluded mr. brenner: as i was saying, no one mr. schlesinger: objection, judge. mr. brenner: your honor, may we no one disputes through the entire time disputes these basic facts. no one disputes that mr. and mrs. shulman bought a one-bedroom condo in 1983 in florida. that they are snowbirds during this time. so the question you have to ask -- and no one disputes that this entire time they have a house in maine. okay? those are the facts. so the question you are going to have to ask at the end of the day is: were they residents of maine who liked to come and spend some time in the winter in florida or were they residents of florida who liked to spend some time in the summer in maine? move to strike. that is not -- that is not a legal question at all. approach? just see the last question. mr. schlesinger: there is no such -- the court: hang on a second. let me overruled. mr. brenner: okay. so that is what you are going to have to ask, and interestingly -- are you okay? yes? okay. interestingly, you got some -- one of you, at the conclusion of mr. shulman's testimony, asked the key question -- because how do you answer that question? you answer that question -- one of the ways you answer that question is: where does -- where does a guy like mr. shulman live? you know about his whole life. is he a guy that is going to live in a little condo? is he going to live -- what makes sense? and someone asked -- i do not know who. someone asked: what was the size of the house in maine, or the cabin in maine, and what was the size of the florida condo, in 1997, when these transactions take place? mr. shulman said the one-bedroom condo was 1500 square feet. that is what he said. i do not have the records on the condo. i cannot say. that is what -- that is his memory of it. if that is consistent with what you-all know about one-bedroom condos in communities that great question. great question. we can look at what harvey said about on the home in maine, or the cabin in dot the landscape of broward and palm beach county, that is for your determination. it. harvey described it as a very small one-bedroom condo. maine, mr. shulman said -- he said it was 15 feet by 18 to 20 feet. so, at the maximum, he says the thing in maine is 300 total square feet. that is what he is telling you. that is what he tell -- that is what he remembered, 300 square feet. remembers. a lot of what i'm going to tell you today, i think we need to look at the actual records. mr. shulman, as you -- as counsel has already brought out, medical records are brought out, he -- he is having memory loss, but let us look at what the records say, because they are in evidence, about the cabin in maine. the cabin in maine, according to mr. shulman, is on a lake big enough for him to fly, land, take next slide. the cabin in maine is on 2.39 acres. i do not think mr. shulman really it is a lake big enough that you can off his own -- i call it a puddle jumper, sea plane. i think puddle jumper is a wrong word. take off and land a plane. it is on 2.4 acres, 2.39 acres. let us go to the next one. this was -- if you recall, i brought it up. i was constantly being told: do not call it a cabin. do not call it a cabin. do not call it a cabin. do not call it a cabin -- i mean: do not call it a house. it is a cabin. it is a cabin. it is a cabin. this is what mr. shulman told us. he actually remodeled it. we talked about it. he remodeled it with his son. it was not a cabin. okay. it just was not. lifelong new englanders. okay. so i want to be totally up front with you. this is a picture of the home, but it is taken in 2004. okay. i cannot tell you what it looked like exactly in 1997. this is a picture of the home in 2004. next. okay. this is the best record we have, they loved this place. they are mr. shulman -- mr. shulman said: we again, if i could, i would. if i could there was a remodel in 2002. i cannot tell you what happened in that remodel. i do not know. i can only tell you the evidence we have. it is 2004. there is a picture of it. the square footage of it in 2004 is 5,700 -- just under 5,700 square feet. tell you exactly what it was like in 1997, i would. i cannot. this was not a little cabin in maine. this was the shulmans' home. could not even get there until july 4th ever. you will see the medical records in evidence. they were there plenty before july 4th every year, every single year, because they split their time. and you have to answer that question: which one was their permanent home? and let us go back to the timeline. the other thing we know is that at least the shulmans, when did -- they sell their home in maine. at that point, they decide that the one-bedroom condo is not something they can live in year-round, and they buy the house they live in now, the house in delray beach. and we did ask mr. shulman about this, you sell the house in maine, the yeah, i remember that. we just had to and this is the question you are going to well, you then decide that you are going what his thoughts were about what happened in 1997 when they left maine, and let us just walk through that real quick. remodeled cabin. this is me asking questions, i believe. to purchase a new home in florida. do you remember that? this is in 1997. make florida our permanent home. have to answer because if they do not become permanent residents of florida until 1997, then the engle class is not for them. lives -- mr. shulman is 77 -- actually he is probably 76, about to turn 77, that is the first time in their lives that the shulmans spend year-round in florida. those are the facts. now let me give you one more fact. another thing you may look at other than the size of the home or things like that is, how did the shulmans feel about florida? just the next slide, please. and in 1997, for the first time in their 1 mr. shulman told you in '83 they were committed. florida was the place they wanted to be, right? 1983, florida was their home. they loved it here. this is where they wanted to be. well, in 1995, mr. shulman is diagnosed with bladder cancer, we know that, in maine, and we have heard about this record a bunch of times. after his surgery, he is then being evaluated for potential chemotherapy. and what happened is, is that it is in the fall period -- the surgery was in august -- into the october period. and he is meeting with the doctors in maine about his chemo- -- the potential chemotherapy. usually goes down to florida. so he is talking to the doctors about where he should start chemotherapy. he ends up not getting chemotherapy. and i just want you to see one other record. this is mr. shulman with his doctors talking about florida, having to go down a little earlier. they are talking about the transfer of care, and mr. shulman says he hates florida. okay? but he knows that in the winter, he let us go back to the verdict form there is a second part of this where it so you have to determine, in the class period, if mr. shulman was someone who lived in florida and just spent some time in maine or lived in maine and spent time in florida. and that will be for you to decide. question on the next slide, please. starts, where the disease manifests. did it manifest when he was in florida, when he was a resident of it? i think it is subsumed in the first question, but just in case anyone is wondering where are the diseases that he is claiming, where was he when he got them, we can just pick through that very quickly. next slide. this is 6-20-95. this says hematuria. that is blood in the urine. he is in maine. this is what ultimately -- you can go to the next slide. in his urine. this leads ultimately to his bladder cancer. medical center. this is the next month. noticed blood you can go to the next slide. maine this ultimately leads to his bladder this is after he already has bladder cancer diagnosis. no question about that. now the plaintiff has tried to address this issue of the blood in the urine first being perhaps found in florida. can you go to the next slide? and let me tell you what they are relying on. i just want you to have all the facts. this is december 1995. cancer. this is when he is come down to dr. benedetto. this is the chemotherapy evaluation. and dr. benedetto says that a year and a half prior, he had had blood in the urine and was told it was related to bicycle riding, nothing to do with bladder cancer. at least that is what everyone thought at the time. when he had blood in the urine. we know it is a year and a half before christmastime, december 1995, which would take you to june of 1994. shulmans' life between 1983 and 1987, they are summering in maine, and you will see that in the and, in fact, we do not know where he was if it was like every other year in the 1 medical records. we just do not have the '94 medical records, through no fault of the plaintiff, through no fault of the defendant. it does not exist. i cannot tell you where it was. i can tell you where he was. i can just tell you that it had to do with bicycle riding, at least that is what they thought at the time, and that at least a month would work out that he is in maine at the time. you, you know the defense position is mr. shulman never had copd, but the -- the plaintiff keeps going to this record that says he had copd. that is also in maine. he did have it, the first time he -- he -- he says he learned about it would have been in maine. maine. the next record. coronary artery disease, again we think the next record. you know that -- as mr. furr said to we do not believe he ever had copd. if the next record, please. and he says that, he says he is told in they showed some records where next question [sic]. october 1995, also in maine. so that -- that is the evidence you are the record is pretty clear he gets it in 2003, but they showed, dr. wohlgelernter -- wohlgelernter -- i should say dr. dan. there is -- here it is a question as to cad from 1995, again, also in maine. going to have on the issue of residency and, again, it comes down to really what were the shulmans? maine residents who liked to escape the winter and come to florida or vice versa, florida residents who liked to escape the winter -- florida residents who liked to escape the summer and go to maine. florida. i -- i suggest to you that when you get to question 2 on your verdict form, because of these facts -- which i said to you, the facts are undisputed. you just have to determine what to do with them. no one likes to escape the winter in okay. that is on the issue of residency. i suggest to you that mr. shulman has now i just have to say one more thing the purpose of the engle class, in now proven to you that he was a resident of florida at the time his disease manifested, either the bladder cancer, coronary artery disease, or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. about this, and mr. schlesinger essentially called this defense a technicality. okay. as mr. furr said to you, we have both -- we have full faith that you will go back and follow the instructions and follow the law -- follow the law. you. it is not a technicality. it is what the florida courts have determined is what the purpose of the engle class is for. addition to the other elements mr. furr talked about, is for florida residents. no one -- no one disputes that. so it is not a technicality. the plaintiff's proof, which they have not been able to prove in this case. bit about dr. proctor because mr. schlesinger it is -- it is a -- it is an element of and where the facts take you, they take okay. let me segue into just a little 1 brought up a couple things. dr. proctor said a few things that were -- and i just want to give you an example of each -- that were misleading, false, and irrelevant. i'm going to give you an example just to show you how clearly these things are. the first one is misleading, and mr. schlesinger did this -- brought the same testimony up. do not bring the testimony up. mr. schlesinger said in his closing that ammonia made cigarettes more addictive, and that is what dr. proctor said. they were all over that. it is free-basing. it is potency. it is kick. it sounds really bad. it does sound really bad if that -- like the ammonia makes it this -- this super-addictive thing. and then we just asked dr. proctor the simple question. let us go. this is -- and you saw impeachment. what this is, just so you can understand the slide, this is me reading back to dr. proctor his testimony from either a prior deposition or a prior trial. so we -- we listened to six days of it, he was asked: when you say more and then what i said to him: did i okay. and i got through reading the that is correct. in fact, if you added potent, talking about ammonia, you are not saying more addictive, right? ammonia to a traditional cigarette, it would actually make it less addictive. answer. so adding ammonia, not only does it not make it more addictive, as plaintiff suggested to you, it actually makes it less addictive. read that correctly? instead of just saying yes, he said: yeah, that is exactly what i just said, as if he had been saying that for six days. as if the message about ammonia is he was trying to tell you for six days: you have got to know about this ammonia thing. it is really great to put it in, it makes it less addictive, as if that was the message he was communicating to the jury. these folks should be applauded for adding ammonia to their cigarettes because it makes it less addictive. so when he gets caught, he says: yeah, that is what i've been saying all long. if you add it to a cigarette, it would actually make it less that is another place where second, let us give an example of false this is from 1965, and it is a -- a let us go to the next document. mr. schlesinger bought up this document. addictive, or it could make it less addictive. dr. proctor's testimony is entirely misleading and inappropriate. why is he doing that? testimony. and dr. proctor knows all this, because when you got -- when you cross-examine him, he usually admits it. he brought it up in his closing argument. he said -- i forgot if he called him mr. tamol or dr. tamol or what he called him. document from -- it appears from a -- one page from a lab notebook from a philip morris employee. and this was the smoking gun. it says that: we are only going to make enough cigarettes to keep smokers hooked. you all about that. yeah, this is terrible, they are only making -- they are only going to make cigarettes with enough nicotine to cig- -- keep smokers hooked. but dr. proctor knows what is coming when and dr. proctor, you know, he is telling i said: you believe that the next he says that. let us go to the next page. he knows that philip morris made three separate brands of cigarettes that not only did not have enough nicotine to keep smokers hooked, he, himself, describes it not only as -- i said they are less addictive. he corrects me. cigarette -- there was three brands, this was just one of them -- which was one of the brands you said was certainly less addictive than traditional cigarettes, correct? addictive. i would say it is nonaddictive. it could not create or sustain addiction. too low -- too little nicotine in the rod. exactly the opposite of the document he shared with you and that plaintiff shared with you in closing today, exact opposite. the document -- they say it says: we will never do it, some guy writing in a notebook. and, in fact, they did do it. my client did do it. okay. the next thing is that -- i do not even remember this. it was like 6:15 at night on like the sixth or seventh day of dr. proctor's and he says: it is not only less 1 testimony, and the plaintiff triumphantly reopened his testimony to examine him about the issue of light cigarettes, as if we had not heard of dr. proctor. so this is in the irrelevant category. mr. shulman, in his entire life, never smoked a light cigarette. from 6:30 until like 8 at night, we talked about light cigarettes with dr. proctor for something mr. shulman never smoked, ever, not philip morris products, not reynolds' products, not liggett products, none of them. never smoked a light cigarette. recall, dr. proctor's proof of this -- remember his big thing was light cigarettes deliver the same tar as regular cigarettes. that was he had seen one study in a philip morris document that said: if five machines smoked a cigarette three -- and they switched from a regular to a light, three will deliver the same amount of tar or something. that was the whole proof. and then i showed him one with the same exact study but with 200, and he said: you know, that was his claim, and his proof of in fact, this was the one, if you so, again, i'm not going to -- i'm not and the next issue i want to talk about i think the one with five is probably more reliable, because it agrees with him. going to -- to bore you going through those studies again, but, again, that is an example of dr. proctor giving you completely irrelevant testimony. just a little bit is -- is filtered cigarettes, and mr. furr covered it a little bit. plaintiff seems to be taking the position here that -- and they even call it -- they call it the filter fraud. is here. let us first go to the -- the instruction. mr. furr showed this to you, or part of it to you. i'm snowing you, i think, the third -- the third paragraph. paragraph that the plaintiff showed that talks about it being in combination with another cause. so there is another paragraph below here, and there is one in between. the tobacco companies did not tell mr. shulman but what the plaintiff is saying is that well, let us talk about what their claim and, by the way, there is another there is no claim, but i just want to something about a filtered cigarette that caused him to act differently essentially. this is what they have to prove. they have to prove there was a statement made. first of all, you -- no one disputes -- mr. furr showed it to you. there is never been a statement that filtered cigarettes are safe or safer from the tobacco companies, never, never. not one that mr. shulman heard, just never. talk to you -- remember when dr. proctor said about filtered cigarettes? i just want to apply it to mr. shulman. here's what he said about filtered cigarettes. one, people only switch to them because they think they are safer, or primarily switch to them because they think they are safer. that is one thing he said. instead of quitting. they mean to quit and then they switched to a filtered cigarette. they are intercepted. three, when they switch, they smoke more. and four, when they switch, they smoke differently. he said, two, people switch to them let us just look at the other things that he switched to please mrs. shulman. she none of those apply to mr. shulman. let us go to the next slide, please. there is two more, please. the next one, please. mr. shulman did say on the stand that he switched because he thought they were safer. that was one of the things that the plaintiff asked him, and he did say. we -- we had to bring out through dr. seidman through mr. shulman's previous testimony. was always on his case, so he said: you know what, honey, i'll switch to a filtered cigarette. he wanted her to stop nagging. from turning yellow, prevent his teeth from turning yellow, to soften the smoke, to remove the hint of bitterness from the smoke. those are the -- the -- the nonhealth reasons that mr. shulman, not what he said here, but what he had said previously about his switch. but let us go to the next slide. first of all, someone asked this, i believe -- someone asked about: did marlboro filtered cigarettes have the same warning label as he thought it would prevent his fingers they say people did not know it was we asked mr. shulman: were you other cigarettes? yes. all cigarettes have the same warning label, mandated by the government, changed in 1966, 1970, 1985, all the same. filtered cigarettes, unfiltered cigarettes, all the same. dangerous. as soon as they knew it was dangerous, they switched. mr. shulman knew it was dangerous since the '30s. intercepted? were you about to quit when he switched to filtered? he said: no, i had no intention of quitting. no intention of quitting was his testimony. increase the amount of cigarettes he smoked when he switched to filters. dr. seidman said he did -- remember this was the one where he said: oh, yeah, he was at two packs. he went way above two packs, and then he showed him mr. shulman's sworn deposition where he never changed at all the amount he smoked. look at the medical records. you will never find and you can look at the medical records. dr. seidman -- mr. shulman did not this whole story of dr. filter -- i said: you have seen no evidence, that he went to -- way above two packs. he is a pack to pack and a quarter, maybe pack and a half a day smoker until the recent -- very recent 2015 records from the memory center, and he did not change the way he smoked cigarettes. dr. proctor -- dr. filter -- dr. proctor said about inhaling deeper and all this stuff, and i asked mr. shulman: you have seen no evidence of that? he said it on direct. dr. seidman, if he ever did that -- if mr. shulman ever did that? and what did he say? he said: well, i extrapolated that he did. and i said: does that mean because some people do, you assume mr. shulman did? and he said: yeah, exactly. filtered cigarettes have no connection to mr. shulman's case. little bit about marlboro cigarettes. philip morris makes marlboro cigarettes. you saw that mr. schlesinger said that the two main brands that mr. shulman smoked were lucky strike and marlboro, and philip morris makes marlboro. so all these things they told you about i want to switch gears and just talk a remember, they told you -- then mr. shulman, when i asked a little so we -- let us go to the next page. that is the ads that they are relying on mr. shulman said: yeah, i switched to marlboro because the ads, they -- they basically screamed safety to me. i said: okay. let us look at the ads. look at the ads you showed. that said filters are safer. bit about it -- you can go to the next slide. i asked him: there was nothing in the ad -- words or statements in the ad that caused you to buy marlboro cigarettes? he said he could not answer. cowboy? mr. shulman used to break horses? interesting guy, a pilot and breaking horses, you know, run the gamut. and he said: yeah, that is what attracted me was the cowboy on the horse. country? i said: you liked the picture of the remember this whole story that and i said: you remember marlboro yes. you remember: come to where the flavor now, mr. shulman did say -- and i'd like yes. so, again, this is a case of shoehorning is? mr. shulman into dr. proctor's story. dr. proctor's story said filters -- advertising about filters said they were safer or connoted safety. these are the ads -- go back one slide, please. these are the ads that mr. shulman told us attracted him to marlboro cigarettes. you will have to make a judgment whether that ad calls out saying filters are safer. to give you the evidence as best i can. mr. shulman did say on direct examination that he switched to marlboros in 1960. that is what he said. and on cross-examination, i -- approximation -- this was from his deposition. can you even approximate when you started smoking marlboros? again, this is before we get into -- you can bring up, i guess, two more now. i asked him: can you give me an the clerk: counsel, 30 minutes has gone mr. brenner: and i asked if he now harvey, younger man, has a to trial. he says: no, i cannot. and i said: do you even recall how old your children were when you started smoking marlboros? he says: no, i cannot. by. remembers whether they were still living in the house at the time he started smoking marlboros, and he says no. completely different memory about marlboro cigarettes. home until 1972, and harvey, by his own description, i have no reason to doubt he was very, very close with his father. i have no reason to doubt it, but pilots -- seem to be a very loving family. i think the evidence is clear that they were a loving family and are a loving family. i think the evidence is clear on that. no one disputes that. and we can go to the next slide, please. we asked harvey because harvey lived at so we asked harvey about when his dad we asked him if his father ever told him mr. schlesinger: excuse me, judge. i we know today -- i think we have gone for started smoking marlboro cigarettes. he said: the first time was after i moved out of the house in 1972. why he smoked marlboro. no. and we asked him: do you know whether marlboro was ever even his primary brand, and he said, no, he does not know. a while, but today it seems now everyone has agreed mr. shulman quit smoking in 1975. so at most, mr. shulman smoked marlboro cigarettes for three years. now mr. furr showed you verdict form question number 3 about product use, and let me just say the following: i do not believe any of the defendants' products caused any -- let it go, but what he believes -- reference -- the jury should disregard the reference to whatever mr. brenner believes or does not believe. that is -- that is of no bearing, and the jury should completely disregard the court: sustained. sustained. the if you get to that question, i would mr. brenner: thank you, your honor. it is the defendants' position that none it and it is stricken from the record. of liggett -- that the smoking of liggett cigarettes, the smoking of reynolds' cigarettes, the smoking of philip morris cigarettes, you know, we do not -- the defense position is that none of those -- none of the smoking caused the disease that mr. shulman is claiming. but i will tell you that there is only two to three years of marlboro smoking, period. suggest that you cannot answer yes for philip morris cigarettes because that was the cigarette he claimed he smoked from philip morris. with you is -- is damages. early in his closing -- he is actually pretty up front about it. he, at first, said: look, this is -- essentially what we are here for is to get to punitive damages, but then he said, as far as compensatory damages, he even said: we are not here for the money. okay. the last topic i want to cover if you can go to -- that is good. mr. schlesinger said yesterday very now i do not know how he got to that well, asking for $8 million is a funny way of expressing that. $8 million is a lot of money. think of it as 80 years of $100,000 a year. number. he just said it. in fact, as mr. furr said, he also said $500,000. i just want to address a couple of the issues of damages, the concrete issues that the plaintiff asked for. one was medical bills. they had mr. shulman on the stand. they put a big binder, remember, and they said: did we meet with you last night and you went through all these bills and they add up to $393,000? and he said: yes. all right. folks, i can tell you this, the medical bills are going to go back. they are going to be less than that big binder. look at those, and you find what is actually related to -- assuming he had all the diseases he is claiming, you look for the bills that are related to bladder cancer. you look for the bills that are related to coronary artery disease, and you look for the and even within those, you look -- you there, i think you will find none. you look at those and you find if you you will make a determination whether that bills that are related to copd. bladder cancer and cad -- he definitely had cad in 2003, no doubt about it. think it was fair to have mr. shulman testify that he went through each of those bills and came up with $393,000. was a fair thing to do by the plaintiffs. mr. shulman had trouble reading a deposition page. he is 94 years old. he had trouble reading a medical record on the screen. who thinks he combed through these? the second thing that mr. schlesinger brought up, they said that one of the issues of damages -- and, by the way, i agree with mr. furr. find out -- you find -- in all other claims, there is no question that mr. shulman, if you find that he bladder cancer caused by an addiction to cigarettes, that he meets all the other requirements. there is no doubt. i'm not saying that, but what if you find for the plaintiff and you he definitely has had some damage. they put -- they said that -- you can -- go to the next slide, please. they said that he was so depressed -- i'm addressing is what they put forward as the concrete examples of it. and this was harvey's testimony, and mr. schlesinger put it up. his slide is a lot nicer than mine. harvey says that he literally sat in a chair for two years and did not talk. that is what he says. bladder surgery in 1995. the man sat in a chair for two years and did not talk. hopscotching back between maine and florida during those times. you will see that in medical records, but let us just look at one medical record. seven weeks after mr. shulman's surgery. he has good days and bad days. of course he does. of course he does. i am not saying that every day was a great day for mr. shulman. but what i'm saying is the evidence does not support this claim that he was sitting for two years unable to talk and hopelessly depressed. october 1995, after his surgery -- he is able to well, first of all, we know he is on good days, like yesterday -- this is the second claim plaintiff made through walk two miles on the flat surfaces and is quite active and feels well. he does not have overt signs of depression and he is quite verbal about this. so, again, there are medical records. they brought the medical record that said he was depressed. no doubt. both exist, but let us not say that for two years he sat on a chair and did not speak. mr. shulman is that the bike riding claim. remember that? he could not ride a bike. so he said he absolutely could never ride a bike after his surgery. showed him this record and said: well, it seems odd that you could not ride a bike since six years after or seven -- yeah, six years after your bladder cancer you are telling your doctors you are riding 10 to 20 miles a day and you are there for a biking injury. clearly, you were biking, sir. and what mr. shulman said was that that was -- he actually said he would tried twice. that was the second time and he fell off and that was and go to the next record. and then mr. furr, on cross-examination, let us go to the next slide. so this is two years later. he is biking it. no more biking for mr. shulman. and, again, i -- you know, i am not saying that mr. shulman sat on that stand and intentionally told you something that was not true. i'm not saying that. i just -- as i said before, i think the medical records that are taken at the time need to be looked at to see what actually happens. and exercising daily. here's a guy that kept going. he just did. he just did. he should be commended for that. the next thing that plaintiff told you was that mr. shulman absolutely could never fly again because of his surgery. let me stop for a second. no doubt the man's passion was flying. no doubt about it. he loved it. he did it his entire life. he -- he passed it on to his son, and i believe his son next -- next record. again, exercising and biking. next record. exercising daily and biking. you are going to see his medical records. 1 testified that he retired as a pilot. family passion, loved flying. but it was interesting, mr. shulman was very specific about dates on flying, although the suggestion was he stopped flying because of the surgery, mr. shulman kept saying: i flew for 68 years. i flew for 68 years. i flew for 68 years. well, if he flew for 68 years, there is no way he stopped flying in 1995 because he would have been seven when he started. that would mean he started in 1927. mr. shulman, a remarkable man, started flying really young. he did not start flying at seven years old. that is true. i do not know if he has his times mixed up. i do not know if he was flying for 68 years, but i do know we have a medical record, which we went through with you, that shows that mr. shulman, before his surgery, having nothing to do with his bladder cancer surgery, had stopped flying. that is what he told his doctors, and we got in a whole -- there was -- a very interesting thing happened in this trial. when i pointed out this record that said he was too careless, it was i do not know if -- i do not know if mr. shulman was telling his doctors he as if i was accusing him of being too careless. nothing could be further from the truth. was too careless to fly. it would not be shocking if a 74-year-old man decided it was time to stop flying airplanes. would not be shocking. so i am not saying mr. shulman was too careless. mr. shulman, to his credit, knew when it was time to stop flying airplanes, but it had nothing to do with his bladder cancer. as mr. schlesinger said, they embrace every word in every medical record, and this is just what the facts are. covered it a little bit and i just want to go through a little bit more of what -- what we are doing here. standard to get regular damages, compensatory damages is preponderance of the evidence, the standard for punitive damages is clear and convincing evidence. explicit, lacking in confusion, and of such weight let me go to the one last issue. this is punitive damages, and mr. furr one, it is a higher standard, whereas the and the evidence must be precise, so -- the clerk: counsel, 40 minutes. mr. brenner: thank you. this whole issue about doubt that we have that it produces a firm belief or conviction without hesitation about the matter at issue. had some argument about during the closings, doubt -- if there is any doubt, you cannot possibly meet the punitive damage standard. you cannot consider the engle findings. the plaintiff has shown you the engle findings. they do apply if you find he is a class member to his other claims. his punitive damage claim. so you can throw those findings out. even if you found he is a class member, you must not consider them at all. trial, and as we pointed out the evidence at trial, the conduct evidence you heard at trial, had nothing to do with mr. shulman. dr. proctor's evidence, admittedly, had nothing to do with mr. shulman, made no effort to connect the dots. you cannot punish a defendant, any of the they do not apply, everyone agrees, to you can only consider the evidence at there is another sentence to that so i do not know how many times at mr. hammer: judge, can we approach? defendants, for harms suffered by individuals other than the plaintiff. and there is another part of that instruction that says you can consider it if that same harm -- if the same product that harmed the plaintiff harmed others, you can consider it on another factor for reprehensibility. instruction, i want you guys to know what is there, but no matter what, you cannot punish a defendant for harm suffered by anyone else other than the plaintiff. trial -- objection. can we approach? sidebar:) please? sorry. while mr. brenner is correct, the punishment the court: uh-huh. stop the time. (the following discussion was held mr. hammer: judge, the punishment -- mr. hammer: can you take that down, mr. brenner: take it down, please. that is the second part of punitive the court: i thought that -- was not mr. hammer: it is not on its own, cannot be for harms to others. damages. to talk about that now is premature. that is not an instruction to give them. there an instruction -- mr. brenner: it is in the inst- -- you cannot object to a sentence from the instruction. the court: i thought that was the one that -- that everybody stipulated to that actually mr. gdanski -- though, judge. a favor and read the reprehensibility part too. but what i read into the record -- that mr. gdanski suggested, and we put it in there: in deciding if punitive damages are warranted, you may not seek to punish the defendant for any harms suffered by any individual other than the plaintiff. however, you may consider evidence of harm to nonparties if the conduct that harmed -- mr. brenner: i even -- i even did them the court: i mean, this was language mr. schlesinger: but he -- mr. brenner: that is what i just said. mr. schlesinger: but he put that up in mr. hammer: he put that in front of the mr. schlesinger: no, he did not show front of the jury. jury. he is got a board that does not show that. the court: but that is consistent with this. this to the jury. he is showing the board to the jury that cuts off the -- court: board back up. harm suffered by individuals other than the plaintiff. trumpets in front of you that kill -- that smoking kills the amount of people in florida, all those statistics, i'm sure they are going to say it again the court: sustained. mr. brenner: sustained or overruled? the court: i mean overruled. mr. brenner: overruled. (the sidebar discussion was concluded you may not punish any defendant for any mr. brenner: as i -- you can bring the no matter how many times the plaintiff -- and mr. -- and mr. furr said that in rebuttal, we probably heard it 50 times in the trial, you cannot punish any of these defendants for harms to others. there will be another phase. you have heard about that. and, look, the -- the bottom line for philip morris, but i believe this -- not i believe. it is true for all the defendants. nothing any of these defendants did or did not do changed mr. shulman's actions. he was his own man. on the verdict form, you should check "no" for philip morris, question number 8. where i started, which is to say thank you, thank you for your attention today, but more importantly just for the whole trial. you guys have been great and we will anxiously await your verdict. thank you. closing statement ms. ruiz: thank you. good late afternoon, everyone. we are talking, then start the clock again. almost there. i've just got a couple of things to comment on this afternoon. going to try not to repeat what others have already told you. attention that you have paid to this case. you have been incredibly patient. so when this trial began, i told you a little bit about my client. i told you a little bit about mr. shulman and his smoking. we are at the end of trial. mr. furr and mr. brenner again did an excellent job of explaining to you why plaintiff did not meet his burden against any of these defendants on all of his claims. plaintiff's burden to prove his claims against each defendant. so i need to cover what the evidence was with respect to liggett. but please remember that it is what did the evidence show? nothing we all have sympathy for mr. shulman. he is 95 years old. but that does not mean that liggett is responsible because mr. shulman barely smoked its cigarettes, never as a primary brand. when you consider the evidence in this case, please use your natural reason and your common sense. you did not check that at the door when you got here, and i ask that you use that when you evaluate the testimony of the witnesses that came here today. that liggett did influenced mr. shulman's decisions or his behavior. you heard about his smoking. strikes and marlboro throughout his life. he told you he smoked some other brands but when he did smoke those other brands, why did he do it? it was because of price. he told you that liggett's chesterfield and lark brands -- those are the only two liggett brands that you heard about from him. he told you those were never his primary brands. he did not smoke any cigarettes because of anything liggett did. he told you that he smoked mostly lucky so, as i said, plaintiff has the burden plaintiff must prove causation as to liggett advertising certainly did not make mr. shulman go out and buy lucky strike or marlboro cigarettes. of proving that liggett cigarettes caused mr. shulman's illness. each defendant -- i cannot stress that enough -- by the greater weight of the evidence. here's the jury instruction. he basically has to prove that but for smoking liggett's cigarettes, he would not have gotten sick. his illnesses are smoking-related, but to the extent that you find that they are, liggett's cigarettes did not cause them. ask yourself when you get back there when you look at the evidence: did his use of chesterfield or lark cigarettes make a difference in mr. shulman's outcome? dr. soloway, told you the answer is no. i asked him: on your opinion on causation of mr. shulman's bladder cancer, would that opinion now they all covered why we do not think one of the plaintiff's own experts, because mr. shulman did not meet his beyond that, there is no evidence that change if he had smoked five years less? he agreed. no one came here and told you that mr. shulman smoked any amount of liggett brand cigarettes, let alone five years. burden to prove that liggett cigarettes caused his illnesses, if you get to question 3 on the verdict form, the answer for liggett has to be no. liggett did or said or failed to do or say anything that affected mr. shulman or his smoking decisions in any way. case about the tobacco companies and their conduct, what they did, what they did not do. liggett? the evidence showed that liggett was a responsible tobacco company that took its own path. culminating with the 1964 surgeon general's report, there was a lot of scientific evidence coming out concerning the risk of cigarette smoke. studies was that wynder-graham study. you saw the you saw evidence that in the 1950s and you heard a lot of arguments in this what did the evidence show as to one of the most widely publicized what does liggett do in response to this life magazine that had the coverage of the mouse skin painting studies. information? 1950s, you heard about this from plaintiff's own witness, dr. proctor, liggett did not attend that plaza hotel meeting that dr. proctor told you was the start of this -- of the agreement to conceal. liggett did not have anything to do with the frank statement. i think they brought a big old board with the frank statement. when you look at that document, liggett's name is nowhere on that document. liggett responded to this new information by taking an independent path. this is one of plaintiff's exhibits. it is the -- what i call the trip report. it is plaintiff's 3289. it is authored by british scientists who visited the united states. liggett felt that the problem was sufficiently serious to justify large-scale investment by the company directly in experimental research on smoke and cancer. liggett did not join the tirc. instead, here's what they report about liggett. they report that liggett has already arthur d. little was a preeminent liggett invested enormous resources in a invested considerably more in this work than the combined donations of the rest of the industry to the tirc. that is at page 5 of that document. biological testing program with its consultant, arthur d. little. scientific consulting firm, and together, liggett and adl set out to do two things. they wanted to replicate the mouse skin painting studies and they wanted to see what, if anything, was causing the problems that were being reported. companies shared their research with the public, ultimately turning over the results of their research to the surgeon general's committee in april of 1963, before the surgeon general's report came out. paper that i talked about with dr. proctor. that is liggett's nine-volume submission. it is in evidence, liggett 231. there is ten years of research in that document that liggett turned over to the surgeon this was an ongoing process. both you might remember the big stack of the advisory committee repeatedly please accept on behalf of liggett and general's committee. praised liggett and adl for the quality of the work and the amount of ground that they covered. just a couple of documents. i show you this. this is liggett's 219. this is the assistant surgeon general writing to dr. kensler at arthur d. little: we feel that simple acknowledgement of the receipt of nine volumes which you submitted to us is not sufficient. arthur d. little our special gratitude for the time, effort, and expense in the production of these materials for our use. minutes from a 1963 meeting of the surgeon general's committee. they report: these minutes cannot possibly record the massive amount of data in these reports. hainer on behalf of the committee for their comprehensive and well-organized presentation as well as for the documents which have been prepared and those still to come. this is liggett exhibit 2398. these are the chairman thanks drs. kensler and 1 of agriculture. this is liggett 6965, also in evidence. the chief of the tobacco laboratory to the government said this: the report contains a wealth of information, especially with regard to the biological responses of animal systems to cigarette smoke. they go on to report: in view of the voluminous amount of material contained in the report, it would be impossible to record here the many findings obtained in the ten-year period of productive collaboration. you -- this is the one document related to liggett that is in evidence. document that you are going to see back there that has anything to do with liggett. that there are biologically active materials present in cigarette tobacco that are cancer causing, cancer promoting, poisonous, stimulating, pleasurable, and flavorful. he told you that liggett did not share, other than some ads, this is the only so dr. proctor came here. he showed here's a memo from the u.s. department i invite you to look at liggett's 1 nine-volume submission. again, it is 231. there is a lot of information in there. it is over 700 pages. i'm not going to go through all of them today, but i'm going to show you a coup- -- just a couple pages so you get an idea of what is in there. if you look on volume i, page 3, you will see that liggett researchers concluded -- and this is what they sent to the surgeon general's committee -- that there was an association between cigarette smoking and overall death rates. they go on to tell the committee that the effect increases with the amount smoked. committee what it found with regard to filters. liggett never said that filters were safe. filtered smoke is just as (or almost as) carcinogenic as that from unfiltered smoke. evidence. here in volume iii of the submission is a table of contents. it lists the materials that have been suggested as possible carcinogens in the liggett also told the surgeon general's instead, they said: condensate from this is liggett exhibit 2398, also in they go on to say that: nicotine is a human lung. it lists seven items. liggett shared the results of its own mouse skin painting studies and showed that they had produced carcinomas. nicotine, liggett also reported about nicotine in the submission. here they say: the action of nicotine on the central nervous system is complex, and varies with the dose administered. there is little doubt that nicotine is a potent central nervous system stimulant. highly active pharmacologic agent in tobacco. the pleasurable effects of nicotine are the reasons why people smoke tobacco instead of something else. nicotine is a potent stimulant of various chemoreceptors and one of the most potent central nervous system arousal agents known. clearly this information was concealed by liggett from the public health officials whose job it was to protect the health of the country. even with this information, the public health community did not come out and say that nicotine was addictive until 1988. that is when they changed the definition. we have gone through that. you see, contrary to what dr. proctor liggett did belong to the council for told you, liggett's researchers showed the committee that painting tar on mouse backs caused tumors. they identified components of cigarette smoke that are poisonous such as arsenic, carbon monoxide. they talked about how nicotine is the reason people smoke and that is it is stimulating, pleasurable and flavorful. liggett was not hiding the ball. now you heard a lot during this trial about various industry organizations. you heard that liggett was not a member of the tobacco industry research committee. tobacco research from about march 1964 until january 1968. minor player, at best, with insignificant financial contributions. you heard liggett's contribution to the ctr was .3 percent. that is less than half of one percent. so ask yourself, what documents did you see from liggett directing anybody at any of these dr. proctor told you that liggett was a please ask yourself when you go back none. there is no evidence of liggett hiding organizations to do anything? the ball. there is no evidence of liggett keeping secrets, and, again, the only one you are going to see about liggett in evidence is the document that i just showed you. there: where is the evidence that liggett is involved in concealing information? i submit to you that there is none, but, of course, there is a crucial test for evaluating these claims. tobacco company or group, including liggett, play any role in mr. shulman's decisions to start or continue smoking. the short answer is, is that there is not any evidence that they did. warnings on the packs and they did not make a difference to mr. shulman. nothing would have made a difference. mr. shulman never identified anything that he saw from liggett, and there is nothing that he would have relied upon from liggett that would have changed did any of these statements from any we know from 1966 on, there were the overwhelming evidence is that he showed us a large number of ads going his mind about anything. but despite all of this, dr. proctor came here, talked to you about advertising and movies. it is up to you to decide whether dr. proctor had his own agenda. he is not a fan of cigarettes. he is an advocate for the abolition of cigarettes. that is his choice, but that is something you get to consider when you are evaluating his testimony. for 70 years. some were liggett ads. some were ads for products that have nothing to do with this case, but none of the liggett ads made a difference to mr. shulman, had anything to do with the facts of this case. mr. shulman told you that to the extent he smoked liggett cigarettes, it was because they were cheaper, not because of advertising. obviously, the goal of advertising is to sell a product. everybody does it. that is not something unique to the tobacco industry. it is not evidence of wrongdoing. you heard a lot during this case about youth marketing. remember that dr. proctor told you that he had no evidence of liggett marketing the last thing i want to mention, they must be based on liggett's conduct as you heard, the burden is on plaintiff because plaintiff did not meet his burden to youth, so please remember that when you consider this issue. of proving that he relied on any liggett statements or omissions or liggett's participation in any agreement to conceal, we do not think you should get this far, but if you do, the answer for liggett should certainly be "no." punitive damages, and mr. brenner and mr. furr touched on it. punitive damages are intended to punish a defendant for wrongful conduct. and how liggett's conduct impacted mr. shulman. to prove by clear and convincing evidence that he is entitled to punitive damages. there is no basis for awarding punitive damages here. we do not think you should even get there, but if you do -- and this is my only opportunity to talk to you about this, so i've got to mention it. whether there is -- if there is any evidence of wrongful conduct by liggett that caused damage to if you do get there, you need to decide you heard about liggett's research in liggett was the first company to put mr. shulman and whether it is necessary to send a message to liggett or to punish liggett for the way it is currently doing business. based on everything that i've just discussed with you, punitive damages against liggett are not appropriate. the '50s. dr. proctor told you that was an honest response to the mouse skin painting studies. even after the warnings were on the packs in the 1960s, liggett continued to do research. voluntary warnings on its cigarette packs. today, of course, liggett is the smallest of the major tobacco companies. it has about two percent of the market. there is no need to punish liggett. so i ask, please use your intelligence and your common sense when you are looking at the evidence in this case. is no support for plaintiff's claim for money damages or punishment against liggett. thank you.