mr. schlesinger: thank you. counsel. good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen of the jury. i'm going to launch in and go really quick, which i always do. the pleasantries and niceties i'd like to give you will be truncated because of the fact that we have already experienced it together. you all have been super patient. you know, events larger than ours outside this courtroom make me think about the importance of this system, make me think about the honor of being able to practice as an attorney in the united states, in florida. and the power that a jury has as a great equalizer in courtrooms in america, it is really a bedrock motion of our society. the courtroom is a messy place and a pressure cooker. maybe not so much for you, you guys are kind of laying back and watching it. there are delays and time delays, they are not your fault. they are part of what just happens, okay. but somehow out of that mess, out of that intensity, there is an opportunity for justice. there is an opportunity for a just result to emerge. it is because we rely on you as a neutral, detached, impartial observer of the facts that his honor decides which ones you get to hear. he is trying mightily. he labors mightily to be fair and see to it that what you do see is relevant and appropriate and proper for your consideration and protect you from seeing what may not be. and so he is the judge of the law in that regard. that is a monumental herculean task, especially in these types of contentious events that are complex. so i do not want you to hold it against either side for the length and some of the delays and some of the lengthy sidebars. this is how it happened. it happened that way. it happens different ways at different times. the judge labors mightily. once he hands you those facts, you are the judge of what is true. you make the final determination about what the truth is. one of the determinations i hope you will make about my client is that you write on a verdict form somewhere a conclusion that after his life's work, after his dedication to the american dream, being a successful businessman, rising through the ranks, paying his dues, being a productive member of society, demonstrating a life of care, intensity, simplicity, intelligence, safety in some of his activities, that you assign him the role, you say we have decided that you were a janitor. i hope you do not do that. because he testified that he was not. but that is just a little piece of it. when you all get this case, you will be the judge of the facts. we will be on your time. and then instead of us making you-all wait, you can make us wait as long as you want. and this case is a multi-phased trial. there is more than one event that takes place for you to be able to complete the entire task of the trial. there is a second phase. it is about punitive damages. his honor described that to you. you-all have more power now than you will ever have again in your life. you will make a decision in this first part of the trial as to where you want to go. it all comes down to a verdict form here. it looks like this. i do not know if you guys have it yet. i started filling it out real quick. i cannot show it to you that way. the court: they have one. they have jury instructions and a verdict form. mr. schlesinger: good. it has a bunch of questions on it. you all are going to answer it. but what i know you will not do is shirk the responsibility that if we are -- if i stitched this together for you in a way, if we carry our burdens of proof so that bob is entitled to bring this claim, right through him, an opportunity through him to get into what i say are their richly deserved punishments, the concept of them finding a penalty for decades of deceit, decades of lies, a conspiracy that the engle determination, it is not over. that is the truth. that is the -- the court has read to you, those findings are yours. you pick up as the engle jury -- right where the original engle jury left off. those are the engle jury findings. that is the law of the case. you embrace them as if you made them yourselves and determined them yourselves. so hopefully, ultimately, if and when you determine that not only is bob a member of the class and he is been hurt and you go through that information and check off the boxes on the verdict form, when you check off the very last set of boxes, the very last question on the verdict form, whether or not you find by clear and convincing evidence that punitive damages are warranted against the defendant, you check off yes to all three, and we come back and we continue this trial. and i know it may be friday afternoon, by the time you get this case tomorrow, but it will be your turn to make us wait. i know that nobody here will shirk the responsibility if they believe that is the thing to do. and if you, as a collective body of decision-makers get to that point, i'm hoping it will not be -- enough is enough -- play in both of their houses and let us rush out of here. it is true that what you have observed, even with the delays and imperfections, there is an opportunity for justice. you have seen enough evidence. you can come to that as a collective body. i hope you will. the simple truth is that you have seen these documents. these are secret internal documents, never meant to see the light of day. i say we have the goods on them now. you have had them since the years of the late '90s and early 2000s. litigation busted these things outside of their vaults. and a lot of things they said publicly, internally is quite hypocritical of what was really about their business. the business model is to addict those most vulnerable to a powerful dependence-producing drug and replace them when they get sick and die. knowing full well that it causes cancer and choosing profits and choosing to make their money over the lives of the customers that they were sacrificing. you know, i think about the book by robert fullman, "everything i ever needed to learn about life i learned in kindergarten." do not hurt people. be decent. be straightforward. i reflect on these things and i see what this type of case is. this is -- mr. edson: objection to counsel's personal opinion. the court: okay. sustained. the jury should disregard the reference to counsel's -- counsel referring to himself, and that should be completely disregarded by the jury. mr. furr: your honor, so that we do not get off track, i'd ask counsel not to talk through my objections. the court: please do so. all right. let us proceed. mr. schlesinger: thank you. the court: please disregard that, jury. thank you. mr. schlesinger: this business proposition was intentional, embarked upon with full knowledge of what was going on and persisted for many, many decades, all right? so this is the truth here. it is no more complicated than that. i mean, there is nothing about these, there is nothing about -- all this is, is drugs. now, it is a hard concept to wrap your mind around because they created the culture in which we leave. they created an illusion that exists to this day. to this day the vast bulk are filtered cigarettes. this cigarette is safer than that cigarette, when actually this cigarette is more dangerous. that is why i did this at the beginning of opening statements. look how hard it is to break that illusion. this fraud exists to this day in the mind of the public. so when i say this is nothing but drugs, that is all it is. that is all it is. so the case is about robert, because he is one of the individual folks that fits right in the slot. he is 95 years old. he is from the cigarette century. he lived the rise of the cigarettes in this country. if he is not the right person for this case -- to bring this case, then who could be? the punitive damages considerations, his honor explained to you, are based on reprehensibility. is it odious? is it malevolent? is it beyond the bounds of human decency? we said, listen, we are a corporation and we are entitled to be treated like a person. i say that is fine. but when you are being treated like a person, then you have to act like a person. when you are being treated like a person, you have the rights and responsibilities of a person. you should be decent. you should be humane. these companies were never that way. this is a great historic wrong. we are lucky to have a man who is lived this long to present this great historic wrong to you. sometimes it takes a long time to bring justice to a great historic wrong. what did martin luther king say? the arc of the moral universe is long, but it bends towards justice. who more appropriate for that quote than this case, a man at the far edges of what we know to be human longevity, to be here for you in this case. so the punitive damages considerations are not just about harm to bob. all the other people that have been hurt. you heard about 20 million deaths. you heard about over half a million folks a year dying. the number one leading cause of death in this country to this day, to this day. so all of the people that you heard and the documents, all those names that you heard, they are all acting in the course and scope of their employment with the companies. that is why the company is responsible. so the acts of the corporations were reprehensible, but they were done by people. they were done by folks who conferred that responsibility to the corporation. i said these corporations, these entities, reynolds, liggett, these are enormously powerful companies. they are entitled to be treated as humans, but they should be humane. what they have been is not humane. what would a humane company do that knows that its product is causing cancer? it would seek to cure, not cause cancer. that is what a responsible company should do. we seek to cure, not cause cancer. look at the things that were hidden from my client and others that my client had a right to rely. mr. shulman had a right to rely, as millions did, that these entities, these defendants would not conceal material information about their products. the conspiracy was formed in the '50s, when they knew full well it caused cancer and, nevertheless, instead of doing what they said they were going to do in the public statement, the frank statement, we believe that the health of the american public is paramount to anything in our business, including our profits, but, really, behind the scenes, they are hiring hill & knowlton, a pr company, to jolly up a giant story. we are going to get to the bottom of this. look what they hid from my clients. all these things. the poison. they knew full well there was not a controversy or doubt. they knew it was addictive. they manipulated it, they made cigarettes. this highly engineered device is as addictive as it could possibly be made. they are defective and unreasonably dangerous. they invented lung cancer. it is an industrially manufactured disease. in the early 20th century, there was no lung cancer. you could not find it. they invented it. when those cigarettes started becoming popular, when this guy was a little boy, it was only 20 years later when it started showing up in the '50s in such large numbers that people were scratching their head. the only thing it could be contributed to was cigarettes. they knew full well when the public health authority started finding out about it. so what did they do, they launched the conspiracy. they did not say -- they did everything opposite of what they promised, right? they said there is no proof. the health is our responsibility. it is not injurious. we always will cooperate with the public health authority. tobacco is to blame for everything over the years. we are going to have unimpeachable scientists look at this. that is what they did. what world did bob grow up in? he grew up in a world where things were -- let us do this one right now -- he grew up in a world where people trusted their corporations, right? they trusted them. there was no reason in the '20s, '30s, '40s, and '50s to think -- the cynicism of today cannot be applied back in the past because it would be violating what dr. proctor explained, the concept of presentism. we have got to put things in context. he grew up in a world where, at first, cigarettes -- do i have that slide? do we know the number? 114. mr. brenner: your honor, may i stand over there? the court: yes, you may. the lawyers may move around as needed. mr. schlesinger: he grew up in a world where cigarettes, right, were healthy. okay? it was good for you. remember dr. proctor, medicinal health benefits. they were good for you. you should do it -- it would cure your ailments. that is how cigarettes first came out. nobody had the first clue they were bad for you. cigars, pipes, tobacco, they were around forever. but the invented cigarette, the sugar, juiced up cigarette later laced with the intensive nicotine enhancement properties that only a brilliant billion-dollar engineering program could install in that device to create that hook, right, he did not know that. he had no way to know it. it is good for you. they taught people how to breathe it in, inhale. your mouth where you puff the cigar, that is the size of a tennis ball. your lungs are the surface area of a tennis court. that is what unleashed this wave of addiction and ultimately evolved lung cancer. but this is what the tobacco industry has told folks, breathe it in, inhale it, it is great. then when those first inklings came out in the most subtle way, as dr. proctor explained, in the '30s, '40s, right, all of a sudden there was a lot of doctor advertising. remember bob told you about the three doctors? i'll show you that ad. in that time period, they are like doctors are doing it, doctors are doing it. that is like a subtle pre-conspiracy reassurance. well, the doctors are doing it, it cannot be bad because maybe there was some rumblings out there. all along he is smoking, he is addicted, he is been smoking since he was 12, millions of people are doing it. everybody is doing it. he does not have any reason to know anything different. eventually, we got to the frank statement. our product is not harmful. they said we do not believe our product is harmful in the frank statement. in the '50s, the mouse painting studies came out, the wynder and graham article came out, and now life magazine says this thing looks like it is got cancer. they came out and said no, it is not harmful. we are going to get to the bottom of it. in the meantime, here are filters, right? the illusion of filtration, the psychological crutch. in the meantime, that is what you are going to use. [#deleted sidebar#] mr. schlesinger: you guys have been in the engle findings already proved and you guys -- they cannot be denied by the defendants. you have to accept them. they are -- the engle findings prove these products are unreasonably dangerous. they are a defective condition. they are more dangerous than they ought to be. mr. furr: objection. take the board down, please, sir. your honor, totally inconsistent the way you instructed the jury on the engle findings. (thereupon, the following bench conference began.) findings as the jury was instructed and i have the instruction right here. it is not inconsistent with how you instructed the jury. litigated this during the instruction conference. you determined that these were the findings the jury would be instructed on. mr. hammer, without showing it to us, just put up a board that includes findings that you did not approve the jury to be instructed on. mr. gdanski: i'm not saying these are the instructions. it is a demonstrative. mr. furr: these are definitely the mr. schlesinger: we can use the engle mr. furr: here is what happened. we findings. this is a demonstrative aid. the court: i've instructed the jury on these. tomorrow, if you want to bring in a demonstrative that is consistent with these instructions. let us not use this demonstrative. let us bring in a demonstrative that is consistent with the jury instructions. all right. thank you. the clock again. the court: you may proceed. i'll start (thereupon, the bench conference concluded.) the engle findings are very clear that it is a defective and unreasonably dangerous product, that when you use the product as intended, it will hurt you. but a little kid that is picking up the habit, which is the basis of their business -- remember, the base of the business is the high school student and younger -- he fits the pattern. he was a kid when he started mr. schlesinger: the engle findings say they are -- these are lethal products, right? there is no socially redeeming benefit to tobacco. it is not an old story because you are hearing it now for the first time. six jurors, eight jurors at a time. smoking -- are youth and adolescence. that is odious. that is why when you look in the documents, even in their own documents that they thought would be secret forever, they had to adjust their language to install the word "adult." remember that? from now on change young smokers, which they characterize as 10, 12 years old, 14 years olds, adjust the language and put that word "adult" in there because the concept of it is so malevolent. that were it to come out at all -- even within the secret documents they tried to build in a little deniability. because they knew it shows their intent, it shows their understanding. they knew how bad what they were doing was. they are the ones that chose this path. they are the ones that choose when they knew full well that they were -- that their customers were dying from this product, that the profits were more important. it was not mr. shulman's choice to go into this business. all he did was follow the crowd and do what everybody was doing. you would have been a strange person in his age culture to not smoke when up to eighty percent of men smoked. there was nothing about addiction that anyone really knew in terms of the meaning of the word. like we know now words like addiction. we hear that word. but like a homonym, the same word may have different meanings. mr. furr cross-examined bob shulman about where you said you were addicted to flying, and you were addicted to motorcycles. do you remember that? i heard that. i'm like that is not the same thing. the tobacco industry's part, what you saw them do, is they tried to trivialize addiction and downplay addiction. but you were addicted to motorcycles. there is different words that have different meanings depending on how you apply them. parents love their children, right? parents can also read a book and love the book. but is i love my son the same thing as i love that book i just read? no, there is different meanings. the fact that you said you were addicted to motorcycles, what does that got to do with the exceedingly complex neuroscience of the chemical molecular brain-changing drug that is nicotine, whose chemistry was perfected by these companies? it has nothing to do with it. so what they said all the way along when they could have been telling the truth was it is good for you, breathe it, inhale it, the doctors are doing it, our product is not harmful. do not worry, we will get the answers. in the meantime, here is a filter. what is the notion of a filter? purification. it will take out whatever is bad for you, right? this is the psychological crutch you can rely on. then they said there is no proof. you know, it has -- the statistics, it is epidemiology, mice is not men. this is all public, when internally everything was very different. internally, they were like we are devoting our business lives to the propagation of lung cancer. now, think about that. let us say a fellow comes along, meets a buddy on the street and says, man, i've got this great business. i've got this great new business, special kind of something, pizza. and people are not going to be able to get enough of it. they are going to buy it. we are going to sell millions of sticks, trillions of pizza. we are going to sell some that there is -- i've got to tell you, there is something in them that is going to kill the customers, you know. but we are going to make a fortune in money. would anyone ethically or morally go into that business? no. would they? so should they? and what is it? did they get a pass, that they have done this all these years? it is like it is too late. you caught us too late. the arc of the universe is long, but it bends towards justice. this is the moment in time to take into consideration what mr. shulman has lived in the cigarette century and say, yeah, you know, we ratify, we honor what you are doing and how you come before us. this is why i say the word "justice." this is not a joke. this is not game, some punch line. you know, if you think that, if you feel that way, if you are cynical, then we are going to lose. it is just that simple. then we do not deserve to win. if it is some sort of goof or joke or you are just here to get some money, if that is what it is, then we do not deserve to win; i do not want to win. that is not what we are here for. we are here in a great american moment with a great american jury in a world that is in turmoil. and it is well worth it to take these things as serious as we do. i know you have, because no matter how much we put upon you, no matter how late we kept you, no matter what we did, you have soldiered on and persevered. so i feel that however you call it, it is going to be because of diligence and desire -- mr. furr: objection as to counsel's continued expression of personal opinions, your honor. the court: i'll sustain that objection. the jury should disregard any reference to personal opinions by the attorney, and it should be disregarded by the jury. mr. schlesinger: so just going through this real quick again, eventually -- and this was the world bob lived in. he had every right to rely that they would not conceal, to rely that -- the engle finding says they did these concealments; they conspired to maintain these concealments with the intent that the customers would rely. and both sides -- and they rely on each other. in other words, his company -- and mr. furr may be a nice guy, but he is not reynolds. he is not the company. he is the lawyer with the obligation to represent. they relied on each other. bob was relying on what they said and what they did and what they promised just like they were relying on him and millions of others like him to keep buying and stay addicted and be part of that epidemic of addiction and keep the sales going. the reliance goes both ways. they both need each other. that overwhelming message of advertising is so influential, the imagery. it is not the little fine print on the side of the pack where it is at. it is the beauty. it is the appeal. we will go through that. what do they keep doing? they said, can we have an open debate? can we keep the controversy going? you saw the videos with all the folks, the traveling through sky, the college of tobacco knowledge. you saw those folks coming out to try and keep that message of doubt, that disinformation campaign going. even in the waxman hearings, they changed it slightly. it may, but it is not addictive. it is not addictive. it is not addictive. and then, ultimately, they got busted. it all came out. these documents are now the basis of why we are before you today, is the truth of what happened. when you come to the decision that they merit punishment -- st. augustine said that punishment is justice for the unjust. if you come to that, if you see it our way and you come to that decision, then you will be able to not only tell them, we reject -- we find this inappropriate. we decent people, we reject what you did and we ask you -- we want you to be different. you make that message. but it is also a deterrence to others, to other entities, other corporate persons, other companies that might act in a similar way where they might deny the truth of the harm of their products or of the damage they do to our environment or things that are campaigns of doubt and denial that other companies may do. without juries like you, they could run roughshod. there would be no counterbalance. there would be no message from the citizenry in the other direction saying, "no. this is inhumane. this is indecent." these are the basic principles from which this case springs forth. finally, they knew after they got busted it was all a lie. they knew. in the '60s they had written that the time is going to come where this "assumption of the risk" defense, right -- lie, deny, and blame it all on the smoker, where it is all your fault, when that assumption of risk was going to loom large, but it was being whittled down by tobacco companies' utterances, the fact that there is no risk or that it is remote. so the mantra in this courtroom from the defense has been: what did he know? what did he know? what did he know? what did mr. shulman know? he knew. he heard it was bad. he got in trouble. he was on the roof with the tar. his mom did not want him smoking. his wife thought it was a dirty habit. he knew, what he knew, what he knew. right? what did they know? but when they got caught, then here comes the big pivot. the big pivot. everybody knew. everybody always knew everything about all the harms and dangers. that was not the world he was in. and everybody did not know. and they did everything they could to dilute the message. they were a solvent. they were a social solvent diluting that message, making it confusing, spending more in one day than the public health authority spent in a year to try to overcome the message. they -- oh, they steamrolled the message. the filters, they advertised the filters as being the miracle. so they knew. so this business about what he knew in an era where he could not have fully understood any of those things, they did know. they were not telling. they knew. so that is the big pivot. let us go back to where we were. and that is why you heard so much about bob in this courtroom, about -- i mean, how simple is it? i give you a record right smack-dab in the middle of the class period that says he is got chronic obstructive pulmonary disease from tobacco abuse. and the definition of "class membership" is that in that slot between '90 and '96, you come up with an illness that manifests or a diagnosis of an addiction-caused disease, addiction to the nicotine in cigarettes causing disease and, boom, right there in the record, the organic medical record done at the time, nothing to do with litigation, a medical doctor's diagnosis saying he has a tobacco-related disease, an engle tobacco-related disease due to tobacco abuse, which is addiction. that is what dan seidman told you, doctor. we have got another dr. dan. dr. dan seidman. that is what he told you. that is in one sentence. class membership. he did not live in florida. really? is that the defense to this case? is that the microgranular defense to the case, that he did not have a residency in florida when we gave you a deed that he owned a condo since 1983 continuously through 1997 across the entire class period? he was treated in florida for all of these diseases, bladder cancer and heart disease and copd, all within the class period, all while he was an owner and spending -- you saw the records -- at least six months a year down here with a voter's registration card and with a driver's license, florida voter's registration, florida driver's license. and they are going to tell you, but he was not a resident? is that credible? is that what this case is going to turn on? not what they did, but whether his -- whether he had a residence here. folks can have residences in more than one place. mr. brenner: objection; misstates the law, your honor. mr. schlesinger: you are not going to hear anything about that. the court: what is that? mr. brenner: objection; misstates the law. the court: overruled. mr. schlesinger: you are going to read in there what if -- the engle class definition means what it means. and it says it is embracing. remember i said in opening statement that word, "all"? all. it is not exclusionary. if the tobacco companies had their way, it would be exclusionary. no people, no citizens or residents, nobody that got sick during '90 and '96. mr. furr: objection. improper argument. plaintiffs have the burden of proof to establish class membership. the court: sustained. the jury should disregard the last comment from the lawyer. mr. schlesinger: is that really what this case turns on? there is no doubt that he had residency and citizenship in the state of florida in the plain meaning of those terms, which is all you are obligated to determine. and we gave every piece of data to prove that. and there is nothing to the contrary. you will not hear from the jury instruction or on the verdict form that he has to exclusively live in florida. that is not the law. it is not the engle class membership requirements. it is not. but do you know what it is? it is a good example of an extremely, extreme hyper, you know, polarized position that the tobacco takes that stretches the bounds of credulity. mr. brenner: objection; commenting on the defense of the case. the court: sustained. the jury should disregard the last comments made by the attorney, and they should not be considered by the jury. mr. schlesinger: you can dismiss it out of hand, and you can consider whether there is any basis to make that argument because the law does not say he has to be an exclusive resident. the frank statement said what it said, but here is the real reasons. the real reasons were not that they accepted a base of responsibility. but who ain't for more money? and we are going to capture -- they are talking about how much money they are going to get for capturing the younger adult. remember the weasel word i told you about, the pitman 1975 document, when they said, start sticking that word "adult" in there? just put your finger over that, okay, because it ain't true. younger smokers. that is just a word in case it ever got into a courtroom for you all to see. right? younger smokers and holding them over time, we are going to make $2 billion extra dollars by getting 12-year-olds. this is just, oh, heck. it does not meet with the bounds of human decency. and he said the priority was profits, not the lives of the customers. this man is a scholar. he is a hero. he is a brilliant man who did -- spent an inordinate amount of his life reading thousands, upon thousands of documents and learning and digging into the truth, bringing the historical truth of the tobacco company to light, right? he is what -- when you hear about experts, that is what an expert is. he really is an expert, someone who really knows the subject matter. that is what an expert is. not somebody who comes in -- we will talk about it. i can do this closing argument just in pictures. this is a flying saucer, right? here is the question. there is a difference between what mr. shulman heard. there is a difference between knowledge and awareness, right? awareness and knowledge. and here is the point of the flying saucer real quick. how many folks here have heard of flying saucers? everyone has heard of flying saucers. how many folks here believe in flying saucers? maybe not so many. so having heard cigarettes were bad when the companies he thought he could trust, that would not be able to put out a product if it was deadly, dangerous, in the era where you trust your companies, the '50s, the "leave it to beaver" era where everybody trusted their companies and thought america was great, post world war ii environment. everything is great. we are a can-do nation. there is no cynicism. there is no post vietnam war cynicism that pervades our culture today. he was able to believe that message because he might have heard it was bad, but that does not mean he knew it was bad just like folks have heard of a flying saucer but do not know or believe there is flying saucers. you know that too. how about this: how many folks here have heard that this thing, this thing that we all carry around like it is indispensable, causes cancer? how many folks have heard that? are there reports out there? are there articles in the paper and government reports? could you find evidence right now that these things cause cancer? how many people believe it? how many people are not using their cellphones. so presentism distorts our understanding of the past. are we going to go back in time and be able -- he is the oldest man in this courtroom. he might be one of the oldest men that any of us really knows. he was given the gift of longevity, and it was marred by the ravages of tobacco. it was marred. the man had his manhood taken there him. this was a guy that was a man, a real man. he was out there doing stuff at an age where folks did not do it. he was a pioneer. he was an aviator. this was an interesting man, a successful guy. and he is paid a major price for something that is really not his fault, not his choice. ultimately, you will get to a point where you can consider fault and you can assign blame and percentages for, was he someone who has human weaknesses? he should have tried harder? he should have quit sooner? they said, indisputably, he quit in 1975. and you know what? if he did, then let us give him credit for that. do you remember that i was the first person to show you all those records that tied it in to the late '70s that he quit? perfectly appropriate to do so because the case we are presenting to you, the evidence we are presenting to you the science we present to you by dr. soloway is clear. it is not how long ago you quit. it is how much you smoked. he smoked more than enough to make him sick even as of 1975. he was smoking since the '30s. that is over 40 years of smoking deadly, dangerous cigarettes. so give him credit if he really quit permanently in '75. there is lots of evidence of the '80s and '90s. but it is not the defining issue in this case because the true medical experts, a man like soloway who is got a curriculum vitae as thick as a butcher's middle finger with 450 articles or so and a professorship in the same university as benedetto, their colleagues said in no uncertain terms, this is not complicated. this is simple. he smoked a lot of cigarettes. he got bladder cancer. and by the way, who brought you people that know about bladder cancer as witnesses? we brought a world -- the, perhaps the world's authority. he told you he almost invented the subject, the world's authority on bladder cancer, dr. soloway. what did he charge 1,500 bucks, 1,500 bucks. that is the number i heard from him. yeah, i think i charged -- like money matters at all to that guy. and a treating doctor. dr. bernsley, who treated him, organic, natural, not for purposes of just coming into a courtroom, straight up in the records. of course, he had bladder cancer from smoking. it was the number one cause of bladder cancer. we are debating that point? sure, we are, because when you do not have a leg to stand on, a good defense is a good offense. try to break the other guy's leg. and when it comes to the conduct of the tobacco industry and the fact that all they did was lie and deny and blame the smoker, it is better to blame the smoker than to talk about what you did. they cannot talk about what they did. they cannot deny the findings. they are stuck with them. we are all stuck with them. you all are stuck with them, but they are yours. you embrace them as if they are yours. so heimann denied that was warnings were justified. he said the surgeon general was dead wrong. that was one of the ceos of the tobacco company at the time. so they were not telling the truth. okay? they were not telling the truth. similarly -- i say this as a song. i'm going to go into too much detail. there is a song by elton john called "mona lisas and mad hatters." it is got a great line in there about "i thought i knew, but now i know." it is about -- it is just a great song. but he says, "i thought i knew, but now i know." you all came here. we had a week-long jury selection with a couple of hundred of you with paddles like an auction room. and you all were being asked about cigarettes and tobacco. and some folks made some pretty wild statements. i remember them. i remember a hush coming over the room when somebody made a statement. but you all were probably, even when you walked into that courtroom the first -- able to have in your mind that there is something bad about tobacco. there is something bad. i know there is something. but you do not necessarily really know. so that is why i say, "i thought i knew, but now you all know." now you know. you have seen what, even though it is public, very few have seen, because who is going to take the time to go digging through the legacy website and figure out how to read those documents? you know, after this case is over, whatever interest you have, you may pursue it. this is a free country. but right now in this courtroom with the evidence his honor has allowed you to see because he is decided that is what you should decide it on, you have more than enough. with those engle findings, more than enough. they are culpable of a conspiracy to conceal material information that he had a right to believe they would not conceal. and that is what -- that is why this is an industrial-driven epidemic. it is not the smokers. it is the company driving that addiction. they said, we will attack the surgeon general. we will not work cooperatively with him. he will smear him, belittle him. that is what they said they would do. they did not work cooperatively. they said -- when the surgeon general would come out, they said what the surgeon general was putting out was, it was propaganda. do you remember that? accusing the surgeon general of propaganda, that is going to lower the threat level. this is seductionism. okay? that is what this is, a form of seductionism. what i do mean by that? well, we know that if somebody creates harm and scares everybody and the threat of the harm is well outside the -- disproportionate to the true threat, that is not seductionism. seductionism is when you lower the threat level, when you get people to still instinctive fears. remember that document? they sought out to still instinctive fears. con quieto. let us calm this down. there was a cancer scare. let us settle it down. they had an opportunity to tell the truth in '53. why did not they do that? bob would not have had bladder cancer. he would not have heart disease. he would not have copd. he would have none of those diseases. he would have a clear, definitive, true message, truth in advertising. if cullman came out and said, we made these cigarettes as dangerous as they could possibly be and those filters, those new filters now are actually going to make the cancer worse, truth in advertising, that would have been incendiary and critically important. and lots of things would have changed in this country. and that is a big difference than what happened. that is why we are losing as many people here as we are losing in this country. bob is one of those victims. he is a quitter, all right, one of the 60 million. but you know what? 60 million quit, no thanks to them. he was an american success story. he was a tobacco success story. he fit right in their slot. he did everything they wanted him to do. he was the perfect customer. the only thing was he got off. let us say he got off in '75. i have no problem with him getting off cigarettes in '75 if that is what the facts and evidence show. his son remembers differently. he remembers differently, but that was enough, more than enough. and dr. soloway said the relative risk does not go back to normal. you are still twice as likely to get it. by the way, do you know what the relative risk is of a man who smoked 40 years of cigarettes and he gets cancer of the bladder? for him, it is one hundred percent. it is one hundred percent. you do not start looking for something else. it is one hundred percent. in any event, these are some of the lies they told. they said all those allegations against smoking have been abandoned for lack of evidence. and the fact is they were devoting their lives to propagation of lung cancer. they said they were trying to tell people they were going to let the scientists do the worrying. they knew right here the evidence accumulated from smoking as a health hazard was overwhelming. remember this? still instinctive fears. and they did it. they did it great. madison avenue, the best you could ever do. they had chills. they tried to tell you, we are going to have a scientist of unimpeachable integrity, of national repute. that was all a fraud. the co-conspirator organizations, the tirc and the ctr, acted as a shield and a front. they were not getting to the bottom of it. they were hiding the truth of it with advertising. that is what they were doing. and they said, we are not interested in the truth. we are interested in evidence which we think can deny the allegation that smoking causes disease. and they always knew it was a holding strategy. look how long it worked, over 50 years. look how long it worked. it worked great. they said it was brilliantly conceived and brilliantly executed. they celebrated it. they celebrated it because it was so great. they shot those sales right back up. the little cancer scare, they shot those sales right back up. look at the lag time between smoking and cancer. and look at the lag time between quitting and cancer. and you will see a document, claude teague, one of the masterminds of reynolds, a brilliant man, devoting his life to something that was not appropriate, was not proper, was not decent, and was not humane. he could have done brilliant things to help humanity. but instead, he was stirring that pot and coming up with a way to make these more addictive and get those kids. he said in the '50s -- and this is something they did not show you. he said in the '50s that the lag time from the cessation of smoking to the person getting cancer exceeds years or more, exceeds 10 years or more. you heard their experts. we will talk about them. you have got an order in your instructions, a special instruction that allows you to reject experts. you are going to hear something about -- i'm the shot of espresso. you are going to hear something about how you can decide how you want to decide on witnesses. but you can reject experts. and that instruction that lets you reject, completely reject, roll them out of the courtroom what an expert says, is the power the judge gives to you. so if you were saying to yourself or you heard some of the witnesses, you might have said, how can he let them say that? how can he say that? you may have on your own had some disbelief. our job on cross-examination is to bring out some disbelief, just show if things are not credible. we try to do that. we try to reveal biases or prejudices or lack of knowledge or an absence of foundation for the opinion. you all may have already come to the conclusion: i do not know if i buy this. i do not know if i'm buying this. and thinking, well, how can -- that person is there and they are testifying. the judge let them. how can he let them do that? well, you have got a rule in your instructions, in that thick packet of instructions, that says you may reject the evidence that is given by someone called an expert. there is a special rule just for experts, that you all can reject them. you are not bound by them. you may say, i do not think this person is really an expert and i reject it. so that is very important. the whole point of the conspiracy, according to proctor, was to obstruct, block, hide, conceal, delay -- do everything in their power so the truth did not come out. he talked about leakage. sometimes it did. here is something i think is very important. they promised to talk about, did he rely on their statements? was there something that happened with mr. shulman that would have been a lot different? yeah, if they promised to stop making it. promise, promise. if they had stopped making it when they knew it was bad and really done what they said they were going to do, bob would not have gotten sick; he would not have spent the last 20 years of his life disabled and not the kind of man that he envisioned himself to be, humiliated and feeble by the injuries that came from smoking. and dr. proctor said this goes to reprehensibility, the fact that the same conduct hurts other people, millions of people. millions of lives were unnecessarily lost. i know the number is numb. you know, the number is numb. it is a such a big amount. it is almost hard to wrap your arms around. million people. that is the population of the state of florida. mr. furr: objection. it is improper argument, your honor. mr. schlesinger: so imagine -- mr. furr: objection. the court: okay. do you need to approach? mr. schlesinger: no. mr. furr: yes. mr. schlesinger: it is perfectly appropriate. the court: approach. (thereupon, the following bench conference began.) the court: it is 5:00. twenty-eight plus minutes so far. mr. schlesinger: okay. mr. furr: i believe you ruled pretrial on this exact argument. mr. edson: this is the order. that is the motion. the order granted -- mr. furr: pretrial, we made this exact argument in our pretrial motion to preclude mr. schlesinger from arguing that the 20 million deaths over time were equal to the population of the state of florida. the court: which ruling was that? mr. furr: that was 18 that you granted in part and deferred in part. i know it is hard to trace back exactly what it was, but it may perhaps just refresh the court's recollection. the court: which part of it did i grant and which part of it did i defer on? mr. edson: you had deferred -- you granted as to all parties if counsel believes the door has been open to allow them to make an argument that might otherwise be questionable -- the court: may i see what you are reading? mr. edson: it is paragraph 18 of your order. we are supposed to approach before they touch things in our motion. the court: this is just general, is not it? mr. edson: no. mr. furr: that was pursuant to this motion, your honor. that included this paragraph next to the one involved with -- the court: the argument is about million people. mr. edson: that is in evidence, judge. that is in evidence. the court: is not there evidence? mr. furr: the argument is not about million here. it is about comparing that to the state, the entire population of the state of florida. mr. gdanski: we are allowed to reflect what we all know and we are allowed to draw on that evidence -- mr. furr: it is -- mr. gdanski: it is closing argument. mr. schlesinger: it is closing argument. we are trying to bring into context the numbers. the court: what did you say on the caprio case? mr. brenner: that was in caprio. mr. edson: what we did in that order was we had improper arguments that we were seeking to preclude, and your honor granted it. this was one of them. so the court's order was they were supposed to approach before they got into these areas. the court: all right. i'm going to overrule the objection. (thereupon, the bench conference concluded.) mr. schlesinger: may i proceed? the court: yes. mr. schlesinger: in any event, so i was -- put up the slide. what we were talking about was 20 million people. big number. and i said the number is numb. we will come to a slide that sort of illustrates the point. the number is numb. think about the state of florida. i'm a born and raised floridian. think about the state of florida. it is got key west all the way up to tallahassee, across to pensacola, the little towns and around florida. just imagine, just imagine that you went and you were driving around and there was not anybody. there was nobody in the state of florida. you could drive. there was no traffic on 95 or the turnpike and us 27, the peace river, the scenic 17. no matter where you went, the 10, no matter where you went, the turnpike, there was not anybody. you could stop in buildings, churches, hospitals, courtrooms, and there was not a single human being. right? this is the context i want to give you to the 20 million people that have died just since the surgeon general's report has come out in the united states, the leading cause of death in this country. it is -- and that is the seductionism. we are blind to it. we are inured to it. you do not even see cigarettes in this courtroom except what we bring. these things are hiding in plain sight. it is irrational madness. it was almost wistful when i saw mr. furr asking dr. proctor about the end of cigarettes and are they on their way out. and mr. furr was like trying to make a point, well, they are on their way out; you should not punish them. i remember that. he was almost a little wistful about it. i said, i remember the scene in the movie apocalypse now where robert duvall was that great captain that ran the helicopter, the helicopter army. and he wanted to surf and everything else. he was standing on the beach, and he was like some day this war is going to end. almost wistful. well, if cigarettes are on their way out, let us help them along. you know, let us send a little message today from this jury. mr. furr: objection. it is improper argument. the court: okay. sustained. the jury should disregard anything about sending a message. that is improper argument. sustained. please move on. the jury should disregard it. mr. schlesinger: okay. so the point of it is, i talk about imagine the state of florida like charlton heston in the omega man, just empty. that gives you a sense of how many folks have been lost to the scourge of tobacco illness. there are millions living in the united states now with tobacco-related illnesses all because of nicotine. all because of nicotine. it is the number one leading killer in the united states to this day. one-third of all cancers. if you got rid of cigarettes, it would be like curing one-third of all cancers. one in five -- if you went to a cemetery, one in five graves is a cigarette-related death. imagine if there is a little "no smoking" sign on twenty percent of every head stones in any cemetery that you went to. so, you know, i said and i think -- and you know about this lag time. i talked about the lag time. i showed the front and the back end because even when you stop smoking, a long time happens before the cancer comes. that is the nature of it. cancer is genetic damage. it is cellular-level damage. atherosclerotic heart disease in the heart, it does not disappear. it does not go away just because you quit. there is a reduction in risk because you do not keep adding to your risk, but it does not go away. just like dr. soloway said like a sunburn, floridians, you get a sunburn as a youngster, at 18 years old, 6 years old. i remember i had a girlfriend with those reflectors, when i used those reflectors when i was a teenager and got a blistering sunburn. well, that can cause you to have skin cancer even if you use sunscreen all the time for the next 30, 40 years, 20, 30, 40 years later. that is the nature of cellular genetic damage. cigarettes have 7,000 poisons in them; 60 carcinogens in them. you get exposed to that much smoke for that long, even when you quit, many decades go by and you can die. they did control the future because in the '50s, all they had to do was keep their promises. what would have happened if all they had to do was keep their promise -- mr. furr: objection. there is no such evidence, your honor. there is no such evidence. excuse me. mr. schlesinger: this is inference from the evidence. they promised -- it was proven that they knew that it was bad. mr. furr: i need a ruling, counsel. this is improper. the court: overruled. mr. schlesinger: thank you. the point being they promised to stop making it. he had a right to rely on that promise. they said it in the wall street journal. they emphasized how he read the wall street journal. and so when you reassure someone and say, hey, we would never do anything to harm you, think of how different the world would have been, this world, this country, if we did not have the scourge of tobacco disease, the tobacco epidemic, the health care costs. think of the difference in the stress. mr. furr: objection, your honor. health care cost? outside the what is in the record, your honor. the court: i'll sustain the objection. the jury should disregard the last comments made by the attorney and completely disregard it. go on to your next argument. mr. schlesinger: i told you about the number's numb. that is where i'm at. the number is numb. that is why i made that graphic. the state of florida, i told you imagine there is nobody there. we talked about the power of the industry. they have got the power. you know what? in this case we have got the facts. we have got the facts. i would rather before this jury -- i'm pleased to be able to present some of those facts. mr. furr: objection to counsel's personal opinion over and over. the court: sustained. sustained. the jury should disregard the reference to the attorney's personal opinion. it should be disregarded completely by the jury. please do not consider it in deliberations. proceed proceed forward. mr. schlesinger: yes. you have seen some of the internal documents. not all of them, but they are the legacy of what this entity did. and the epidemic would not -- we have an opinion in the case from dr. proctor that the epidemic would not have occurred. so we talked about the 20 million deaths. we talked about that this is -- what is driving this is the industry which deliberately misled the public on the risks of smoking. that epidemic was created by them, initiated, sustained by their aggressive strategies. that is the evidence and what we propose is the supportable truth in this case and hopefully you can take that very seriously in this case. i told you that they celebrated it. they said that -- what they said was the frank statement and the promise to find out the truth was really an attempt to defend itself on the major fronts of litigation and public opinion. they celebrated brilliantly conceived and executed. they won important battles. it was always a holding strategy, but it was about creating doubt. doubt is our product. nicotine addiction and the delivery device and doubt is our product. the marketing arm, the advertising arm, creating doubt, showing health, but really causing the scourge of diseases and suffering. that was the real strategy. i'm not going to play this. they lied under oath that nicotine is not addictive in 1994, and they had documents going back to the '50s that said we are in the nicotine delivery business. this cigarette, it is not even the product. okay? you think this is the package? no. they said, this is the package. the product is the nicotine, the dose of nicotine. this is a unit dose of a powerfully addictive drug. a pack is a day's supply of nicotine. if we did not have nicotine, we would go out of business. the market would collapse. it is not in dispute. by the way, we put on two eminently qualified witnesses, dr. henningfield and dr. seidman, to explain that our client was addicted. i did not hear them put on anybody to say that he was not even though you know he had him examined by a doctor. you heard a lot about that examination transcript. they read from it a bunch during the trial. but i do not think they are going to get up and admit, you know what? we think he was addicted. i do not think you will hear that in this closing. however, i suggest to you that there was no defense that he was not addicted all of the evidence was that he was. that to me is a form of a concession. you may consider it as such. mr. furr: objection. it is counsel's personal opinion. mr. schlesinger: it is not a personal opinion, judge. it is called closing argument. the court: i'll sustain the objection. please disregard the last comment by counsel regarding personal opinion. it should be completely disregarded by the jury. all right. proceed. mr. schlesinger: yes. in any event, multiple statements making all kinds of promises. not injurious. and if there is any harmful elements, we will remove them. you heard folks say that. these are all broken promises that they made. and we want to be the detectives as much as everybody else. we will cooperate in any way. when they said, we are going to submit the least useful information to the surgeon general, be vague and irksome. everything they did was -- i mean, there are two forms of like complicit third-party strategy that dr. proctor talked about. get someone else to do the dirty work. two forms, the unwitting and the complicit. the complicit were the doctors, the scientists, and what have you that they hired to put out false statements to the contrary about the truth of what they knew, which was tobacco will kill you. and unwitting was the surgeon general public health authority that would go along with, well, maybe these filters are better. you ought to quit. but if you are going to smoke, smoke with filters. they got the unwitting complicity for years of the surgeon general. you talked about the warnings. you are not going to see on the side of a pack of cigarettes a warning about bladder cancer. mr. furr: objection. preemption. the court: sustained. please move on on your argument. mr. schlesinger: i'm allowed to talk about -- the court: the jury is to disregard the last comments. mr. schlesinger: i'm allowed to talk about that. mr. furr: you have already warned him. you cannot be challenged, your honor. mr. schlesinger: that is not true. i'm not challenging him. i'm just commenting. the court: if you want to approach, approach. approach. (thereupon, the following bench conference began.) mr. schlesinger: i'm allowed to say what is not on the warning. mr. furr: this is my objection. what he is doing now is challenging the adequacy of the warnings that squarely preempted. and it is actually -- this is in conflict with the instruction that the court just gave the jury. the court: i think this is pretty clear that we have indicated that once the warnings were on there, that you cannot make a claim. mr. schlesinger: i was not saying that the warnings were wrong or inadequate. i was saying what warnings were not on there. and the evidence in this case is there is no warning for copd or bladder cancer or addiction. that is already in evidence. that is already been testified to in the case. this is perfectly appropriate. it is perfectly appropriate. mr. furr: the highlighted sentence of your instruction, we have no obligation to place any additional warnings -- mr. schlesinger: we already did that. mr. furr: stop interrupting me, please. -- including bladder cancer or copd. of course, copd is in the warnings, contrary to what mr. schlesinger said. but that is not the point. the court: i'll sustain the objection. and do not make any further comments on that. thank you. (thereupon, the bench conference concluded.) the court: all right. i've sustained the objection. the jury should disregard the comments regarding the warnings, and you should completely put it out of your mind. it is not for your consideration. move forward. mr. schlesinger: i'm going to start. thank you, judge. so despite relentless denial -- the only corporate representative you have heard testify, by they way, was the corporate representative figlar, who we presented his video testimony. and even to this date, relentless denial. they said -- their internal document from the '50s said the individuals we met believe smoking causes lung cancer, and their corporate representative speaking on behalf of the corporation, said that, oh, no, they did not think it caused lung cancer. how many documents do we have to show you to prove otherwise? so we talked about how they marketed to bob shulman. we have showed you the document in the '80s when they said in the new york times in a full page ad we do not market to children. 1984. that same year was the diane burrows document. these are in evidence, rjr secret document, that the younger adults -- remember, that secret word, that fake word adults -- important as replacement smokers. starting by age 12. looking at that, the question's how many replacement smokers has the defendants got from bob since he quit? he could not be a replacement smoker because he was the first cohort. he was the beginning of the epidemic. he was the beginning of the boom of the business. they talk about the base of the business is the high school student. i'm going to skip through a few of these because we are going to quit in just a couple minutes, i'll come back to whichever ones i need to deal with. but all through here, it is all about kids. this is the one where it says from time to time we use young smokers, youth market, and in the future use young adults. we caught the conspiracy within the conspiracy. we caught the hiding within the secret documents of words that they knew would not stand illumination, right? they talk about the press, you know, that -- the publicity of the press, the illumination and dark corners is the great antiseptic. so you all are seeing stuff that now you know. you may have thought you knew, but now you know. a lot of folks do not know because you have got to dig deep to find documents like this to show what they plotted and planned and schemed and hatched to go after kids. look at this, on the second grade kids, they are sending letters saying and we are going to continue to support research until the truth is known. in the '70s they are sending to a second grade class that says, hey, tell us about smoking and health. that was in '72. remember farber said i sent them something in '84 because my patients were confused, and they did not understand what was going on. of course, they were confused. that was the whole idea. doubt is our product. they were selling as much doubt as they were cigarettes. so when teague said we deliberately played down the role of nicotine, and the non-smoker has little or no knowledge of what satisfactions it may offer him and no desire to try it, instead we must convince with him with wholly rational reasons that he must try smoking with the hope that he will then for himself discover the real satisfactions -- code word for nicotine -- the real satisfactions attainable. i call that document the chiller because that is cold blooded. that is just a man who is there at that -- the head of the department of research at reynolds, and he has got that hook as sharp as it can be and he is setting it on them young fish and they are getting hooked. everything they wanted to do is get our share of the youth market, get that learner. make them think it is cool, and all of the words that go along with it. and then they will be hooked. i say a decent company, a humane company, a responsible corporate company -- mr. furr: i object to the use of counsel's personal opinion. the court: sustained. mr. schlesinger: i say it is a term of art. i argue -- the court: please avoid doing that. mr. schlesinger: the evidence shows -- the court: sustained. the "i" reference should be disregarded by the jury. mr. schlesinger: the evidence shows that a decent corporation with the rights and responsibilities of a human, if you are going to want to be treated like a person, act like a person, you should be protecting children, not addicting them. that should be what we should do. that is the responsibility of a responsible corporation. here is the engle class. i told you it was all florida citizens who have gotten sick or suffered from diseases or medical conditions that manifested prior to november 21, '96. everything in bob's record showed heart disease in the '90s, copd in '95, bladder cancer in '95. it is all right there. it is spelled out explicitly with the copd, and maybe that is why we had such a fuss about it. because copd is not the big medical physical problem in his life. when i ask you to consider -- the court: counsel, that is an hour, so go ahead and wrap up whatever you are arguing right now. mr. schlesinger: i will. when we ask you to consider what is an appropriate measure of damages, when we say measure the harm that bob has suffered, show him through your verdict you place great value on his loss. the bulk of the damage he sustained, the hurt, the suffering, the humiliation is from the bladder cancer and what was taken from him and from the coronary artery disease that eventually he had a quadruple bypass procedure. the cardiac disease is -- far outstrips the actual suffering from the copd. he had some shortness of breath from the copd, but he is got the diagnosis of copd, and it was an important piece of evidence, copd secondary to tobacco use. a history of copd in late 2000 -- i mean, in late 1995 is class membership in a nutshell. so it is such strong evidence that nicotine addiction is a hook. well, copd from tobacco use, that is a hook into class membership all by itself. there are a bunch of ways in. we will talk more about the engle class tomorrow. i thank you for your attention at this late hour. we will talk more about it tomorrow. thank you. closing statement mr. schlesinger: counsel, good morning the way this is timed, i still get to go the court: all right. please proceed. mr. schlesinger: may it please the yes, we are. court? ladies and gentlemen of the jury. and i have to assemble my electronics. i know it is a little weird, we deprive you of your electronics. and when you go back to -- you do your deliberation, it is not uncommon for the court to actually confiscate your phones while you are back there. and here we are, you know, depending on this electronics right now. it used to just be a legal pad. and i do not even have a legal pad here in front of us, but i cannot read my handwriting more so. i have more time. this is going to take the day. the time -- between the time i get to go 1 and they get to go and i get to do what is called rebuttal, it will pretty much take this day. so it is going to be longer than gone with the wind and, you know, not as necessarily entertaining, but we are going to get through this. there is a lot of material to cover. the first thing i wanted to start with was, i read to you from what i call the chiller document, dr. teague. lot because he was such an important fellow at rj reynolds, an employee of the corporation deep during the years of the agreement to conceal the information from the public. and so, you know, there is a great quote from saul bellow, a famous writer, that said: a great deal of intelligence can be invested in ignorance when the need for illusion is deep. writing about tobacco but just the idea that a great deal of intelligence can be invested in ignorance when the need for illusion is deep. it really does sum up the business plan of this entity. and what is interesting is another thing we are going to return to dr. teague a that is saul bellow, a writer, not in any event, right here -- and i that dr. teague wrote in the secret documents, okay, with regard to how to capture youth -- and "capturing youth" is a word from diane burrows' 1984 document, which all of these are in evidence for your use. remember hearing so many things about what bob was like when he went to smoke with ira crookshank and how it make him sick, but he wanted to stick with it because he wanted to be part of the in crowd and that was the way to adulthood and the pathway and being defined: i'm a tough guy. and about kids, and he said -- this is in the '70s, you know, as they really came to understand and target kids powerfully, where it says: the sentiment discussed would cause the young to want to be defiant and smoke. in this sense, the warning label on the package may be a plus. keep in mind, there was never a warning label before 1970, right? pack of cigarettes before 1970 did not start until 1966, right? and bob had been smoking more than and we will talk about warning labels, but look what dr. teague wrote about smoking the only thing that ever existed on a it may; it may not be. it may be so we talked about the engle class. i 30 years by that time. okay? but in 1966, a caution -- this is '72, talking about a caution on the side of the pack that said: it may be hazardous to your health. hazardous to your health, but here's a filter. so there is a reason why you do not have to worry about it. and that is why sometimes a great deal of intelligence can be invested in ignorance when the need for illusion is deep. reflected last night on -- as i was thinking about this case, that one of the unique things about bob also, besides that fact that he is nearly a century old, right, and that is way on the outliers of our life expectancy, his wife is in her late -- mid -- early '90s, and they have been married for almost 75 years. that -- that also is something that is almost unique, and we brought her so you could meet her. meaningfully anymore. who knows when the ravages of alzheimer's started to rob her memory. you could -- she cannot contribute a lot of folks know that when it comes mr. furr: there is no evidence about her to alzheimer's, a lot of times you lose -- mr. furr: objection, your honor. mr. schlesinger: -- the person before you lose the person. medical condition. mr. schlesinger: let -- i'm making an argument of what i think the evidence has shown. and mr. shulman testified that his wife has alzheimer's. that is in the record. i will pull up the quote. this. the court: okay. overruled. mr. schlesinger: in any event, you have heard about that, so -- but because of what is an important thing, you know, it is something that folks aspire to. it is something that folks think of when they think of family, durability of family, of the idea of a family. mid-90s, you know, that have been married for almost 75 years. that -- that is important because it is part of the humanity of a situation. the idea of a couple of folks in their i do not think we should fight about that is why you-all are not computers it is coming up on thanksgiving. it is we care about the health and well-being making these decisions, you-all are people, because the humanity of the situation is critically relevant in evaluating what happens to people. of our people. we care about our culture. we care about the ideals we hold, you know, true, and this is just one of the important things. family time. you know, it was touching to me and this is part of it, is was touching. where my client started to get a little misty before you, a little choked up because his wife, who he said has alzheimer's, still managed to get up in the morning and make him breakfast for his big day in court, check his jacket and straighten it out, and say: baby, i love you. look how good you look, for his big day in court. witness stand in front of you because of what his wife, who he described as a beautiful, young woman, right, a beautiful, young woman. i think the evidence was, there one time and he almost started crying on the when you are with somebody like he was so talking about the humanity of the it is even important because he admitted since they were kids, that is the way she always looks to him, like a beautiful -- that is the way you grow old together, and he only sees what is inside. he only sees what is good. he only sees what he loves. situation, talking about the kind of man bob is, the little bit of evidence you heard and saw about how he feels about his wife is important. to you: she was constantly bugging me about smoking. the smell, she could not stand it. i wanted to please her. it was not my intention to keep smoking. powerful addiction-producing nature of the drug, which is what a cigarette is. come back to that. questions on the verdict form is not about fault. it is only about dependence and disease. you work through this, and you will see this, you will -- you will see that the first question has you have to keep that in mind because as all the words that go along with the so we touch on that. the family. we will class membership, that first set of he got hit with the big three. he got to do with: is -- is mr. shulman a class member? the evidence clearly shows that he is. you-all have to agree that he is and check off that he is for any of the enumerated diseases, bladder cancer, coronary artery disease, or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. but because all three, each one, each one reinforces and corroborates the other. bladder cancer. he got heart disease. he got lung disease. he got three major hits from tobacco which is the number one cause of those three major diseases in this country. so each one corroborates the other, but any one of them gets him in the class. a unitary theme, as dr. soloway testified to. what is the unitary theme of everything that happened to bob, the one guy with all these diseases, is that tobacco caused them all. so it is important, as you think through this, let us not conflate, do not confuse -- and it will be tough because even the idea of nicotine and smoke, smoke gives you cancer, right? smoke gives you emphysema or copd. the smoke and the nicotine can give you 1 the heart disease, but the nicotine gives you the addiction. that can be a little bit confusing. but i think we have taught you through some of the evidence in this case to understand that the nicotine keeps you smoking incessantly, abnormally. you know, puffing, puffing, puffing, puffing, 200 puffs a day. you know, puffing, puffing on cigarettes and sucking down packs of these cigarettes full of drugs, but it is all the poisons in the smoke that give you the disease. class membership is not about fault. class membership is only about dependence and disease. fault is another phase. fault is another set of questions. relative degrees of fault. remember the engle findings say not only are they intentionally at fault, intentionally culpable for concealing, conspiring of committing fraud, the engle findings also say that the tobacco industry and the named defendants here are culpable for negligence. they are at fault for themselves being negligent or careless. you can determine and weigh and measure and you can decide how to relatively 1 distribute percentages of fault for them. you will decide that, and you can also decide that for mr. shulman. if you decide that he, too, was less than careful about his health and overcoming his addiction and he should have tried harder because his human weaknesses were such that he should have tried harder, you can assign a portion of blame to him. we are going to talk about that, but his fault, if any, his blame, if any, as compared to their blame is in the blame section of this case, and it is not in the class membership section of the case. it is important not to get confused about this -- really you can make a mountain out of a molehill. a lot of talk about mountains. the notion of class membership is a relatively simple notion here. you know, the records bear it out, just that deed from 1983 shows he has entitlement to be called a resident of florida and just that note in 1995 that says copd from tobacco abuse, all by itself that is class membership, all by itself. you know, in another form, in another world with no argument, no debate, in two minutes it is important not to conflate that. class membership is not about fault, it does not mean that he is lying or and reliance on statements, you know, if we can get to that point, but there is opposing sides, so we are having to fuss. whether smokers can -- you know, whether the smoker shared some responsibility. we talked about that, whether an addict loses total control over the mind, whether addicts can quit, for reliance on any particular statement from the tobacco industry. that is what class membership is about. you are 95 years old and somebody interviews you for days, testify -- asks you testimonial questions for days, dozens of hours, maybe 20 -- 15, 20 hours of interrogation, there is going to be some natural variability in a 95-year-old man's answers. anything like that, but if you keep asking the same question over and over again, you are going to find some variety in the answers. anybody, even a sharp cat in his 30s and say let us: put him under the microscope and grill him for, you know, a dozen days and gather up 2,000 i suggest that you could do that with but as dr. -- as dr. proctor said, there it was an immersive experience. you so when it comes to class membership it was an all-pervasive effect, and so pages of transcript testimony. you might find some -- some variability in the answers. was a wallpaper effect of what the tobacco industries did. could not get out of the way of tobacco advertising in the '30s, '40s, '50s, '60s, '70s, '80s, '90s. it was everywhere, every billboard, tv shows into the '70s, every magazine. it was everywhere. there was nothing personal about it. right? there was a population-based attempt to create a culture, to influence an entire nation. have engle findings from the proofs that you-all are allowed to use. though, all these questions come on later questions in the case. so you do not even get to them. words there. but it shows that -- it shows that he needs to be addicted and that the addiction was a legal cause of bladder cancer, coronary artery and it worked very well, which is why we and then there is this. there is a lot of these are greater weight of the let us go on to the next one because disease, or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, and it was before november 21, '96, and he was a florida resident when the disease manifested itself. evidence, and i have the scales of justice in front of you. you have got that in the packet. okay. i go to the scales of justice because we talk about it is not -- in a criminal case, you know, you have heard that any and all reasonable doubt, all doubt is in favor -- you know, resolved in favor of the defendant. evidence. it is what is more likely than not, what is probable. so if bob, overall, if the big view is that he is tipped the scales in his favor, right, then he is proved his case i mean by the preponderance of the evidence standard. now, you know, there is some space under here, right? what is that? well, that is doubt, but the fact of the matter is doubt is resolved in favor of mr. shulman. it does not matter if and here, it is the greater weight of furr: objection. that is a mr. furr: no, i'd like that stricken. the court: i will sustain the there is a little bit of doubt. misstatement of the law. there was no such instruction. it is an incorrect statement. mr. schlesinger: that is my interpretation of what the law means. objection. the jury should disregard the last comments regarding doubt and should not consider it in your deliberations. please proceed. mr. schlesinger: may it please the court? of the evidence, what is more likely than not, right? mr. shulman when you confirm his presence in the class. all these diseases are caused by cigarettes. that is an absolute. placed the cigarettes on the market that were defective and unreasonably dangerous and were negligent. nicotine is addictive. the defendants so the point is, it is the greater weight and all these findings apply to these are -- this is -- this is the law, and then, of course, these are also we know that, and we know defendants cannot be -- this is the law. this is the jury finding. it is your finding. it is absolutely applicable. true. okay? so we know that we have addiction. we know we have disease. we know in engle that addiction leads to disease. concealed material information not otherwise known or available, knowing that the material was false or misleading and failed to disclose material facts concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes or both. agreed, all the companies agreed to commit the fraud together. it was a conspiracy to commit fraud. that is all intentional. conspiracy is not an accident. it is not negligence. it is on purpose, right? to comparative fault, is on purpose. nothing was -- if he was careless because he did not take and that is the fraud finding. and then -- they got together and nothing that mr. shulman did, if you get nobody chooses addiction, but they did. they intended bob shulman and the public better care of his health, that is carelessness. it is not intent. he did not intend to become sick. he did not intend to be an addict. they chose to engage in a conspiracy to commit fraud. they agreed to get together and conceal this information, and they knew it. they intended that smokers and the public -- put bob shulman in there. would rely on this statement to their detriment. that is a conspiracy theory. that is a powerful indictment of industry. that is why the ball is already down the field somewhat in this particular case. you guys are taking that ball and deciding if you are going to move it further down the field, but part of this case has already been concluded. that is what gave light to the engle findings. that engle finding trial was back in 2000 from a case filed in '94 by dr. howard engle, who was a pediatrician in miami. there is no such -- mr. furr: objection, your honor. mr. schlesinger: that was year-long furr: excuse me. please do not mr. furr: you are not allowed to talk the court: let me hear just one -- hang there is no such evidence about who filed trial. speak through my objections. the case or anything else. the court: all right. mr. schlesinger: judge, we are allowed to talk about the engle case. this is a progeny case. about facts in evidence. on a second. okay. sustained. the jury should disregard the last comments by the attorney. they are stricken. judge. so the point is, we are not -- we do not have to retry the engle case because we have the synthesis and the result of the engle case to hand to you, and as an engle progeny jury, you pick up exactly where the engle jury left off. please proceed. mr. schlesinger: i'm starting up again, that is the law, and you guys have that when you are thinking about the parts at your disposal. and when you work together back there as a collaborative body -- it is very interesting, six folks who do not know each other making an important decision together, you can use those instructions, and you can pull out the engle findings and keep them there. of the case that you have got to answer, do not forget how important those engle findings are. we would not be here but for those engle findings. they are critically important in this case. even though we only talk about them in opening and closing, you have got them with you. embrace them. use them. do not forget about them when you are thinking about how to answer the questions in the case. they are critical. about these briefly. the point is there is regular folks and you can decide their demeanor, their frankness, the interest they have, the reasonableness of the testimony, and use your common sense. them. you know, that is why we are all doing this live, and it is nice to be able to do that. believability of witnesses, i talked you look at them, you get a feel for but what is interesting is, i told you the special exception for experts, you can accept their opinion testimony, reject it or give it the weight you think it is deserves. so that is another law you have got. what do we have? i told you yesterday, we had highly-credentialed academics and practical man in the trenches who is also an academic working with addicted people all the time. there was no -- nothing in rebuttal to it at all. there was no counterevidence whatsoever except for the fact that historically the tobacco industry trivialized addiction, made addiction a confusing, misunderstood thing, compared it to things like chocolate or motorcycles. you know, we live in a world where it is a difficult term to conceptualize. however, there is no medical census definition. members that he was addicted because addiction, as you understand it, as regular folks understand it, as scientists understand it, every definition applies to mr. shulman during the period of years he smoked. and you heard testimony from family but we had -- we tried to honor this 1 process, right? we -- we tried to honor the process by bringing you witnesses who duly and truly had qualifications, that they knew what they were talking about, that were justified in coming to the conclusions that they did. and they did it from a background of experience that honors the process, right, that takes the meaning of the word "expert" seriously. and you are going to hear someone get up and say from the defense: well, you did not say dr. proctor has also made a lot of money testifying. i call that the false equivalency. multiple million dollars in earnings over the years he is been doing these engle cases, as a suggestion that he is a partisan who is only saying it to help the people that brought him here and he is not worthy of belief as a counterbalance to when we say perhaps dr. mcgregor's $300,000 in earnings for two cases is the real motivating force behind why she said what she said despite it is lack of credibility, based on what anybody with common sense would say that his hearing loss caused him cancer, some -- something like that. mr. furr: objection. misstates the they will try, by showing dr. proctor's brenner: objection. misstates the the court: hang on a second. mr. brenner: can we get a ruling, mr. schlesinger: that is my opinion. the court: let us not argue back and mr. brenner: objection. mr. schlesinger: now i would say that evidence. -- evidence. please? forth with each other. sidebar:) honor, and mr. gdanski tried this same trick during his cross-examination. argument. mr. furr: it should not be tolerated. they claim that -- he is arguing that dr. mcgregor said that hearing loss caused his cancer. that is ridiculous. dr. mcgregor used an audiogram to demonstrate that his hearing loss was can you guys approach? (the following discussion was held mr. furr: here's my objection, your mr. schlesinger: this is closing they are ridiculing her unfairly. that is consistent with exposure to solvents. and it was the solvents that she said caused cancer. not the evidence in any way, and it is not a mistake. they tried the same thing during cross. mr. brenner: in fact, i asked the exact question in redirect because mr. gdanski tried to suggest: are you saying hearing loss caused his bladder cancer? argument, judge. i may make fair and reasonable inferences. reasonable inference. does not cause cancer. true. mr. schlesinger: no, she said -- mr. furr: of course she did. mr. schlesinger: -- the hearing loss is evidence of cause of cancer from being a janitor, and it is nonsense. mr. schlesinger: sure, it is. the court: she said the hearing loss she said: no. mr. schlesinger: this is closing the court: that is not a fair and mr. gdanski: that is just -- that is not furr: you can draw inferences. you the court: you have to stick with the mr. gdanski: this is the inference in the court: sustained. mr. furr: will you strike that, please? the court: yes, i will. (the sidebar discussion was concluded can draw inferences. evidence. all right? the evidence. court:) the court: okay. the comments regarding hearing loss causing cancer is stricken from the record, and the jury should disregard it and not take it into consideration. it is stricken. again, judge? please the court? nonsensical notion, the evidence will show, it is a nonsensical notion to suggest that hearing loss has anything to do with why this man has cancer the court: yes. mr. schlesinger: thank you. may it the mr. schlesinger: may i start my time what i'm getting at is it is a dr. benedetto's note says: it is a from his occupation as a janitor. it is -- it is -- it is -- how can someone say that because you have the right to reject it. that is why i showed you that ruling. what? was he swimming in solvents that were getting in his ear? dr. benedetto has a note about exposure to solvents. we already know he does not hear well. family trait. and, by the way, if you are interviewing the guy with history, as dr. benedetto's note goes for five pages: you were -- you were a heavy smoker and you were exposed to solvents. what if he said: hey, what did you do for a living? pallets of a degreaser were going back and forth in the warehouse where he ran a business with a thousand janitors running all over the place doing work, cleaning up and mopping. i mean, is that an exposure? comparison is this: if you build a better mousetrap, the world will beat a path to your he said: janitorial. okay? maybe pallets of ammonia and anyway, i'm making a comparison. the dr. proctor built a better mousetrap, the other way around is someone that has door. you have heard that, right? not the other way around. nothing on their record, nothing on their credentials, no life scholastic or professional dedication to the medical scourge of tobacco writing about it, teaching it, taking care of it, anything like that, and have them say they are an expert, that is the same as dr. proctor. right? he is a world's authority. he is been invited all over the world. he is been to the white house. he is written in the surgeon general's reports. he is been quoted by them. he is been a governmental witness. i mean, this is a giant in his field. you. i wish we could put his testimony in a stadium and do it in the joe robbie stadium with 75,000 people to hear what he has to say because it is enlightening, right? mousetrap, the world will beat a path to your door. we were lucky to be able to bring him to that is why i say: if you build a better it is a false equivalency to compare some now he was a no-show. think about that. like properties and the money he legitimately generated because of his great expertise to the money those folks are getting that i say is the true motivation for their testimony. that was the guy that did the cme. no show. think about that. the residency, that is -- i mean, you know, you do not -- there is a thing about a and the. it is not the -- the residency. was he a resident? you will see that a/the comparison a lot. he was a resident of florida. okay? evidence. you will see the driver's license, the voters registration. he owned the condo continuously. we have both the deed when he owned it, he bought it and when he sold it, from '83 to '97. then he bought a house instead of a condo. and you saw the records saying he was down here at least six months a year. that is residency. and the evidence is overwhelming, beyond a reasonable doubt, overwhelming that he is a resident. and denying residency does not meet with the bounds of credibility. all these are proofs. they are in here's the diagnosis. you know very but this is a clinical diagnosis. it is and this is dr. davis's record. there is much about this, from the maine center for cancer in september of '95. and he said in his testimony: it was around the time i was diagnosed with bladder cancer i was first told that i had copd. two dr. davises. we get a little confused, two dr. davises that talked about copd. there is the dr. davis here, and the dr. davis in the 2015 pft test where it said: obstructive lung defect. that is the corroborative test. perfectly appropriate for doctors, you saw the gold standard, to make a clinical diagnosis. meaning a doctor says: you know, you look out of breath. you smoked cigarettes for 40 years. you got bladder cancer from smoking. i think you have also got the copd secondary to the tobacco abuse, which is addiction. what is it about addiction? you know, they make it as easy as possible to start and as hard as possible to quit, like the florida lobster traps. when you have the mini-season, those wood -- those wood boxes, you see the way in, the lobsters get in, but they cannot get out. the kids, they make it as easy as but smoke has always been a warning smoke it is an irritant to the lungs. possible. in nature, in nature, right, flame for man. you think of prometheus. he brought flame to man, okay, that illuminated. it provided warmth. it allowed the development of man. it had many salutary benefits. sign, a danger. if you smell smoke, what do the animals in the forest do? they run. you do not take a natural human being -- a natural animal does not inhale smoke. smoke is a warning to get away. made smoke sweet and changed the ph and added ammonia so that you could get that smoke in and menthol and things to make it easy to get down in the lungs and they unleashed an epidemic of addiction and unleashed an epidemic of lung cancer. cigarette sales went up. lung cancer went up, an industrially-manufactured disease. they make it. they engineer it. the ingenuity of man, as difficult to quit as possible after making but when they engineered smoke and they i'll come back to this. this is even dr. bernsley, his treating, right, it as easy as possible to start. dr. seidman, said he was addicted. everybody else said he was addicted. nobody said he was not. even the family members, they all said it. so it is definitive. severely addicted. this was not a garden-variety, you know, a chipper, someone who smoked a few cigarettes. severely addicted. he talked about it. addiction is like driving a car without brakes. it is a sensation. you have do not feel in control of that experience. that is the truth. that is the sadness. that is the business of addiction. that is the business model of addiction. morris in the '60s said that when these filters were coming out and these light cigarettes were coming out, we have got to make sure we do not let the cigarette smoker get weaned off his addiction. we have to determine what is the minimum nicotine required to keep the normal smoker hooked. precisely control it to two decimal points, and you know that dr. tamol from philip and dr. proctor explained to you they and, again, not only did dr. seidman and they said: without the compound, standard. it is exact precision specification and they are happy that it is habituating and unique, and they call it the sine qua non, without which there is nothing. say: folks will not smoke a cigarette without nicotine in it, the documents, the internal documents, you are going to see themselves, admitted it internally. the exit gates will open, and everything is going to collapse. we will be out of business overnight. even -- even -- even internally, they knew this. they were afraid of it. they feared it. nicotine was their -- it was their -- you know, it was the center of their universe. be out of business almost overnight. cullman -- no? kid." dr. dunn, the "nicotine kid." no, this is where -- so dr. seidman said it, but internally in the '70s, so did the "nicotine kid" say: no one has ever become a cigarette smoker without smoking mr. gdanski: dunn. mr. schlesinger: dunn, the "nicotine and then of course this is from i'm trying to break the illusion. you the cigarette should not be conceived as cigarettes and nicotine. a product but the package. the product is nicotine. the cigarette is one of many layers. think of the cigarette pack as a storage container of a day's supply of nicotine. are presented with evidence to try to break that -- that brainwashing of a nation to make this seem like it is a normal, ordinary consumer product when it is nothing of the sort. it is nothing of the sort. you know: daddy, what is this? oh, it is bad. well, it does not look bad. it looks like a deck of cards. it looks like a little bubble-wrapped toy. it looks like anything you could buy at a walgreens. kid? how do you tell a kid this is bad when it does not look bad? that is another thing about reprehensibility, how do you get away from the fact that what you are how do you tell a kid, a six-year-old, it does not look bad. how do you warn a so everything about it says -- you know, they talk about the health of their doing and might find a place as a corporate entity and the humans that work there, how do they live with themselves? well, they start comparing their customers to rats. business, but they say: you put a hungry rat in a cage. put a lever in the cage. the rat will push the lever. smoking the cigarette is the lever push. that is how they learn to not consider their customers as humans equal to them. they dehumanize them. they call them a prop. they call them a rat. but they talk about the health of their business and how their business has to give birth to new smokers, like they are reproducing, and they humanize a corporate entity while dehumanizing the customer. going to take this case into the next phase, you will say: is that reprehensible? is that odious? does that meet with the bounds of human decency, because, if not, then you can say: yep, this is -- this is warranting a fine, a punishment, a censure from an expression of moral and when you come to the decision that is so they even have a sales chart where they knew when the ascendancy, the they even showed that they would be way more condemnation from a jury of their peers, you, the jury of their peers, an expression of moral condemnation for these kinds of activities. sales is directly related to free nicotine in smoke. remember the secret soul of marlboro was ammoniation and free-basing the nicotine molecule? meteoric rise and success of marlboro with that cowboy advertising and the new greatest nicotine addictive kick ever. profitable. reynolds was trying to figure out, why is marlboro doing so great. the money, the annual sale in business goes up as the free nicotine in cigarette smoke goes up. direct correlation. call themselves a pharmaceutical industry. that is, again, dr. teague. even a philip morris pamphlet in 2003 talk about how easily and how quickly kids can become smokers. they can appear in teens within weeks or only days after they become occasional nicotine kick, because of ammonia. that is a pharmaceutical industry, they what happened to bob, right? he kept smoking until he could get over they are setting a trap for youngsters. smokers. that choke and then he said right away he was addicted. he was stuck. he tried at 16 years of age to get out of the trap, but he could not. this is their own pamphlet. this is after, by 2000 when the website starts saying: okay. you got us. it is addictive. they put out a: kids could not smoke, and they admit right in here how easy it is to become addicted. so if that is the case, then why is this case make it seem like it is such a high burden, such a high hurdle when it is not. they even say: ask your kid these questions and if he answers yes to any of the questions he may be addicted. try to quit, strong cravings, tried to go without smoking but failed, every one of these things applied to bob. this is their own words. the one addiction, tobacco addiction, that is play this, please. (video clip played as follows:) voice: we should also give priority to now that science has come forward and we so nicotine addiction is why people keep (video clip concluded.) so that is the notice that surgeon killing more than 300,000 americans each year. general koop -- about in the late '80s, 1988, so folks were on notice. they are on notice that tobacco addiction back then was killing 300,000 people a year. understand there is 45 million smokers, we know it is over 500,000 a year, but it is tobacco addiction is killing folks. that is notice that they had, another opportunity they had to come clean, to be honest, to be truthful, to mend their ways. but they did not. smoking. in the testimony, this is why bob kept smoking. it sustains the chain of addiction. every cigarette contributes. dr. henningfield explained addiction is the interface, the driver between the product, the cigarette, and the disease, and the addiction drives the daily persistent smoking that is relapsing that results in very high risk of disease compared to any other drug. this is a world's authority that but for the exposure of the this is what it is. right? this is not contributed to the surgeon general's report. you saw, world's authority, the -- one of the top five men in the world on nicotine addiction. nicotine, would bon have been chronically exposed to poisonous chemicals? dr. seidman said no, evidence in this case. a pleasurable pursuit or a pastime. this is compulsive, incessant, drug-reinforcing, drug addiction. millions of lifetime exposures just if you do a pack and a half for 40 years, the most conservative estimate. agree, most conservative estimate in these records that he smoked so much of this, millions of hits of nicotine to the brain, millions of toxic exposures of beta naphthalene, cancer-causing poisons through the kidneys into the bladder, corroding the bladder to the point where he ended up with cancer and a major amputation-like surgery to re- -- to -- this is -- look, you know, america is this industry's ashtray. they put out 540,000 everybody agrees, and even the defense furr: objection, your honor. this mr. schlesinger: the -- i'll move on. mr. furr: no, i would like it butts a year. is improper argument. stricken. the court: all right. sustained. the jury should disregard that and not use it in their deliberations. it is stricken. thank you. mr. schlesinger: here's a quick view of choice being constrained by addiction, exposure to cigarette toxins, and smoking-related diseases. this is a little complex. for you. it is the mouthful instruction the judge read to you about legal cause. everything -- it is not all or nothing. everything happens in combination. you have got this in your pack. the point is that addiction can be a legal cause even if it acts in combination with some other cause, meaning even if bob should have tried harder to quit, his addiction is still a contributing cause to his disease. that is a conceptual matter. you have got i'm going to try to work through this things can be combination. not there is no word "choice" in there. that to address it. it is important -- it is an important legal cause in instruction. read it. be careful with it and you will get it. you have got to read it a few times to get it. we lawyers read it all the time and we still have to read it over again, but you will get that. but what is missing from it is choice. just does not come in. okay. the choice is not part of addiction-causing disease. we know it does. dr. koop just put out the word in his video: tobacco addiction causing death. it does. and here's what they say. this is their confession. this is an admission internally, the lawyers remind us. this is from the '80s, the entire matter of addiction -- video technician: hang on. mr. schlesinger: the entire matter of addiction is the most potent weapon a prosecuting attorney can have in a lung cancer/cigarette case. we cannot defend continued smoking as "free choice" if the person was "addicted." what they called the presmoker, the learner, and 1980. this is the year 2015. dr. teague again, figuring out about in the learner you have got the triple but the smoker, negative, because you are dr. teague, the crucial role of nicotine. the smoker. jon showed you this, about you start out with a self-image enhancement, identify valued people, daring, sophisticated, free to choose, adult, right, in the presmoker? you got the plus-plus. these are all of these things. plus because they are all these things, you are free to choose. not free to choose. you are a confirmed, habituated, addicted, satisfied smoker. we talked the legal cause, contributes substantially. did addiction play an important role? if he was not addicted to nicotine, would he have smoked one to two packs a day for at least 40 years? in order to be regarded as a legal cause, that it not be the only cause, it can operate in combination with the act of another. it is not all or nothing. that is why we will eventually get into the comparative fault questions. now here's concurring cause. concurring cigarettes may be a legal cause of in order to be regarded as a legal cause cause has to do with things like the creation of disease, and i made this pictograph to try to simplify that complicated instruction. of bladder cancer, remember that was from the anatomical exhibit we used, cigarettes need not be the only cause. bladder cancer even though it operates in combination with janitors, if such janitorial work occurs at the same time as the cigarettes and the cigarettes or addiction to cigarettes contributes substantially to producing the bladder cancer. that is the basic idea. and that is what the experts testify to, and nobody said anything different. it is not one or the other. more than one thing can combine to control a disease. every single word in the naturally occurring medical record that was done for purposes of caring for bob, every word. even with solvents, even with janitorial work, it does not negate the overwhelming effect of cigarettes on bladder cancer. we accept and are willing to stand by even the word about solvents because were there some solvents, did that make bicycle built for two, real quick. the it worse? let us say there were. assume there were. it does not mean that cigarettes -- that it is now from janitorial and not from cigarettes. how does that work? the cigarettes were no longer a risk, but the janitorial from even 20 years earlier was? think about that. idea that bob is on the front of the bicycle riding it but that nicotine addiction is in the back, and it is peddling as hard as it can to drive his smoking. so it is the idea, it takes two to tango. a bicycle built for two. concurring cause. it is not all or nothing. addiction played an important role. dependence played a substantial role. tobacco abuse was an important reason why the smoking was driving him to the point of getting a disease. the testimony of dr. bernsley: even if there was a solvent, would that exclude smoking? was not a substantial contributing cause? no. is there any medical way to say smoking no. we showed you all these records about there is plenty of evidence otherwise, however, it is not necessary to what the quit dates. we completely accept the quit dates. we are willing to accept the quit dates. it does not matter. but that is not where the critical issue is, do not want to debate it. the evidence -- the greater weight of the evidence is probable that he did smoke well afterwards. we are talking about. dr. soloway said: '75, he quits. '95, he gets bladder cancer. yeah, because he is twice as likely as a nonsmoker to get bladder cancer even if his risk went down. he started off as four and a half to five times as likely. when it hits him, it is a hundred percent that the bladder cancer was caused by his smoking addiction, a hundred percent. that is the only way to look at it. and dr. soloway explained it. the sun hits your forehead at the age of 20. and the at age of 50, you are going to dermatologist. a great business in south florida. exactly the same scenario, different carcinogen, of course. but it bears repeating. and i know dr. soloway was a while ago, the causal relationship between his long and dr. bernsley, completely and then, of course, dr. soloway history of cigarette smoking and development of bladder cancer. independent, organic, natural treater to the man: he would not have bladder cancer without smoking. and as dr. -- as dr. seidman explained, tobacco abuse, nicotine dependence, and nicotine withdrawal, same thing. they are synonymous terms. so you understand it when you see it in the record what it is meant, how you measure it. confirmed, he got the copd because he smoked cigarettes for many, many years. you have seen this record more than enough times. similarly, you have an actual pft that confirms it. remember copd never goes away. you have an actual record that confirms it with an interpretation of obstructive -- let me use the laser. defect. the proof is there. skip this. all right. so you know the engle class period goes between here and here. you do not want there is minimal obstructive lung but that is what dr. tobacco witness he tries to say: you did have copd if you decide the credibility of that. and to have anybody try to bounce you out of the period. farber does, repeatedly. it was before 1990, but not if it is in between '90 and '96. that is his testimony. and in what cases did he do it? farber finds a way. in all these cases, copd, yes, but it was before the critical cutoff date in may of 1990. folks that try to prove they have copd in the critical time period, he bounces them out. science of it or if that is just because that is what he is -- he is doing to sing for his sum. the defense witness made their denials, but they had to rebut for records, that they never examined, saw or treated him. and here's a document i told you about yesterday i really wanted to show you. there are many -- this is another teague document, 1953, a lag time of more than ten years, ten years or more between the cessation of smoking you decide if that is because that is the they knew. they said it. that is in we are going to come up with the filters, let us have the elmo real quick. video technician: sure. mr. schlesinger: and then talking about and the occurrence of clinical symptoms of cancer. their secret internal documents. they knew what the truth of the science was. filters. all right. here, this is a document that is in evidence. again, these documents are all in evidence. i sure hope you can find them. okay? but this was a disclosure of invention, this guy, teague, a genius, in 1953, back when the -- when the fraud was going to get started, what are we going to do about this? how are we going to handle the fact that it causes cancer? the fake, the gimmick. what are we going to do? he says right in here, and it is signed off by a bunch of people, he is, like, claiming that he is entitled, you know: i have observed, and believe it to be generally true, that the cigarette smoking public attaches great significance to the visual examination of the filter material in filter cigarettes after smoking what is he -- so he is inventing and he says: while the use of such and because the smoking public attaches the cigarettes. significance to this visual inspection, the possibility of incorporating chemicals into filter tip materials that would darken or otherwise change color on contact with smoke appears attractive. something to put in the filter that when you suck on it, the chemicals will make it change from, like, white to brown. and you will look at it and go: oh, look, the bad stuff is being taken out. color change materials would probably have little or no effect on the actual efficacy -- efficiency of the filter tip material, the advertising and sales advantages are obvious. and it was important enough to make it a disclosure invention so you could get a patent and everything else. it shows their intent. it shows what filters -- back up, please -- were always about. magic trick, right? that is an intentional deception to make sales, to keep people smoking, and that is intentional. and that is a but in the '50s when the cancer scare i did that one. i talked about the shifting because as dr. proctor said: we lost a lot of smokers when folks started hearing it was bad, like in the 1964 surgeon general's report. came out, they saved a lot of their customers from making those exit gates with the false health reassurance of filters. justification. they have to reject -- the defense experts have to reject the records that say -- say it the way it is, the credible records. they have to reject those records. they want to supremely emphasize, like what dr. mcgregor did with the reference to solvents and being a janitor, then that is -- that, you know, it is all that and a bag of chips. i mean, that is the -- that is the cat's pajamas, that is it. that one record. well, you know, pick and choose. i say if you want to be consistent, accept the records and explain them reasonably, what do they reasonably mean, what is the reasonable interpretation of the records? but if they see something in a record i do not know if you ever saw it, but so if you reject what these folks had to say, you are empowered to do it. you can move them out there. you do not have to accept what they say if you decide they are not believable. that is believability of witnesses. and of course, you know, there is that movie the englishman that walked up a hill and came down a mountain. they had a -- it did not qualify as a mountain, so they went built a bunch of rocks on it to get it ten feet higher so that they could get it categorized as a mountain. this business about mount snow, the ski hill where he went to watch the bike race. and he was walking up the hill. in terms of credibility, why put a witness on the stand and start with this note which says: hiking up mountain, when you know that the rest of the notes from the same day or the day before say, the dictator goes: walking up a hill by mount snow. walking up the mountain at mount snow to watch a bike race. that -- is that -- you know, is that really the why do that? is that credible? is you know, images, illusions, mr. furr: objection. mr. schlesinger: -- than have lived to mr. furr: objection. mr. schlesinger: -- the tobacco so, you know, it was not mount everest, full picture? is that really telling it the way it is, you know? right, the view from the rongbuk monastery in tibet looking at the north face of everest. that is the highest mountain in the world. impressions. you can create all kinds of them, right? but, i mean, the fact of the matter is, you know, there are more people who have climbed that mountain -- face -- industry. sidebar:) mr. furr: objection. mr. brenner: objection, your honor. mr. schlesinger: will you hold my time? mr. furr: do you need to approach? the court: yes, i do. (the following discussion was held so i object to it, and i move to strike. mr. schlesinger: judge, perfectly through on the transcript, but as he does every case and as the objection is sustained in every case, mr. schlesinger just argued to the jury that more people have walked up mount everest than have filed an engle -- litigated an engle tobacco case. no such basis for the evidence in the record. he gets stopped every time. that is why he kept doing it over my objection. appropriate argument. we made it several times. no reason to object. no reason to interrupt. just move along and we would not have to have interruptions because it messes up keeping my time. doing anything wild or crazy. this is a perfectly appropriate thing to say. it is closing argument. you are allowed to be a little bit rhetorical, a little poetic. you are just allowed to do that. that is -- that is the whole fun of being a lawyer. these are very simple, easy -- i'm not i was hoping maybe some of these could mr. furr: i do not know what came mr. furr: there is no evidence about court: all right. sustain the mr. furr: move to strike. (the sidebar discussion was concluded the number of cases tried. there is no evidence about the people that have climbed mount everest. objection. court:) the court: all right. i sustained the objection. i'm going to strike the reference to the mount everest reference completely, and it should be stricken and not considered by the jury in your deliberations. court:) start -- anyway, so that is mount everest. dr. farber, and that was hard to do, but sponsorship theory tells us if somebody actually does give up a point who is adverse to your position, you are supposed to emphasize it, so that is what i'm doing. please proceed. (the sidebar discussion was concluded mr. schlesinger: anyway -- i'm going to so we did get a nice concession from and he did -- he did say: well, if you and, by the way, do you remember did you hear dr. dan talk about the only evidence you heard from the have copd, it was caused by cigarettes. he admitted that. so i thought that was an important point to emphasize. i wanted to remind you. dr. dan? dr. dan, the heart doc, right? what about the tenormin as a heart disease medicine? tenormin? they could have asked him any question they wanted. tenormin is a heart disease medicine. defense side in this case was from the lung doctor, because people -- doctors treat the whole man. lung doctors know about heart, heart doctors know about lung, that is the way it is. but none of their doctors know about addiction, right? the heart doctor whose main business is from heart disease from addiction to cigarettes? the lung doctor whose main life's work is emphysema, copd, and lung cancer from addiction does not know about addiction? mention tenormin, the drug that he is been on since he got the coronary artery disease diagnosis in late '90, '91, that he is been on tenormin for his and then their heart doctor does not what did dr. farber admit? and i and it shows right in here that the heart disease all those years, medical treatment. remember him doing it. you may have noticed it, he did not want to admit it, but he did. and he had slipped in something about tenormin, but the fact is, is it is used for coronary artery disease, and you did not hear a word about it from their heart expert. why was that? patient was worked up for possible coronary artery disease seven years ago. he had a stress test which was mildly abnormal. there is the tenormin. there is several references in here to the use of tenormin for coronary artery disease right in the class period. after spending a lot of time with farber on whether or not he was treated for copd, why did not they ask the heart doctor: was he treated for heart disease with tenormin? did not hear a word about that, right? limited coronary artery disease. prior cardiac testing, right? they have to adjust the tenormin because he is got bradycardia, slow heart rate. and when they brought the heart doctor the tenormin can affect it. they can it is not the fingernail doctor, the dr. soloway who had worked with the guy, adjust the tenormin for the heart disease. right there, smoking cigarettes is a substantial contributing cause of his heart disease. that is testimony from dr. soloway who treats the whole man, who knows about lungs, who knows about hearts, who has to be able to do surgery on urological patients. toenail doctor, the earlobe doctor. doctors treat patients, they consult, they work together. a colleague like benedetto at the university of miami. common denominator he has in his history? cigarette smoking. boom. to me that is critically important. each individual disease corroborates the other. we talked about that. oh, that is a lot. we may not do too much about that, but it is a way of -- we will do this in rebuttal, talking about he was not a resident. if he was a resident, he was not addicted. if he was addicted, he still should have chosen to quit. even if he was addicted and so what was the unitary explanation, the smoking did not cause his bladder cancer. his heart disease did not manifest before it caused his disease, the defendants are zero percent at fault. even if he was addicted and it led to the diseases, he was a hundred percent at fault. his bladder cancer was caused by being a janitor that could not hear well. bob does not have copd. smoking did not cause his cad. bob's cad was caused by something else. a, b, cs, anything but cigarettes. that is the defense. november 21, '96. he had his heart surgery in 2003. and even if he had a disease, all our fraud and concealment, all that advertising, all that filter reassurance, that did not influence bob. so, you know, we will talk about that in rebuttal. i'll tell you the goat story, if i can remember to, in rebuttal. factors other than smoking. the most important type of story is one that casts doubt on the cause and effect theory of the disease of smoking. misdirection. let us look at anything but tobacco, anything but cigarettes, some factor or so he talks about distraction or all right. he smoked all the cigarette ignore the cigarette causes. dr. proctor testified about that. lucky strike, all these things. even the name of the pack, lucky, it is not lucky, it was not lucky for bob to smoke those cigarettes. even the name of the pack suggests something good, it is going to be lucky. brands of the -- of all three -- of all three defendants who are here, and some of have them bought each other out, but they are all responsible for the prior companies. and it is explained as a cumulative effect. the addiction substantially contributed to his bladder cancer and each cigarette contributes. dr. bernsley explained it. every cigarette causes damages. all three of these witnesses explained it. it is a cumulative effect. each cigarette -- the addiction is cigarette to cigarette. the damage is cigarette to cigarette. and dr. soloway said it elegantly -- doctors, you know, physicians, when they write reports and they comment on each other, they will use words like "an elegant study," you know, "elegant analysis." sometimes a man of stature like dr. soloway, he really, in a word, can sort of put the patina of it that we lawyers, voluble and verbose, do not necessarily -- they say brevity is the soul of wit. there is nothing brief about this, and i know that, but dr. soloway said: simply speaking, sir, the more one smokes, the more likely they are to have the altered effect, the dna damage. it is that simple. it is not complicated. it is an elegant statement by a man eminently qualified to make that statement. it a legal cause? you already know the answer that we hope -- our side of the story is the most credible. it is met with the preponderance of evidence, and you will check off that all three indeed were caused, contributed to be caused substantially by cigarettes. that is on the verdict form. and then of course they all happened in the critical time period, between '90 and '96, and while he qualified as a resident, even if part time, but a resident, nonetheless, of florida. he so was he addicted to cigarettes? was so -- and of course the cigarettes all and what dr. proctor says is this middle was a resident and citizen of florida, all residents and citizens. contributed. even though he smoked a lot more than others, the fact is, is they all substantially contribute so there is multiple questions, but we hope you will check yes on all those boxes because you will find objectively the evidence supports doing so. quote, because some of the other stuff i've already hit you with: millions of people started quitting in the '50s, but millions of those who did not quit shifted over to filters believing they would be safer, which unfortunately they were not. bob fell. we talked about complicit or unwilling. the surgeon general was unwitting. that should be unwitting. i apologize. lawyers that ran that conspiracy inside the halls of these tobacco companies, they were complicit, and the surgeon general was unwitting, unwitting. so that is exactly the trap into which and the doctors, the scientists, the so we talked about the third-party and it would look like the scientist was and then i put this up real quick. it is strategy, using -- the industry would get other folks to do their dirty work for them. disputing that it caused harm when really they were being paid as shields. dr. proctor talked about that. those three entities were all part of that conspiracy. they were the lobbying arm, the defensive front, the holding strategy, you know, the best insurance tobacco could buy to defend their position. an old painting, and there is an old story about the monkey and the cat's paw, and i learned this from my dad, those who -- pulling your chestnuts out of the fire. so the cat in this case is the surgeon general, and the monkey is the tobacco industry that uses the paw of the surgeon general to pull the chestnuts out of the fire so the cat's paw gets burned, not the monkey, the idea that an unwitting accomplice, a third-party -- the third-party strategy: use someone else to do your dirty work. that is the point of this whole painting. he talked about leakage, how sometimes it is an old story. it is been around forever. there is wood cuts going back to the 15th, 16th century on it. we talked about how they celebrated it, brilliantly conceived, but it was always a holding strategy, creating doubt about the health charge without actually denying it. these conspiratory groups were set up as an industry shield and a front. the truth slipped out of all the faults of all the research they were paying for, but when there was something where some harm was found by smoking, the industry that was supposedly searching for the truth would just cut off their funding. figure out a way to block that nicotine we would be digging our own grave. all right. half a million people a year graves being dug, but the tobacco industry humanizing themselves is worried about their own grave, even though they are not alive, they do not have a heartbeat. contracts, the right to control publications which could be detrimental to industry, carefully and they talked about if somebody could okay. so the ctr should work with lies cost lives. that is the simp- -- planned not to be able to harm the industry, avoid any subjects to relate human disease to smoking. this is all in evidence, folks. these documents are all in evidence. you saw some of them, but it is important to remind you because we talked so much about other things. i want to remind you. hopefully the elegant way, the simple way to state why it matters if you concealed the truth from people who have a right to know the truth and not to have it concealed. and if you give them alternatives like filters and things like that to confuse them and give them doubt, lying hurts people. it does cost lives. it has a real effect. it connects up to bob. it connects up to the country. this is an internal document from the '60s: our basic position in the cigarette controversy, right, the manufactured controversy, is subject to the charge and may be subject to the finding that we are making false or misleading statements to promote the sale of cigarettes. and what did they say: our basic -- right, what are they saying? i'm not kids do not know. and this is in the going to repeat that. but, again, the ftc report, notice of what was going on in the '60s about kids being lured into the habit, and once they stop, they may never be able to start [sic]. '60s. kids do not know. this would be an acceptable, socially desirable activity, and it is never brought home to them in a meaningful way when teenagers take up the smoking habit, even in the '60s. product. cast doubt. the key word is "confusion," and what did harvey say about his dad? okay. we will put filters on the cigarettes and now they are okay for you, and the surgeon general was saying cigarette smoking was bad. it was very confusing having to decipher what to do. when you had these conversations with your dad about it with filters, what would he say? harvey detected his father was confused. he was the perfect customer. he did everything they wanted him to do. they wanted him as a customer. they did not want to him to quit. they gave him the filter to confusion was key. doubt is our the tobacco companies were saying: psychological crutch, illusion of now we know, filters -- now we know, the keep him smoking and that helped do it. filtration, if there is anything bad, we will remove it. it is a gimmick all along. like a seat belt made of spaghetti, it is not going to do a darn thing. new science is filters make cigarettes more deadly, more dangerous with deeper inhalation, deeper cancers, adenocarcinomas, deep in the little alveoli of the lung as opposed to the old squamous cell carcinomas. they have changed the kind of cancer to a worse kind of cancer because of a marketing tool; it created the illusion. documents say? from philip morris, the filter tips purely a merchandising and sales proposition, making use of therapeutic claims. merchandising and sales proposition. said: the statements were reassuring. i wanted to smoke. they said it was okay. i was ambivalent about the whole thing way back. i did not know what to believe. i did not know to and what did their own internal internal documents admitting purely a so the essence of the case is what bob who did you believe? myself. it was not a belief. it was a believe them or not. hope, a psychological crutch, that it was. i hoped it was true, but it proved it was different. what is that song by -- the boxer? mr. hammer: simon & garfunkel. mr. schlesinger: simon & garfunkel, right? a man hears what he wants to hear and disregards the rest, right? it is -- it is the nature of man. if you give him a reassurance of something, if you dilute the message of harm. you are giving the addict a place in which he can live within himself in that world of denial, in that hope that maybe it will not we bad for him. in that hope that that filter will help. and seidman explained it -- mr. gdanski: that is from bob. mr. schlesinger: oh, that is from bob? mr. gdanski: yeah. you already did dr. seidman's testimony. deposition: there was doubt in my mind. the and he is an addict, by the way, that mr. schlesinger: this was from bob's that is what complicated the situation and dr. henningfield said folks were tobacco companies kept on telling me the magic filters. filters would take this out of cigarettes. they convinced me that i could be all right to smoke if i had filtered cigarettes. that was the publicity from the tobacco companies themselves. that is why they put filters on the cigarettes because they could take a lot of the harmful ingredients and so forth. more. that is what made it harder to quit. uninformed because they did not get the information in the '60s, '70s, and '80s. that was from the videotape. be afraid to admit that you might have made a different choice had you understood then what you know now. that is 2003. pamphlet existed and the whole world knew and bob knew and everybody knew, and they made good on their promise to stop making them or do something different to make them safer, not let them be addictive, not them let be inhalable, make it more like a pipe or a mouth puffing cigar or something, and what does philip morris say: do not now imagine 50 years earlier if this bob would have made a different choice so then on the verdict form, when it that is what we contend is applicable to bob. had he have known what he should have known. and this is how you teach your kids. the idea being -- if you are telling your kids: do not smoke, and you are a smoker, that is from this pamphlet, it is in evidence, you can look at it. how can do you tell your kids not to smoke if you are a smoker? do not be afraid to admit basically that you are addicted and you might have made a different choice if you understood now -- if you understood then what you understand now. your honesty. that applies to bob. think i did this. doctor -- did not i already do this? comes to these intentional torts: was there fraud an effect on bob? and we suggest you answer the question yes. suggest you answer the question yes. i'll come back to that. but, again -- i your child will respect your dishon- -- was the fraud an effect on bob? we did it influence him, whether there was similarly that they all conspired reliance? remember reliance goes both ways. reliance worked great. they had to rely on the reliance of their customers or they would not have kept selling these cigarettes. they had to rely on the misunderstanding of addiction, on holding out hope and beliefs that filters would not hurt you. so we hope you answer these questions yes. we think the evidence suggests that you should. together, the same thing. it was -- they -- they expected folks to rely -- the court: counselor, you are at an hour. did you want to reserve the rest of the time or -- minutes, judge. i'll take off the back. conspiracy, was it reasonable for bob, just like so many like him? sure, it was. questions. hopefully you will answer them yes. i had a verdict form. do you know where the verdict form is? i have it. mr. schlesinger: i'll go for a few more in any event, in furtherance of the so these are the intentional tort talking about choice, intent, control -- talking about intent, choice, and the messages, the marketing, how they and every step along the way, they were control, the defendants had control over everything, everything. manufactured the cigarette, the way they manipulate the nicotine, how they market to kids. so talking about control, they had a lot of control. aware they had great opportunities to tell the truth, and they chose not to tell the truth in places along the way that would have impacted folks like bob. all these different places along the way. they controlled the business choices and what were their motivations? profits. now that is a warning. anybody going to get up on that? why? that rattlesnake tail, when it rattles it is: do not come here. i'm going to bite you with a poisonous, venomous poison. that is fear. that is -- that stokes avoidance, right, if you really want to make a message. we talked about, i think with is anybody going to get near that? is it used to be smoke made people run from dr. seidman, talking about what makes a person afraid. it because it could be danger. now smoke was inhaled in the lungs, an illusion of safety, an addiction that folks did not know about for years. that is something to be afraid of. is that really how cigarettes were portrayed in the '40s, '50s, or '60s to bob? is that really how? no. and here are the warnings, the only warnings there ever were, and i'm not going to fall into the trap. "warning" when it says "caution." that is all it says is "caution." the first time that that ever sat on a pack of cigarettes. thirty-four years before they were forced to put that on the pack of cigarettes, 38 years. fifty-three years, 1985, has not been changed since. thirty years later, those are still the warnings. all right? so bob had been smoking for 34 years by they have trained me to use this word what do you think? what do we have on notice in the do you want to play that? no, i do not if a kid is getting ready to go off of a '60s of the efficacy of the warnings and the federal trade commission? there is virtually no evidence that the warning statement on cigarettes has had any significant effect. want to play it. i do not want to play it. diving board into an empty pool and there is a no diving sign there and you see him going past the no diving sign and you are like: okay. okay. go ahead. go ahead. you have been warned. to stop him: hey, kid! and you run after him and try to grab him. think about efficacy warnings for bob who smoked for 34 years before a caution saying it may be hazardous to your health or it may not have been. and they should have quit lying. bob should have quit smoking. okay. they should have quit lying. no evidence the warnings had any significant effect. the warning is easy to explain. it never changes. nobody pays any attention to it. or do you do everything you can to try bob should have quit smoking. yeah. this is the ftc: the warning has no and take a look there, the top left-hand we talked about truth in advertising. they spent more in a day than the public effect. and that is after 1966 when it was a caution that said: it may be hazardous. health authority spent in a year. that is the social solvent i talked about, diluting the message. corner, see what it says with bob: more doctors smoke camels than any other cigarette. remember that ad with the three doctors? next tuesday. images, you know. that has a powerful influence. we will skip him. we will come back to him. skip that. so let me get the elmo and i'll put this up. you see it our way and you get past a lot of those first preliminary questions and things like that skip that. marlboro country, those are some nice three doctors. remember he said: i ninety-five next tuesday. ninety-five here is -- when you get past the -- if however, we are willing, for purposes of and you get to percentages of fault, all right. in my -- in my argument to you, i say the evidence would support a percentage as low as you want to go to zero and make him a complete innocent. this question, to accept our fair share of the blame if you think he should have tried harder and he heard and he knew and he should have stopped sooner or he should have overcome the addiction before there was such things as nicotine gum or therapy like dr. daniel seidman offered, but still reynolds should get 35 percent, philip morris should get twenty percent. if you want to give bob shulman ten percent, you can do it. did i get it right? down. so i would not have to worry about it. anyway, take a look. that is how we suggest you fill it out. but here's the good news. this is your burden. we are going to be on not only can you do that -- mr. gdanski: you misspoke. mr. schlesinger: 35, 35, 20, 10, no? mr. gdanski: you got it right. mr. schlesinger: that is why i wrote it there is about $400,000 worth of medical your time. you can fill it out any way you want. you can adjust those numbers any which way you want and put more or less, however you want. and it will be your decision, right? but because of the distribution of smoking, this is how -- this is how we recommend you cover it. now this is what we recommend for damages, pain and suffering, $8 million and 450,000 for past medicals and future medicals. bills in evidence. i'm pretty sure the bulk of those are related to the diseases he got from smoking. you will see from evidence -- objection, your honor. misstating what is in evidence per our discussions this morning about past medical bills. do not want to choke on a gnat, judge. can i just move on? i will not talk about that anymore. the court: all right. i'll just sustain the objection and strike that from the record. the jury should disregard the it. mr. brenner: objection, your honor. mr. schlesinger: in any event -- i move on. schlesinger: so it is past medical it is restoration damages, and i played bills, future medical bills. you will have, i think, medical bills in evidence. you make that decision. but how do i get to 8 million. it is a big number. right? a lot of money. he is an old man. how do you get to that number? it is -- it is restoration damages, compensation damages. with it in my head and i figured that -- opinion, your honor. disregard the personal opinion of counsel. record. pain and suffering damages, compensation, restoration damages, as trying to make up for the harm, to make up for the loss. newspaper for a job and the job was to suffer from heart disease and to have to change an appliance and a bag with a reconstructed human nonbladder mr. schlesinger: yes. so -- the court: it is stricken from the mr. schlesinger: you can think about mr. furr: objection as to counsel's the court: okay. sustained. please if there was an advertisement in a furr: objection, your honor. mr. brenner: that is a golden rule. mr. furr: that is a golden rule out of your intestines and never urinate again, never have sex again and -- okay. he is 75. they sell a lot of viagra, so there is always hope and even at 75 you took away his manhood, that means something. it is a significant, serious injury, but if somebody advertised for that job, to have that job, right, and they would pay 50 bucks an hour, right, a thousand bucks a day, would anybody take that job? violation. i have a motion. sidebar:) asked the jurors to put themselves in the spot of the plaintiff and asked how much money it would take for them to be willing to undergo the injuries that he is incurred. that is a strict violation of the golden rule. i move to strike it, and i'll have a motion as soon as you rule. mr. schlesinger: hold my time, please. (the following discussion was held mr. furr: your honor, counsel just schlesinger: i'm waiting for the golden rule, judge, if i say: would judge to rule. you, jurors, take that job? would you jurors -- how much would you want for your injury?, that is golden rule. i know what golden rule is. i've been giving closing arguments 30 years. that is not a golden rule argument, not even close, not even close. and i've heard the tobacco defendants try to create golden rule out of nongolden rule many, many, many times. exists in florida is if you tell the jury: how much would you want if it was you? how much would be fair if it was you? how much would you want? that job? yes, sir. of course. as a juror, take that job? it is not golden rule. the court: he said: would anybody take the court: he did not say: would you, mr. schlesinger: exactly. perfect -- the only golden rule argument that mr. furr: but of course that is court: i am going to strike the mr. schlesinger: right. it is the court: well, i'm going to strike it implicit. he is asking the jurors: would you accept that amount of money? your honor, it is rhetoric. reference to it, but i do not view it as a golden rule violation because, if it was, he would have to say "would you" as opposed to "would anybody." "anybody" is part of argument. appropriate argument, so do not strike it, judge, because it -- just to be on the cautious side, but i do not -- a golden rule violation. okay? court:) strike the reference to: would anybody take that job? that is stricken from the record, and the jury should disregard it. thank you. please proceed. mr. schlesinger: a thousand dollars a mr. schlesinger: yes, sir. the court: -- i do not think that it is (the sidebar discussion was concluded the court: all right. i'm going to it also includes his future life day, $50 an hour for that job that he was given by the tobacco companies at the end result when others became the replacement smokers for him is about $365,000 a year, give or take $400,000 a year for the 20 years, that is about $8 million. expectancy. if you want to extend it out you can go to $9 million. i'm afraid to ask you for 10 or more, but i've got to tell you, you are allowed to give them as much as you want. you can give them 10, you can give them 12 and a half, you can give them 15, you can give them a million bucks, you can give them 500,000. it is not my final decision. it is your final decision to decide how to measure the harm and if you have seen the case our way, tell bob and his family through your verdict you place great value on the magnitude of his loss. and he had terrible depression. he was clinically depressed, and what did harvey say, he sat in a chair for two years and did not talk. that was free, an aviator, flying in the air. right? is that clear enough? so this is a man he was a flyer all his life, and now he so this was clinical depression, however, if you think some of it, that is was grounded, emotionally grounded, mentally grounded as a man changed permanently, you know, at a point in his life that he was still a relatively young man. look at the gift of longevity he got but for being marred by the ravages of smoking through no fault of his own really. the percentage. medical. his son saw him and felt for him, and he said he was a "macho" guy and the word afterwards was "meek." he would sit in his chair, and it changed from one extreme to the other. saying this about his dad, right? either -- are either trying to live up to their dad's expectations or make up for their dad's insufficiencies. and we know what harvey was doing as a delta intercontinental 777 pilot for a lifetime. we know what he was doing, living up to his dad's expectations. that is harvey shulman. that is harvey and you know they say that sons are and what did -- let us talk about the height of embarrassment, what does so this is why i say a substantial humiliation, a man who has to be like a baby in diapers. the diapers get wet, embarrassing, happened all the time. that is why he does not go out to restaurants. he say: when it happens, you feel like you are two inches tall. verdict on the order of $8 million is a reasonable -- fair and reasonable amount to consider as compensation to him with the -- with the -- with the fervent prayer and understanding that it is to you and only to your decision to determine this intangible element. and you can adjust it in any direction and we will accept the verdict that you determine. you know that these are substantial amounts of money and it is a human decision-making process. point where you expect it and you have to adapt to it. the pain is a constant including right now, but after all these years, i cannot handle it. living with it now it is been tough, extremely. i even found in the record -- i want to you are a pretty tough guy, used to be, the pain never stops. it gets to a because we talked about that with i think he has the courage. i think so i told you how much to put in there. show you -- when they were considering cancer, a reference where he talked about having the courage. harvey, and this was -- i mean we talked about this about bob and that, i think, applies. clinically he can tolerate it, talking about whether he would undergo the chemo. the additional money i recommended $450,000 for future medicals. doctor visits. he is got urology visits. he gets irritation around the stoma. if any complications occur, he could be hospitalized. it is a small amount over and above this amount. $450,000 is a round number to provide for him in the future on medical matters related to all the things that go along with his bladder cancer. i think -- i think that is it. i'll have another chance to address you after the defense counsel has a chance to address you, and i'll reflect on some of the things that they propose, and i cannot thank you enough for he is got those appliances. he is got the only question on the verdict form is if there is any evidence to discuss, mr. gdanski: scott. mr. schlesinger: oh, yeah, we talked your attention. about that at the beginning. i started with that, but now i'm showing you how to answer it. that is phase ii. bring it to the future in phase ii. how much with regard to punitive damages, that is the punishment, the fine, and we will talk about that. sometimes it has to do with what is called mitigation. the defense is permitted to provide evidence of mitigation of conduct, how have we changed, how are we different, and that would be phase ii evidence and we will debate that point if and when the time comes. through all those questions, get to question number 8 and find by clear and convincing evidence. we will talk about that. there is no doubt about the doubt, and there is no confusion about the illusion. you will see that it was -- i think, i hope that the but to get us there, you have got to work thanks, folks. mr. schlesinger: may it please the so a lot of times with such a long trial the plaintiff's last licks, last at bat. court, counsel again, ladies and gentlemen of the jury, home stretch. during all the other parts of the trial, the defendants went last, like the opening statement. here, because we do have the burden of proof, we are entitled to sort of mop up and rebut some of what defense said and see if we -- this is our last chance to talk. and, you know, remember, the law is not going to say it is someone's fault or not for how long the trial took. i do not think the defense meant to suggest that to you, and the -- we talked early on. the trial took what it took. that is what it was. we looked at the transcript. you can look at your notes. i know you took great notes, but he was on the witness stand on direct for a total of seven and a half hours, cross-examination was six hours. so fair is fair. they told you a lot of the evidence they put in they put in on things like dr. proctor took too long. this is how this case went. this system were that that were only true, then cross-examination. i only mention it because that is just not the basis of making a decision about how the case should come out. is far too important, and i -- i -- i -- i hope and know that you guys are totally dedicated as jurors, and so it should not be -- it should not be an issue. were they were only true, were they were only true, that what this -- what this thing does to human beings just magically goes away when you stop using it. millions of people that died years, tens of years, twenties of years, millions of folks that died despite quitting -- the record, your honor. there is no such evidence -- smoking and quitting of other people, and i move mr. furr: objection. mr. schlesinger: -- would be alive. mr. furr: there is no such evidence in mr. schlesinger: there is evidence. mr. furr: -- as to the patterns of mr. furr: there is no evidence in the mr. schlesinger: this -- this -- the court: all right. approach. [#deleted sidebar#] the court: okay. the reference to the quitting aspect of the argument is sustained for the present time. the jury should disregard it. your honor? the court: yes. mr. schlesinger: i wish it were true that when folks quit that meant time passes -- mr. furr: your honor, i'm sorry. i object to counsel expressing personal opinions. references. to the lawyer putting -- you know, referencing mr. schlesinger: may i begin again, the court: sustained. please avoid "i" the jury should disregard the reference it should be -- it is stricken from the himself in the -- in his argument and giving his opinion. record, just like the last one, and you should disregard it. thank you. proceed. mr. schlesinger: thank you. were they were only true in the science and the evidence of what these products do to the humanity that makes up just the united states, 20 million deaths, over half a million deaths a year, were they were only true that quitting meant no dying. this is the cessation-of-use line. this is the death-by-lung-cancer line. dr. teague, in 1953, the cancer does not show up for more than ten years. really what these were, they were just a temporary problem and when folks smoked, there was no meaningful consequence down the road and decades later and people who quit did not wonder in fear when they had a cold or some breathing or something that something had cropped up from smoking. would not that be wonderful? would not it be wonderful if that is it is a -- it is a testimony to the but this is the most deadly artifact in the history of human civilization. that is what dr. proctor told you. awesome ingenuity of man. that is what dr. dunn, the "nicholas kid" -- the "nicotine kid" told you. and it is a terrible scourge on this nation, and if the harm to others, which is the part of the punitive damage instruction that mr. brenner did not show you. you have got the instructions. look at them. if it had nothing to do with this case, then his honor, who labored so mightily to decide what was relevant and appropriate for you to see in here, would not have let it into evidence and yet he did and dr. teague said, ten years or more, from quitting to death. and we know there were 20 million deaths, right, 20 million deaths since 1964. mr. furr said there was 13 million quitters in those first several years, right, and 60 million people quit and nevertheless, 20 million died because, as dr. soloway said, an unrebutted expert -- where is their urologist, right? where is their urologist? i did not need to bring a but when you talk about the scourge of cardiologist or a pulmonologist because my records say he had copd, my records say he had coronary artery disease, but they did not bring a urologist, right, they brought a punchline in dr. mcgregor, and you can reject her and i'm going to show you something she said. these and it is the shame of these things like the sunburn on the forehead, the genetic damage of our cellular structures remains with us for life and when you get the cancer, that is what it is from, right? i'll show you. i'm going to show you. i'm going to go to this and play it. okay? what do we got? are you ready? okay. they want to ask these questions, right? this is what mr. furr started out with. what did he know, when did he know it, and what did he do with that information, talking about bob -- talking about robert shulman, mr. shulman, my client, right? question to them. what about these questions: what did they know? right? when did they know it? right? and what did they do with that let us turn, look in the mirror, turn the i'll show you some filter ads that now ms. ruiz, who spoke last, you know, information? did a good job for her client, the limited role she played, but she also said look at all these things we said, but then they joined the conspiracy. why did not they break the news in the '50s? why did not they tell the world they joined the conspiracy which was to conceal. part of the conspiracy was: we are not going to claim filters are safer, we are just going to imply it. show that, but this is how we look at this and this is why this is a case, it is about bob shulman and so much more. it is a bigger case than just bob or you would not hear about the full effect of smoking. is right -- cut right out of their secret documents. they are a manufacturer of doubt. that is the business they are in. that is what they do. and so when you see this, it is the means of establishing a controversy exists in the minds of the general public. he was part of the mind of this is the business they are in. this they sell cigarettes. they sell doubt. whoever would ever qualify? in other the general public. he is one of them. advertising is meant to affect a broad audience. the filter fraud was meant to affect a broad audience. words, every defense argument they made, could not every single one of those be equivalently assigned to anybody that ever came into any one of these courtrooms and said: hey, this is what happened. i mean think about that. it is a -- it is a one-size-fit-all defense. talk about generic dr. proctor. it is generic defense, right? and dr. proctor is -- dr. proctor does not talk about the individual smokers because he is a historian of the broad conspiracy, the fraud, the devastation. he wrote a thousand-page book on it. and there is no counternarrative. there is no other story. we named all those books that are part of telling the story for those who want to know it of what happened in the world of the cigarette century and the cigarette papers and the question of intent and all those books that are part of the knowledge base from which dr. proctor now goes further. what do they say: if i have seen and that is what dr. proctor did with the and his book is as recent as 2012 and he further, it is because i've stood on the shoulders of giants. base of knowledge since the late '90s when the documents came out. he stands on the shoulder of giants and he sees further. was invited to the white house. he was there because he was in the surgeon general's report. the major body of knowledge on these things. now if, in fact, his testimony is generic, that he does not talk about the individual smokers, can you imagine how much more time he would have been spending discussing bob shulman. like it would have been three questions. did this all apply to bob. yeah. boom, there would have been thousands of additional pages of testimony. why is it, as he testified, they have taken his deposition a hundred times? if he does not talk about the smoker and it is generic and he says the same thing every single time, then why does the defense take his deposition over and over and over and over again? why do they do that? ask yourself that question. nobody, nobody has done a better job of he -- dr. proctor is a public health manufacturing doubt. when you decide to render punishment, it will be for the purposes of deterring others. what other corporations, what other industries manufacture doubt or do things that harm the public health? advocate. he advocates against and for the abolishment of cigarettes. do you know why? because they should be abolished. whatsoever to cigarettes. that is no longer an excuse. they are nice, they are fun, they are satisfying. no, they are machines -- they are just machines of disease and suffering and pain. and what do they say about mr. shulman started smoking in defiance. i showed you this. their word. he started smoking in defiance. it was frowned upon. they did not want you to do it. what are they saying? he fit the model. they describe him every which way in their papers. they sought to in the 1930s, it was a dirty habit or there is no discernible benefit what did dr. teague say? to be defiant. -- and the other thing about this you know what the condo commandos do, the evidence supports in multiplicity of get the kids to be defiant. it was a right of passage for adulthood. this is their word. yvonne business, when did he quit. look, i told you, i think -- no, not what i think. ways that bob continued to smoke or relapsed and smoked again into the '80s, even into the '90s. there was plenty of examples of it. he even testified about living down in lighthouse point, florida and getting hassled. they hassle you because he was smoking downstairs and a second floor neighbor started screaming at him at the end -- in front of the condo when he got fined. remember he said: you can ask the condo board. busted out with that, 95 years old. they say he is losing his memory. that document they pointed to was recent memory. and sure, he is 95. none of us are going to remember as well as we did when we were 55 or 35, but he remembered that, and that was -- that was a story that came right out of his mouth unprompted. you know what? that had the i mean, where does that come from? he he smoked. he was addicted. he was ring of truth. it seemed to make sense. it is -- you can -- you can suggest that, but the reason we stuck with the '70s for dr. soloway and dr. bernsley was that is all, it was good enough. it is not -- it is not the defining issue whatsoever, not what -- not at all. deceived. he got sick in a multiplicity of ways from three similarly tobacco-caused diseases. and they start playing games around it, but the -- yvonne's dad, that was the progenitor of these discussions died in the mid '90s, and it was around that time -- and harvey said: my dad smoked at my 50th birthday party. there is lots of evidence of it, but i -- i mean, we do have limited time. take one second, a little personal aside. night for the plaintiffs to get up and give rebuttal, you bring a pitchfork. okay? many nights, you guys are sharp, and i'm like: i can actually make a rebuttal argument and they are not going to kill me, because you guys are trained normally, you guys come in at 6:00 at but here's one neat thing, i'll just but because we worked so late for so but the bailiff tells me pizza is now to pay attention late. and it is like that is the exercise or practice, so fortunately, i'm -- i'm able to do this, and it just -- it makes me feel good because i -- i know what it is like. and we have all done it, to give that late-night rebuttal to the crowd of folks that has not -- has not been here late. but you have, and so you are hopefully bright-eyed and bushy-tailed. coming, and that is about how long i've got because when you start smelling that pizza, i better move on. so i'll try to get through this. in any event, there is some evidence, and, you know, this is from the book as well, dr. -- my dr. dan -- i'm going to call him dr. dan. he just wants to help people. he tells people in the current time: yeah, you can do it. that cigarette does not have any magic power over you. come on, man. you can do it. you have to give addicts a red hot, nonstop, clear, concise message that is not confusing. if what else are you going to tell them? the one thing he was not control of was dr. seidman, another quote from his book this was a man of safety. he controlled you give addicts an alternative, psychological crutch, they are going to be going to there belief system. a man hears what he wants to hear and disregards the rest. everything in his live. she checked those ailerons. he checked the -- the gauges. he checked the fuel, the oil. he was a -- he was a safety-conscious man, and he was in control. smoking, and he did not like it. it was embittering to him. but he tried. he certainly did try. he gave it his all. is: it is a monster. there are many ways this monster will grab ahold of you, and you have got to learn how to outsmart it. how do you stay -- because he is trying to teach folks how to quit. sound byte out of whole -- you know, the -- look, this was a long swindle by tobacco. right? it is hard to tell in a sound byte. that is why it is taken us so long. it is a history that goes back 50 years, but this is the kind of thing he says. you know, you cannot take one -- one while willpower plays a role in let us look at this problem in another let us play that, please. (video clip played as follows:) mr. seidman: for many, willpower means being stronger than the cigarette. they experience quitting as a boxing match between smoking and not smoking. self-control, success in quitting is not simply about being a weak or a strong person. after all, many strong, disciplined people have been defeated in their efforts to quit. yul brynner, john wayne tried to quit many times. so quitting cannot just be about being strong or trying harder. way. can you imagine telling someone who does not know how to swim to just jump in the water and be strong or try harder, or someone who does not play the piano or read music to just be strong and perform what, to them, are incomprehensible notes on a page? how you approach the problem of quitting smoking makes all the difference. if you rely on willpower alone, you may end up feeling even more powerless than when you started. the harder you try to bide time by the overall reliance on willpower and stalling and delaying taking a smoke, the more you start to feel like a stripped gear that cannot get traction. being strong can actually backfire. many smokers who use ineffective methods to quit eventually give up. they may avoid any talk of quitting and take on a bunker mentality. many suffer a loss of confidence, begin to feel helpless, and start to believe they are just not strong enough to quit. one of the greatest obstacles to trying new approaches to quit successfully. (video clip concluded.) that is the cutting edge in 2010, and he said it described bob shulman to a tee. there are -- there are different kinds of people in the world of statistics, right? splitters, and i think you have seen in this case that the defense has been the splitters. strangely enough, this myth then becomes one of the things they tried to do with so, you know, what did -- you know, we call them the lumpers and the 1 my 94-year-old client, god bless him, he is going to be 95 years old next tuesday, married on -- going into his 75th year -- year of marriage, was talking about what his wife knew or did not know. and remember, they took their depositions in 2014. and what -- what bob told you was: you know, she has alzheimer's. okay. and so that was a poignant and touching moment because she got up and she cooked breakfast for him, and then that is part of the reason why we did not put her on the stand a long, long time to talk because she is got alzheimer's. you know, they are gone before they are gone. it just -- choked up because of this morning. years old, and she has alzheimer's. and she got up and made a breakfast for me. so -- and then what -- mr. hammer: do you want to play it? mr. schlesinger: what? mr. hammer: play it? mr. schlesinger: sure, play it. (video clip played as follows:) a. i'm sorry that i'm choked up, but i'm q. why is that? a. i got up to come here -- and she is 93 he is not hurdling. right? the law they would like every percentage point of (video clip concluded.) now something else we heard about with the splitters and the hurdles, mr. furr's hurdles. really, the hurdles? you got the -- you got the -- you got the law. he is not going to be -- he is not doing hurdles. his hurdling days are over. i'm 56. my hurdling days are over. does not say anything about hurdles. they would like them to be hurdles. fault that you assign to them to be another hurdle. hurdles each for reynolds and 35 hurdles for -- and every dollar should be another hurdle, an endless series of hurdles for a 95-year-old man. that is not fair. that is not what the jury instructions say. that is not what the verdict form says. you have got it. you will read it. you have got the evidence. but putting hurdles in front of him, no, that is not what -- that is not the law. that would be -- that would be 35 so let us play this. (video clip played as follows:) q. you do not have any evidence that rj a. that is right. they knew the truth. (video clip concluded.) you see, they did not -- they did not -- reynolds has ever had any information establishing that smoking causes bladder cancer that was not already known to the public health community, correct? they knew that it did cause bladder cancer, and they concealed that. they did not -- they did not show that to you. and the bladder cancer line that did not go up that dr. proctor testified about -- i have the clip. going to say it. if i have time, i'll come back and play it. explained that is because they came up with cures for bladder cancer. transurethral resection that they tried on bob, to scrape the inside of the bladder and take the cancer out. the bladder cancer line, dr. proctor i'm not going to play it. i'm just there is that turp procedure, the but they could not do it because the thank god they got it, but they had cancer was invasive into his muscle wall because he was sick with cancer that was invading to the point where it was a t2 lesion. that is in the records. that is right on the verge -- they did not have lymph nodes -- of spreading out of body where it would kill you. not -- he could not get away with the scraping. he had to have his whole bladder and his prostate removed. that is a big surgery. cured most bladder cancers when they are caught in time, right, even with a much less severe procedure than he went through. board. this is lung cancer deaths. this is not -- and lung cancer is -- lung cancer -- and dr. proctor testified to this, lung cancer is a death sentence. in many, many, many, it is 90 percent lethal. cancer, and that is why he is here 20 years later. so you have to understand that dr. proctor the point being that modern medicine so, therefore, this board is a death it is not the same disease as bladder do you want to play it? we will play it. a. that is right, yeah, because bladder q. sir, in fact, based upon your review of explained that. baron says i've got to play it. play it. (video clip played as follows:) the historical record, is not it true that the age-adjusted bladder cancer mortality rate in the united states did not go up substantially between 1950 and 1977, right? cancer becomes more and more curable, unlike lung cancer where, essentially, every diagnosis ends in death. that is one of the reasons you have to be careful about whether you are talking about mortality or morbidity, which are quite different. (video clip concluded.) so this is a little more of the whole story. we have been doing point, counterpoint in front for weeks in front of y'all. we could do this for another week or two. notes. you -- some of y'all were diligent notetakers, and it helps refresh recollections and put things in perspective. but that is why you all have got your hired scientists, misled the surgeon knew that half of smokers would die. you know, what was concealed from bob? what was he entitled to rely that they would not conceal [sic]? all these things. we talked about them before, but, you know, all these things. they purposely misled the public on all these things. general, sneered and belittled the public health authorities, studied nicotine and knew it was highly addictive, targeted children. ninety percent start as teenagers. knew that smoking cigarettes was killing hundreds of thousands of americans a year, and manipulating the levels of nicotine. 70 cancer-causing agents, arsenic, cyanide, radioactive polonium. and there was a toxic exposure, and i think it came from dr. mcgregor. we are going to talk about her too. were giving up an illusion of filtration. they were purposely misleading the public on the safety of filters. where do you think those engle findings came from? from no evidence? they just magically filtered cigarettes no safer. and they let us play this, please. (video clip played as follows:) q. does advertising play a role in a a. we hope so. when we advertise, we do appeared out of the air? there was a jury trial. that was approved by the united states supreme court, the florida supreme court. these are -- these are -- these are -- this is a -- it is a beautiful legacy that you-all have at your disposal. take them out. look at them. embrace them. read them. study them and understand them in the context of why we are here. they are why we are here. person's selection of a cigarette? make the effort, and i think it is fair to assume that the expenditure of large funds for advertising does give status to a brand. q. throughout your tenure with american, it was not only american's position but your position that cigarettes were not injurious to health; is that accurate? a. through my tenure? q. yes. a. yes, that is so. q. that is something american tobacco wanted q. as far as you are concerned, a person is a. yes. q. okay. (video clip concluded.) so -- so he says: advertising matters. a. yes. q. it is a statement that american tobacco a. we issued that statement, yes. q. and as far as -- a. of course we wanted them to believe the public to believe; is that correct? placed great reliance on? it. justified in relying on that statement? we expect folks to rely on advertising. of course they did, and they showed you the -- a couple of ads. there is a whole composite exhibit of ads. you can get them all day long. you can get them on ebay. that is why i have those magazines. the glamorous cigarettes, but they also show a lot of advertisements for cigarettes, multiple pages of advertisements for cigarettes. these magazines, not only do they show pretty much any one you pick up, right, 1 there is a cigarette advertisement, right? any one you pick up, there is a cigarette advertisement on the back, and several throughout.and this was the world that bob grew up and lived in. it is toasted and all this -- all this stuff. and so, look at this. this is all about filters. look at this one here. more scientists and educators smoke kent with the micronite filter. right? 20,000 filter traps. you know, they -- they -- they agreed never to say it is safer explicitly, except right at the beginning of kent a little bit, but they certainly implied it. you know, the new improved filter, and then they would say it is the filter taste. what? the filter taste? they did use titanium dioxide to make the filters white, and the filters would burn brown when you sucked that thing out of it, and you would say, yeah, something's coming out of there. but it was all about filters. it makes good sense to smoke kent. kent filter is the bests. there is millions of these. millions of them. and here's what the 1981 ftc report put out as notice to everybody. it talks about -- and that begs the question: what chance did talk about honest science and the kind a valley of snow holds a log farmhouse jon did this with dr. proctor long ago. he talks about the imagery and the -- the words tell it all. under a blanket of white. smoke rises in the still air from the chimney. a loan cowboy rides his horse through untouched virgin snow, dragging a christmas tree by a rope. it is hard to imagine a more evocative american image, even though the white-boxed cancer warning in the right-hand corner has stained the snow yellow. the reflective pleasure of tobacco pervades the ad. it unifies the desire for a perfect christmas with the experience of smoking. the surgeon general has no chance against this. robert shulman have? of things they said. this is from their own internal documents. okay? our medical and scientific witnesses will say whatever we want them to. they lack credibility and integrity. this is their own admission. another admission that they are liars -- now this is -- this is important. this it creates a real confusing sort of this is also in evidence -- where they say that the funds were administered through the ctr. joint industry funds were used to purchase favorable judicial or legislative testimony, thereby perpetrating a fraud on the public. is significant to take into consideration when you are -- the enormity of the reprehensible elements to this wrongdoing. it is a big historical wrong, and you have seen a lot of it. okay. this is from dr. mcgregor. it was an answer that came out late at night. it was an important question and answer. i wanted to reflect on it with you for a minute because it does create -- and i'll see if i can nail this in a way that makes sense. issue, right, with the way in which mcgregor came off with her opinions that are just so fundamentally flawed, right? bladder cancer, but we do not know why. she said that solvents have not been linked to bladder cancer, right? she said in there that janitors get more so now they took benedetto's notes about now that is a very telling explanation of now think about that. you know, it does not even matter because solvents and they turned it into something about a janitor, and the mere fact of being a janitor that, we do not know why, but it is not from solvents. solvents have not been linked to show bladder cancer, and they do not know why. where she was coming from and how flawed her analysis is. what is it? you know, come on, what is it? where is the science? she is not a bladder cancer urologist. she does not know anything about it. she just came in here and said what she said. it is -- that is just -- that is just not credible. business about solvents, solvents, solvents, and she said: solvents have not been shown to link to bladder cancer. bernsley explained way back when, aniline dyes, now banned, sometimes used by hairdressers, contained beta naphthalene, and that is a potent bladder cancer carcinogen. that is just not accurate. all this our experts testified, soloway. cigarettes are full of beta naphthalene, i'll come back to this. anything but cigarettes. remember we a potent bladder cancer carcinogen. they would have you believe that the mere fact of being a janitor for an unknown reason, that you should accept that is a scientific connection that that causes bladder cancer, and since he was a janitor, he had bladder cancer because of that. showed you the newspaper ad that that march birth is linked to lung cancer. they cite 28 reasons for doubting the cigarette-cancer link. occupational tie in lung and gastric cancer. half of the cancer, people are nonsmokers. talking about them putting out all those years. and with dr. dan, the cardiologist, we say right there based on the increased risk of developing coronary artery 20 years after you quit smoking, is not it true mr. shulman's coronary artery disease would be caused by smoking cigarettes? hypotheticals that smoking would have been a this was that fraud that dr. proctor was i would agree with this set of mr. schlesinger: that was in evidence, the court: okay. no comments. come [#deleted sidebar#] mr. schlesinger: may i start again, the court: yes. that is stricken from mr. furr: how about the heading also, mr. schlesinger: can i just put this the court: again, the jury should mr. furr: no, same issue. take it mr. schlesinger: doctor, is it true -- up? disregard what was up on the screen. down. the court: you know what, we are not using it. we are not using the demonstrative. move on. okay. i've given you an opportunity. let us go. if the research you have seen is true which demonstrates -- this is testimony in the case. demonstrates you have an increased risk of developing coronary artery disease up to 20 years after you have quit smoking, then, sir, is not it true that mr. shulman's coronary artery disease would be caused by smoking cigarettes? hypotheticals that cigarette smoking would have been a contributing risk factor. exclusion of other information, but you do see the cover page of the big book that i handed you is the 2014 surgeon general's report? answer: i would agree with this set of the research you have seen is true which yes, sir. right. i did not say the yes, sir. is that right? answer: yes. okay. it says: in comparison with current -- i'm sorry. it says: in comparison with never-smokers, former smokers had a relative risk of coronary heart disease mortality of 1.9, 10 to 19 years after quitting among both men and women. do you see that it says that there, sir? answer: yes. we cross-examined that time late at night, and he agreed under that scenario bob shulman had smoking as a cause of his cancer. the record, testimony in the record. dr. mcgregor described history? remember how dr. mcgregor said history is what you get from the patient. she said that just the other night. remember how -- what a fuss we had to have with dr. farber about: what does it mean when the record says "history"? this is a couple of months after. at the time of his bladder let us go put up my next slide, please. okay. all right. and then remember how that is a concession from their expert in that is in september of '95. two months cancer, he was told by dr. davis that he had addiction-caused copd. remember that? copd secondary to tobacco abuse. later, he is with dr. rymer, right, and he has a history of copd in rymer's notes when rymer takes his history. the history is, you ask the patient: what do you got? testimony, which said: yeah, i got diagnosed with copd around the time i got diagnosed with bladder cancer. does not it stand to reason that is how it happens? when you get hit and you take those one, two, three punches from cigarette smoking, everything comes together. this. what slide number is this? video technician: 22. mr. schlesinger: okay. so let us talk about something. remember dr. farber finds a way -- i told you about bouncing folks out of the class depending on the dates and playing around with the dates. so here's that record that talks about and that is why we put on bob shulman's so here is something. let us talk about it is not bob's major medical problem. mr. furr: objection. i take offense to copd secondary to cigarette abuse. that is a hook that they cannot get off. it is a class membership hook all by itself. it is not why we are asking for $8 million plus/minus in your good judgment -- which, by the way, what did they suggest would be fair? is it really -- are they that confident and cock sure that you are just going to stiff-arm bob shulman and negate everything -- that. and walk out of here with -- personal attack on counsel. disregard the last argument that counsel just made. it is stricken from the record. move on. topic, but the point is: what did they suggest would be fair? these are human elements of damages. they are humans. they could have suggested an amount. they did not. mr. schlesinger: -- we have proven to you mr. furr: your honor, i object to the the court: sustained. the jury should mr. schlesinger: i was getting off i tried to tell you based on this i said you can go up or down from imagine with dr. farber on the witness it is not a medical bill that you add up. thousand-dollar-a-day analogy i came up with, that is a range. that range as high or as low as you want because i respect the function of the jury. it is humanity. it is what humans do. some folks may think: these amounts are too high. some may think: it does not even begin to measure what happened to a man like this. that is up to you. there is six of you to make this decision. so we respect your role, but i want to just see one thing. stand, every single thing else in this record, which we accept and i continue to accept this record because it still supports our position. everything else is the same. i'm going to change one thing in this record, one thing in this record. pretend, assume hypothetically that september 20th, '85 is the only difference in this entire chart. what does dr. farber say? like schlenther and all those other cases: oh, he had copd. he is now what does dr. farber say? they can if you think that that is what dr. farber here's what they say. why did they lie? out. that is before the magic cutoff of may 5th, 1990. would have done but for that one change in the record, then you know what you can do with dr. farber's testimony. lest some lawyer be looking over our shoulder, i do not concede that even one person dies of a chronic disease that is caused by smoking cigarettes. sauce for the goose is sauce for the gander. that is all i'm saying. we will call that the thanksgiving -- the thanksgiving document when you guys are trying to remember that document, where they said in 1987 in their internal secret documents from the company -- ernie pepples, the company that mr. furr's client bought: i do not concede that one person dies of chronic disease that is caused by smoking, lest some lawyer is looking over my shoulder. something about stupid, foolhardy, bad stuff that we said that we did. okay. the thanksgiving document. and then mr. furr got up and said when it is a man who binds the he can say what he wants to argue and well, remember what us lawyers are? we are not witnesses. we are not evidence. okay. and when we have the guy who is a witness, a corporate witness, he denies that there was ever making up of misleading statements. corporation, they deny to this day. mr. furr is saying it in this courtroom that: i'm sorry for what those guys said. i'm not here to defend that. that is not evidence. that is not testimony. try to persuade you, but his own corporate representative, dr. figlar from rjr, who has testified many times in these cases, and you saw his testimony, he denies everything. page of one of their documents was in the least bit wrong-headed, stupid, bad, or anything like that. that is the sworn testimony, his relentless denial. to say on the packs: i came. i saw. i conquered. not here in this courtroom. now where is the rest of it? so talking about mr. brenner and saying: that is what the -- that is what they used he will not admit to one word on one single but here, right here, it says right oh, it does not have more kick. dr. proctor told you the ammonia makes the cigarettes more addictive. too much ammonia makes them uninhalable, unsmokeable, nasty. that is all that mr. brenner showed you. here: more instantaneous nicotine kick, more free nicotine, and they correlate the sales, more increased ph and nicotine kick from the ammonia compounds. free-base the nicotine. they make these -- the hook as sharp as possible. they make these things as -- as addictive as possible. extractable nicotine contributes to impact in the cigarette smoke. right? the soul of marlboro, remember the secret soul of marlboro? remember the code word satisfaction for addiction? they use a lot more ammonia than bob shulman's janitorial company ever did, and they put it in cigarettes, right? dr. proctor actually say about ammonia? does it come on. they put that stuff in there. so what is he talking about. they okay. ammonia is an impact booster. they -- and what did -- what did yes, it increases its potency, its does it augment a cigarette's nicotine make a more powerful impact of nicotine on the brain? strength. kick? it does. it is more potent. more toxic. more powerful biological effect. it is weakened in the salt state but strengthened when it is been treated with ammonia. i mean, you know, i do not know we did not take leave of our senses here. there was a lot of testimony. a lot of late nights. you have notes, you check and see. video of the diammonium phosphate. that is one of their secret ingredients. that is a chemical. that is not natural. that is the ingenuity of it. it. okay? residency. i'm going to mock -- i had no intention of mocking what mr. brenner said until he made a mockery of this issue, because when you what is next? yeah, i'll skip this. i'll come back to residency. residency. oh, my goodness, ammonia -- and we even showed you a 1 read your instructions, you will see it is not "the" residence. it is "a" residence. and without debate, the man has a residence. he was a resident, a part-time resident, a half-year resident. some people may hate living in florida. it is hot as hell. the snowbirds are clogging up i-95 and the turnpike. decision on prejudice, that he is a snowbird and they are making too much traffic. that is not what it is about. people have dual residences, but it was not something it has to be the residence. it is all residents and citizens. citizen of florida. how do you know that? he had a driver's license in florida. he had a voter's registration card in florida. when he was almost on death's door from bladder cancer, mr. brenner finds an excerpt from the record that says he hates being in florida. he hated everything during that period of time. when his son got up and said: does this you can have more than one residence. but you are not allowed to make your he was a resident of florida and a you are going to pull something out he mr. hammer is very hip on this residency so here the warranty deed says -- this that is a figure of speech that describes explain it? he sat in a chair for two years and would not talk. the son's pain at the love of his father of what is missing from it. rode a bicycle? what does that got to do with it? it is the humanity of it. stuffy, residency stuff, so i must touch on it. he digs -- he is all about the residency. is when they sold the house in maine, the cabin in maine, the mansion in maine, the mcmansion in maine, the cond- -- the high-rise in maine, okay. when they sold the cabin, house, mcmansion in maine, the warranty deed says: we shulmans, right, both of 3150 north house -- northeast 48th court, apartment, lighthouse point, florida. talk about splitters, talk about hurdles. this is really a hurdle in this courtroom? really? really? i mean they even say in the deed. let us see the next one. no? what are you guys doing to me. what did the people that put the okay. now dig for a minute. 2.9 acres. here we go. here, let me click. i've got the -- we are almost done. we really are. right? you heard of a scraper? you heard of somebody doing a teardown and a rebuild? what did he sell it for? 350k, 350 grand. 5700-square-foot house on it that mr. brenner showed you a picture of? how is that -- how does that picture in any way tend to prove or disprove anything in this case? how much was it worth after the 2002 teardown and rebuild? 2.1 million bucks. hm, that is interesting. a land value with a cabin on it, about 350 grand, right? now somebody does -- he shows you a big house that is 5700 square feet that was done five years after mr. shulman sold the house? my goodness, that just -- that stretches the bounds of credulity. lawyer and a very smart man, he would not touch this residency with a ten-foot pole. you notice mr. furr, who is a very good mr. brenner: objection, your honor. please move on to your next okay. and what else did they say? mr. schlesinger: i'll leave that part but when you listen to the argument in the court: sustained. sustained. the mr. schlesinger: yes. mr. furr: can we leave the smart part improper argument. jury should disregard it completely. argument. in? in. okay. i'll leave the smart part in. this case, mr. furr did not make that argument. he left it for someone else to do. he did not go there. okay. and that 5700-square-foot house that was built, it is got nothing to do with bob shulman. i mean talk about something that is got nothing to do with bob shulman. these are all their internal documents. we have got the goods on them. we have got the goods on them. that is why we are here. this is -- were it only true that you could quit smoking and not get sick years later, were that only true. it is not true. the overriding admonition is that philip morris wants to re-evaluate its historic position on smoking and health in three different venues. public statements which its executives and spokesmen make and litigation. nothing said can adversely affect our litigation position. this is what they said -- this is what philip morris said as recently as the '90s as to what is a tobacco company. it is a law firm that sells cigarettes. that is what a tobacco company is. creating a better atmosphere for product liability litigation, no matter what they do, and what is the effect of that? for purposes of litigation, the industry is not willing to concede anything. and in the litigation venue, we will require the plaintiffs to prove causation both legally and scientifically. relations sham. our position continues to mislead the public with a wink. george orwell in 1984 that was made into a film there is a -- there is a book written by this is the industry's ultimate public richard burton represented big and in the movie, the quote from the involving richard burton and john hurt. brother, the all-powerful government entity, and richard hurt had defied the government, the big brother, and he was being corrected, and he was being tortured. and in the movie -- and i mean i'm a movie guy, so i had not read the book, but i saw this scene in the movie, and i remember it from years and years ago. book, as richard burton -- you know, he was liz's husband. remember liz on the front page of the magazine here? talk about a movie star, right? a glamorous movie star. remember her? richard burton was married to her when she was -- when she was it. she was the most beautiful woman in the country. she won an academy award. she is there smoking her cigarette. he is there. he was a shakespearean actor. he was unbelievable. leaning over hurt, also a spectacular actor. he richard burton won an academy award. and he was the bad guy, and he was 1 was the guy that the lizard jumped out of his chest in the movie alien. remember when he like -- when they woke up and the alien jumped out of his chest? but this movie, he is leaning over, and i remember this, and he says to winston, that is the character john hurt: and above all, we do allow the dead to rise up against us. you must stop imagining that posterity will vindicate you, winston. posterity will never hear of you. you will be lifted clean out from the stream of history. we shall turn you into a gas and pour you into the -- minutes remaining. mr. schlesinger: thank you. we will turn you -- you will be lifted clean out from the stream of history. we shall turn you into a gas and pour you into the stratosphere. in a register, not a memory in a living brain. you will have been annihilated in the past as well as in the future. you will never have existed. so i -- i hope that when you take this nothing will remain of you, not a name the clerk: counsel, you have five perhaps there is a reason why he is and i've been carrying this around in my awesome, sacred responsibility as seriously as we know you will in these late-night hours that we have been putting into this case, that you will think about whether that man dutifully belongs in a class that he is indisputably a part of, and you will inscribe him in that class because it will stand as a testament of time. here for so long. perhaps he is here for a reason, to close that circle and help protect future generations. pocket because -- and i've got a feeling -- i've got a good feeling we are going to be seeing you next week, and he is going to celebrate a birthday, right, next week, on tuesday, 95 years. and by that time, you cannot put the candles -- that many candles on a cake, but he deserves 95 candles on the cake. and do you know what else? what do we put on the cake? one more candle, the 96th candle. your verdict, if you see this our way, will be that 96th candle, and that is what we ask you to consider and that is what we ask you to do, and i cannot thank you enough for the effort so