mr. boyce: thank you, your honor. may it please the court. the court: yes, sir. mr. boyce: thank you. members of the jury, good afternoon. it is nice to see you all again and because this is the last time that i get to speak with you in this case, i want to start by thanking you. thank you for your attention, thank you for your willingness to serve. you have been a remarkably attentive jury and you should all be proud of that. the price of citizenship in this country is different. for some people it is as easy as going to vote or paying your taxes, but for you, you have been asked to do much more. you have been asked to put your lives on whole hold for three weeks and serve as jurors in this case. but there is more to what you agreed to do and promised to do in this case than getting up really to be on time, fighting your way through traffic to be on time or dealing with car trouble. the most important part of what you agreed to do is the promise you made on the first day, to be fair and impartial jurors, to decide this case, the sikes case, solely on the basis of the evidence that plaintiffs were able to prove for mr. sikes. not evidence that relates to other smokers besides mr. sikes, not evidence that happened decades before he started smoking or years before he had his first cigarette. real evidence that plaintiffs were able to connect in a real way to mr. sikes. so i want to thank you for that promise and on behalf of myself, mr. seiden, and our team. and because i represent the r.j. reynolds tobacco company i want to let you know that the men and women who are the r.j. reynolds tobacco company today, appreciate your efforts as well. now, there is a famous saying that facts are stubborn things. originally attributed, i think, to john adams, became famous, i think, later by ronald reagan, but the phrase is that facts are stubborn things and the facts of this case, the facts of mr. sikes's life are just as stubborn and they are a problem for plaintiffs. they are a problem for plaintiffs because if you just look at the man he was and the life that he led, you will see how plaintiffs cannot meet their burden of proof and cannot meet the requirements they have to in order to recover money in this case. and there is a few key facts i want to highlight at the beginning and we will talk about them in detail as i go. but the first is what we heard from dr. schoonover. dr. schoonover is the only doctor who knew mr. sikes when he smoked. he is the only doctor that you heard in this entire case that ever treated mr. sikes. he is the only doctor that knew him when he smoked and he is the only doctor that ever treated him, and what did he tell you? he said on each and every day that mr. sikes smoked, for his entire life, he could have quit smoking. no doubt about it. there is no dispute at all in this case that on every single day that mr. sikes smoked a cigarette, he could have quit smoking. and because of this, there is actually three simple truths that i'd like to point out as we go along. number 1, mr. sikes always had the ability to quit smoking. no dispute about it. number 2, mr. sikes did quit smoking. he quit smoking on four occasions for long enough to be past any nicotine, any physical withdrawal, or any nicotine receptors in his brain. all of that is gone. on four occasions he has passed anything to do with physical dependence or nicotine. and number 3, when he goes back to smoking, he does so for reasons that have nothing to do with nicotine, nothing to do with the r.j. reynolds tobacco company. mr. shields told you this this morning. he said on each one of those occasions when mr. sikes made a choice to go back to smoking it was because somebody might have been smoking at work, he might have had stress at home, there might have been a financial issue. never once did he tell you that mr. sikes went back to smoking after quitting because of something the r.j. reynolds tobacco company did. and that is what he has to prove to you to get the money that they are seeking in this case. and make no mistake about it, that is what this case is about. it is about money. it went pretty quickly. but mr. shields asked you for about $10 million. he said that that would be more than reasonable. $10 million is what they are asking for. but do not forget, he could quit, he did quit, and when he went back to smoking, he did so for reasons that have nothing to do with reynolds. could quit, did quit, and went back for reasons that have nothing to do with reynolds. that is not smoking because of addiction. that is smoking because of mr. sikes. now, it is not just that mr. sikes quit. what you have to remember is the timing involved here and the disease that he had, which is copd. dr. schoonover explained to you that if mr. sikes had stayed off of smoking in either 1994 or 1998 or 2001, that it would have halted his copd in its tracks. halted it in its tracks. and dr. schoonover said that what would be halted is the more rapid decline in lung function that you get when you keep smoking, that is what it would have halted in its tracks. so if he stopped smoking in '94, his lungs function starts to decline just like a nonsmoker's. if he had stayed off in '98, same thing. and in 2001, we will see the medical record in a moment but after he quit in 2001, dr. schoonover reports in july of 2002 that his copd is stable and that he is remarkably functional despite the impairment he has in his lungs. he could quit, he did quit, and when he went back to smoking, he did so for reasons that have nothing to do with the defendant in this case. and he did it at a time when it could have made a difference. that is why reynolds takes the position that mr. sikes is responsible for what happened to him. it is not enough to say that smoking causes emphysema or that smoking is the medical reason he got emphysema. this is a case about responsibility, responsibility and control. responsibility for what you do with your own hands. cigarettes are legal in this country. they are legal to make, they are legal to sell, they are legal to advertise. you cannot base your finding in this case simply on a disagreement with the tobacco companies or some problem you have with the sale of cigarettes. we allow our citizens in this country to choose whether to engage in risky behaviors, risky addictive behaviors like gambling and drinking and smoking. but here in this case, the reason mr. sikes is responsible for what happened to him is because he could quit and he did quit at a time when it would make a difference. he would not have died of copd if he had stayed off cigarettes in '94. he would not have died of copd if he had stayed off cigarettes in '98. and he would not have died of copd if he had stayed off cigarettes in 2002. and when he went back on each of those occasions, he did so for reasons that have nothing to do with nicotine and nothing to do with r.j. reynolds. now, before we get to the choices that mr. sikes made during his life, i want to go through some of the evidence that we learned about the man because, again, plaintiffs want you to act like that affidavit answers of question, and i'll go through that affidavit in detail with you. but basically what that says is, i started smoking in 1961, tried to quit and got sick. that is not a life. you cannot skip over 42 years of life that easily. that is what plaintiffs want you to do. that is why we spent so much time talking about frank statements and press conferences and things that have nothing to do with mr. sikes. no connection at all. they do not want to focus on what he was doing on a day-in-and-day-out basis during his life. but before we get to that, i just want to review some of the things that we learned about nicotine. mr. shields is correct that nicotine is a very important part of this case. you have to find that mr. sikes's smoking because of addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine, smoking because of addiction was sufficient to cause the disease. cannot just be smoking, it is got to be smoking because of addiction. and we will see time and time again that mr. sikes is smoking for reasons that have nothing to do with addiction. and you can look at it quickly this way, we will have a chart at the end, we will go back over this. when he quit smoking in '98, in 2001, and '94 he is passed any physical dependence. plaintiffs used this chart to show you the addiction cycle and let me just hold it up here quickly. they have it right here. this is the addiction cycle and it has daily use, physical dependence. in 1994 there is no daily use, there is no physical dependence. 1998, no daily use, no physical dependence. in 2002, no daily use, no physical dependence. when he goes back to smoking on those three occasions, it is not because of addiction, it is not because of the dependence, it is because of mr. sikes. it was those choices that took his copd from something that was stable to something that was life threatening. now, first, you learned a tremendous amount about nicotine, more than you probably ever wanted to or thought you would learn, but i want to just review a few things that we learned about it, what it is, what it is not. first, we learned nicotine occurs naturally in tobacco. reynolds does not put nicotine in tobacco, in fact, the cigarettes that reynolds makes, the tobacco in reynolds' cigarettes has less nicotine in it than you would find in the plant. reynolds take nicotine out when they make their cigarettes. you learned how when you smoke, nicotine has a very short half-life in your body. i think dr. werner said it is about 20 hours, but after about a day, all of the nicotine is out of your body, every single bit of nicotine is out of your body after about a day. if you are the type of person that when you quit, you experience withdrawal from nicotine, that lasts about two or three weeks and that is from dr. werner. dr. werner says those symptoms peak in about two weeks and are gone after a matter of weeks. and dr. werner made it clear that in '94, in '98, and in 2002 mr. sikes was past all of that. and number 3, we learned that any receptors that a smoker develops in their brain when they are smoking down regulate in a matter of weeks. all of that blue that dr. werner showed you on her slide, all of that is gone in a matter of hours. that is the top row of that slide. that is the one thing they did not tell you, the top row of that slide is people that smoke and have not smoked in a matter of hours. there is no blue in their brain. it goes away in hours. and any receptors that are there, go back to the level of a nonsmoker in a matter of week. there is nothing physical about it after you quit for a few weeks or months. we learned how nicotine still to this day is fundamentally different from other drugs of abuse. fundamentally different from heroin and cocaine and methamphetamine. it is different in the way it works. it is different in the amount of dopamine it releases in the brain. and it is different with respect to the withdrawal symptoms somebody experiences when they stop using. when somebody tries to quit heroin cold turkey, they go into cold sweats, they might have delusions, they might see things that are not there. dr. werner told you she did not have to know anything else about a person who was coming off heroin -- i mean off nicotine, she could just look at them, she could tell which one was which. they are that different. withdrawal from alcohol can kill you. withdrawal from methamphetamine can kill you. nicotine is and always will be fundamentally different. think about the symptoms that we heard associated with nicotine withdrawal, it is just a phrase. you have got to look and see what it really meant. it meant that he was irritable, cranky, maybe had a flat mood, maybe ate a little more and might have been restless. those are the symptoms of nicotine withdrawal. since when did being irritable become an excuse for doing something that you want to do? if being anxious or cranky got you out of doing something that you wanted to do, i would not have graduated from high school. you want to go back in time with me on sunday afternoon before high school, i'm cranky, i'm irritable, i'm restless, i'm anxious. my family would tell you i was probably miserable to be around. but we go to high school. we come to jury duty on time. if the priority is getting something done, irritability and anxiousness does not stop anyone. that is why he is responsible for this conduct. that is what he faced. that is what he was up against. being cranky for two weeks is what he had to go through to quit, and he did it. he did it time and time and time again. you learned how there is no intoxication with nicotine. there is no such thing as having too much nicotine to drive, in fact, nicotine actually makes you think more clearly. you are able to focus better when you are using nicotine. but there is no such thing as an intoxication to nicotine and that fundamental difference is the reason there was this debate over whether nicotine and caffeine should be characterized as addictive or not. it went on for decades. and finally the surgeon general said, look, we are going to take out intoxication, we are going to take out this tolerance, we are going to take out this antisocial behavior definition, and we are just going to put nicotine and caffeine in there. thats what happened. it does not mean that there is intoxication and it does not mean that there is the type of tolerance that you see with those other drugs. that is why dr. werner and dr. bernstein both told you no one abuses pure nicotine. nobody is interested in pure nicotine. it is not just nicotine. there is something about smoking that people like and that is why they smoke. if it was truly the same, people would be looking for pure nicotine and they do not. it is a fundamentally different drug. one of the things that nicotine is similar is the way it works, it releases dopamine. but you heard that is no different from any other activity that we like. reading a book, drinking a glass of water, eating a meal, any of that releases dopamine and you saw the comparison chart from dr. bernstein when he showed you how much dopamine is released when somebody does methamphetamine versus how much dopamine is released when somebody does nicotine or caffeine. this is what dr. krugman's talking about. this is his chart. remember, he had think and feel and high and low and he said, he told you that cigarettes are down there on the low side of it, it is more of a feel thing, that people do not think about it, it is not high priority. he is got it next to ice cream. that is their expert. can you imagine what mr. shields would do if he had a document from the reynolds tobacco company that said cigarettes are like ice cream? dr. proctor would be up here waving it around. he would be telling you it was part of the biggest fraud and conspiracy of all time. that is from this trial. that is their witness. it is like ice cream. it releases dopamine, it is something people like to do, it is something they know is bad for them. when they go without it, they might be cranky, they might be upset. that is krugman. that is not claude teague, that is not allan rodgman. that is krugman. they do not think about it, it is low on the standard. that is their witness. now, finally, the last thing we learned about nicotine is nothing about nicotine and nothing about addiction stops people from quitting. this is dr. werner. can even addicted smokers quit smoking? yes, absolutely. absolutely she said. addicted smokers can quit, no doubt about it. absolutely. there is nothing about nicotine that stops people from following through on a decision they make to stop when they are serious about stopping. some people quit easy, some people quit harder, but every single person who smokes can do it and we have heard that from every single witness in this case. 60 million people in this country have stopped smoking. 60 million. that is more than the populations of florida and georgia and alabama and louisiana, both of the carolinas, part of kentucky. that is how many people 60 million people is. that is how many former smokers there are in this country. and you heard from witness after witness, there is no difference between the people that stop and the people who keep smoking. and just think about it with respect to mr. sikes's own family. you heard today this theory that it had to be genetic. what mr. shields did not tell you is that mr. sikes's father quit smoking. mr. sikes's mother quit smoking. both of them quit. they smoked for a while, when they were done with smoking, they quit. if there is anything genetic about smoking that mr. sikes got, he also got the genetic ability to stop. both his parents were smokers, both of them made a choice that they were done with smoking, and both of them put it down and never went back. you heard about his friends, mr. meadows quit smoking. what did he tell you? reached a point when something else was more important to me. saw my grandson looking at me, felt silly for smoking, put them down, never went back. never went back. he told you, mr. sikes never asked how did i it. he said, we talked about it a bunch, he would tell you he would try. he never came and said, mr. meadows, hov did you get it done? how did you do it? give me some pointers, help me out. you heard the same thing from carla slicker and donna storey, both of them quit smoking. mr. sikes knows this. he does not reach out for advice from them, but there is no difference between those people and mr. sikes when it comes to nicotine or addiction. the difference is the priority and the timing of the choices they made. the timing of the choice that carla slicker made to quit is the only difference between her and mr. sikes. and the timing of those choices is not something that the r.j. reynolds tobacco company caused legally. finally, you saw this in dsm-iv. the fact that you meet the criteria for dsm-iv nicotine dependence does not necessarily carry any implication regarding the individual's control over the behaviors that may be associated with the disorder. the fact that you are nicotine dependent, does not mean you are not responsible for the conduct or the behavior. and we heard that time and time again. none of this means you are out of control. none of this means that you are not responsible. and that is where i want to turn just briefly to this concept of legal cause. the judge is going to explain legal cause to and he is going to explain that a legal cause has to be direct, continuous, and substantial. the judge will give you the jury instructions when you go in the back and review them when you go to deliberate but every time you hear cause, you need to remember, direct, continuous, and substantial. it is not enough to be a cause, it has to be a legal cause. and to be a legal cause it is got to be direct, continuous, and substantial. and that is why addiction is not a legal cause of what happened to mr. sikes. mr. shields: objection, your honor; improper argument. the court: it is argument. overruled. mr. boyce: one of the other phrases that you will see in the definition of legal cause is something that is called but for. so it is got to be direct, continuous, and substantial, and it is got to be a but for cause. but for is a way of saying if you take it out of the picture, would things have been any different? if you take something away, would it have made a difference? that is but for. but for this, this would not have happened. direct, continuous, substantial, and it has to be a but for cause. here there is no proof that mr. sikes smoked because of addiction and that if he did, that that addiction, that smoking because of addiction was a legal cause of the copd. the only cause that if you take it away makes a difference is mr. sikes. he is the only one that has the power to change what happened. and let me give you an example of what i mean. in 1994 he is past physical dependence, he goes back to smoking for reasons that have nothing to do with nicotine. that is not smoking because of addiction. that is smoking because of mr. sikes. same thing in 2001. no physical dependence. when he goes back, that is not smoking because of addiction, that is smoking because of mr. sikes. the only cause in this whole case that if you take it away makes a difference is mr. sikes. it is not nicotine and it is not the r.j. reynolds tobacco company. now, with those concepts in mind, i want to go back through some of the evidence you heard about mr. sikes's life and the choices he made, both about smoking and other parts of his life. we will start here at the very beginning. decades before mr. sikes is born reader's digest is starting to report on the health risk of smoking. dr. proctor explained to you that reader's digest was the most popular publication in this country at the time. it was something that significant majority of the americans read and this is decades before mr. sikes is even born in march of 1948. shortly after he was born, dr. proctor says that there is a steady beat of scientific information about smoking and disease reported in the popular press, and the studies start to be published in things like life magazine and time around 1953. in 1954 the frank statement is published and shortly after there is a poll that says seventy percent of americans think that smoking is harmful. seventy percent. that is way back in 1954. seventy percent of americans thought smoking was harmful. and these are the warnings mr. sikes is getting himself. his father, otis, tells the kids not to smoke. his father, otis, tells the kids that advertisements are bs and cigarettes are no good for you. this happens in the early '50's. 60 years later mr. sikes filed an affidavit under oath where he said he thought the advertisements were true. he thought the advertisements that cigarettes were safe. 60 years after his father told him, do not believe those ads, he wrote an affidavit under oath and said, i believed the ads. but here's what is interesting about the timing. this evidence comes from fletcher sikes, from his deposition, we read it to you. fletcher sikes's deposition came after the affidavit. mr. sikes did not know we were going to talk to fletcher. when he signed that affidavit -- and we will go through it in detail where he said the only commercial he remembers was the marlboro man, the marlboro man. for a brand that is no part of this case, for a brand that if he smoked at all, he smoked for a fraction of the time, the marlboro man is the only commercial he remembered. but what is important is that affidavit came 60 years after his own father's tells him, do not believe those cigarette ads. and that statement, i remember when my dad told me they were bs, not in his affidavit. in 1961 or '62 mr. sikes began smoking on a regular basis and starts hiding it from his parents. the '64 surgeon general report comes out and it concludes that smoking causes lung cancer. one of the interesting pieces of evidence in this case you heard, mr. shields said time and time again, i think dr. proctor said this, that reynolds or other tobacco companies had some kind of veto power over the advisory committee who could be on there. if they had a veto power, this is the conclusion. they are not vetoing anything. the conclusion is quite clear, smoking causes lung cancer. it is front-page news all around the country. the navy starts warning sailors of risks. now, dr. proctor did not even check to see what the navy was telling people about the risk. you heard that testimony from him. back in the '60's, the surgeon general, they were real generals, they came from the military. we asked him, did you check to see what the navy was saying? did you ask anybody, dr. proctor to make sure that you were giving a full picture to this jury? he said, no, i did not look. mr. sikes joins the navy. he leaves the navy in 1969. while he was in the navy the first warning label goes on the packs and it says, caution: cigarette smoking may be hazardous to your health. mr. sikes is 18 years old in 1966. 18 years old. he is been a regular smoker for a few years, at most. from '61 or '62 until '66 is four or five years. did you see any evidence that when the warning label went on, mr. sikes was interested in changing his behavior? any evidence that in response to something going on the side of the pack, he tried to make a change and was prevented from doing so by the reynolds tobacco company? we move forward and in 1970 the warning label changes. the warning label now says that, the surgeon general has determined that cigarette smoking is dangerous to your health. that is 1970. mr. sikes is 22 years old. to give you an idea of how long ago this was, 1966 is before the first super bowl. the first super bowl is in 1967. in a world without super bowls, smokers were being warned about the health risks of smoking on every single pack of cigarettes. every single pack since 1966. in 1970 the warning changes. 1971, mr. sikes marries donna storey. their first child, jennifer, is born in 1973, and there is more important dates. in 1971 cigarette ads are taken off tv. there is no more advertising on television and in 1972 the warning label goes into the advertisements. now, remember, 1971 is 40 years before the affidavit that he filed in this case. 60 years after otis sikes tells him, do not believe advertisements, and 40 years after there is a warning label on every ad he saw, he filed an affidavit that said, i believed the ads. i smoked because of the marlboro man. 1976 -- excuse me, in the mid '70's you heard from fletcher sikes that mr. sikes acknowledges he understands all this. cigarettes are killing him, he has a lung problem. in 1977 his second daughter, laura, is born and in 1976 mr. sikes and donna get divorced. before the divorce in 1975, dr. burns told you about a poll that said ninety percent of people in this country believe that smoking is harmful to health. ninety percent. dr. proctor and dr. burns acknowledge that is a staggering figure for any poll. you cannot get ninety percent of the people to respond to anything except an issue as fundamental as this, that cigarette smoking is harmful to health. you know what was funny? dr. proctor said, well, i do not know if it is because of the warning labels. i said, well, smokers see warning labels, right, dr. proctor? he said, possibly. possibly. that was the most he could bring himself to tell you, was that it is possible a smoker sees this warning label. remember mrs. sikes told you she knew about the warning labels? she is never smoked a cigarette in her life. she grows up, sees the same ads, same part of the country, never has a single cigarette. she knows about the warning labels and for smokers, the best proctor could do was, it is possible. in 1976 after the divorce -- this is an important period of time -- because from 1976 until sometime in 2000, mr. sikes is a single man living by himself. for 24 years he lived by himself as a single man. he dated carla slicker for a few years, around '78 or '81, they stopped dating in '81, he meets mrs. sikes in '94 and they start dating and they do not move in together until sometime after they are married in july of 2000. for 24 years we do not have any evidence of what mr. sikes was doing with smoking, we do not have any evidence of what was important to him. all we know is that he is a single guy living by himself, living the life that he wanted to live. that is who he was. did you hear any evidence to the contrary, that mr. sikes was gullible or easily misled or the type of person that you could control? of course not. for 24 years he is on his own, he is doing his own thing. in 1981 dr. burns explained to you that 95 percent of smokers are thoroughly aware of risks of smoking and he told that that was more people than knew who the president was and in 1981 our presider was ronald reagan. more people knew that smoking caused disease than knew ronald reagan's name. in 1985 the warning label changes to the ones that are on there today and one of them says quite clearly, smoking causes emphysema. that is the disease mr. sikes got nine years later. but where is the evidence here that mr. sikes is interested in stopping smoking and being prevented from doing so by the reynolds tobacco company? that is what this case is about. is reynolds a legal cause of this life? he is hired as a captain of the la cruise in 1989 after spending about a year as captain of the gambling ship, the emerald princess. i'm going to set this one right here so we can look at the screen. now we are up to 1994. and that is when mr. sikes is diagnosed with copd. this is where we start to get into the medical records. the first one we saw is from august 17, 1994. excuse me, ladies and gentlemen. this is the time when mr. sikes has his first heart attack and is first diagnosed with copd. and the doctor reports that he is going to improve his diet, that he is interested in pursuing a healthy lifestyle, that he was offered cardiac rehab, deferred it, wishes to pursue it on his own, and that he is going to do the treadmill stress test on his own. he is going to defer it. ask yourselves if you ever saw any evidence in this case ever that mr. sikes went and did the cardiac rehab. this is 1994. is there any evidence that he went and followed up on the cardiac rehab ever? not just in '94, but at any point in time? this is the man that he was. but he quit smoking in 1994. he quit smoking for about two months, i guess is what the evidence is, nobody's entirely sure. and one of the reasons no one's entirely sure is because when he goes back, nobody asks him about it. nobody. not ashley heilig, not janice sikes. no one. no one says, why did you go back? you just had a heart attack. you have just been diagnosed with copd. why are you smoking? and what is even more telling is that mr. sikes does not put it in the affidavit. what he wanted you to know was that he remembered the marlboro man. he never once put, you know what got me in '94, it was this. there is nothing. they have guessed that it might be because people smoked around him. reynolds is not responsible for that. they guess that maybe he had stress. reynolds is not responsible for that. we go forward four years -- excuse me, three years, and he is smoking and dr. wainwright says, he is done well since his first heart attack but he is been poorly compliant with follow-up visits. there is not just one record that says he is poorly compliant, there are a multitude. you will have all these medical records to you -- for your notes, let me tell you that the first one is ats 4751, defense composite exhibit and another one is ats 4752. you will not have to go through all the boxes of medical records. if any of the ones that i talk about that you want to see, you can see them in 4751 and 4752. 4752 is the collection of medical records that relates to wellbutrin. and you heard from dr. werner that if it says wellbutrin, it is for depression. if it says zyban, it is for cessation. you look through 4752, you are going to find wellbutrin, wellbutrin, wellbutrin. you will not find zyban anywhere in there. and you are also going to look if you see the dates, you will see plenty of time when he is taking wellbutrin and he is not smoking. wellbutrin was an antidepressant for mr. sikes, it was not a cessation aid. dr. wainwright reports that he has hyper -mr. sikes has hypertension and it is now out of control. and he is told to be more compliant with his diet and exercise and he was strongly encouraged to stop smoking. that is in february of 1997. no evidence that mr. sikes did anything to stop in '97, no evidence that he asked a doctor for help. we fast-forward all the way to '98, where just like he did time and time again, he waits until things are so bad he goes to the emergency room. and he show up in the emergency room in july of '98. plaintiffs want you to believe that this is the natural progression of his disease. there is no evidence of that. if in 1994 he had gone to the cardiac rehab and followed up with what they are recommending he do for his pulmonary condition, he would not be in the emergency room in '98. it is because he went back to the diet and back to the smoking that it is er visit after er visit. there is no preventative care anywhere in these records and that is why each one of these visits starts with a visit to the emergency room. mrs. sikes told you that she knew the names of the people that would drive the ambulance. remember that as you look through these records. no evidence of follow-up between visits, no evidence of compliance with the preventative advice they are giving him. this is decades before the copd is life threatening. this is 1998. he is going to smoke all the way up until 2007. he does not pass away till 2011, this is 13 years before he passes away. but it is the same story time and time again. he quit smoking for about eight or nine months, it is hard to tell. we know that he stopped smoking in july of '98 with a hospitalization. in september of '98 he is still not smoking. he reports good dietary habits, still not participating in any cardiovascular exercise. that is four years after 1994. but here's one of the things i want to remember about 1998. from september of '98, the next time that we know for sure he is smoking is in march of 1999. march of 1999, that is not smoking because of addiction. he is well past physical withdrawal, well past any blue lights in your brain, well past any receptors. all of the nicotine is gone from his body. this is their chart. this is the addiction cycle, he is not in here. never mind that this chart should have an arrow showing 60 million people exiting this cycle. 60 million, including mr. sikes. never mind that. this is their addiction cycle and what does it say? daily use, physical dependence. in march of '99, there is no daily use, there is no physical dependence. when he makes the choice to go back to smoking in 1999, it is not because of reynolds and it is not because of nicotine. that is not smoking because of addiction, that is smoking because of mr. sikes. not smoking because of addiction. addiction has nothing to do with it. he goes back in '99. this is one of the interesting things. once again nobody knows what happened. we have no idea. no one asked him, no one talked to him, no one encouraged him to go see a doctor. he never went to see a doctor. as you go back through the medical records, look for a single record that says mr. sikes is here today because he cannot stop smoking. mr. sikes accidentally smoked a cigarette and is here because he desperately wants to stay off. they use the word relapse as if it is an excuse for years of continued smoking. dr. bernstein told you what relapse is. relapse is one or two. you have a bad day, you have a couple cigarettes, you get right back on the wagon. that is relapse. that is the evidence that should be here if he was serious about changing his behavior. and the fact that that evidence is not here is the reasons plaintiffs cannot prove that smoking because of addiction caused this disease and that smoking because of addiction caused his death. we fast-forward two more years. once again, no follow-up visits between 1999 and 2001. he ends up in the emergency room in 2001. he is going to have another heart attack. he is smoking two packs a day, goes in on march 29th and tells the doctor he is not interested in cessation. this is seven years after his heart attack, seven years after he is first diagnosed with copd. he is not interested in cessation. couple days later, the doctor says, he does show an interest in quitting and he will follow up with his primary care physician. i asked dr. schoonover, did you see any evidence that mr. sikes did follow up with his primary care physician in 2001? he said, no. i said, did you see any evidence that he went to any other doctor and asked for help in quitting? he said, no. no follow-up. two days later we are back to the same pattern. things have gotten so bad mr. sikes has to go to the emergency room. and he shows up with a blood pressure of 300 over 150. that is not nicotine, that is not addiction, that is a man who is not maintaining his health. that blood pressure is off the charts. we talked about this with dr. schoonover, but you will see it when you look at the record, in the bottom left-hand corner they are checking his blood pressure every five minutes. there is no claim for heart disease in this case. they are that worried about his heart. they are checking it every five minutes. gets out of the hospital, stops smoking. interested in it, before he leaves tells dr. nabezidah not interested again, ends up quitting smoking. we get to july of 2002, he is been off cigarettes for 15 months. 15 months. he is years past brain receptors, years past physical dependence, years past any nicotine in his body. i asked dr. werner, let us go through dsm-iv together. she likes to take evidence from this decade and evidence from this decade and evidence from this decade and put it all together and say, well, he was dependent. as if that covers every minute of every day for 40 years. that is not real life. that is nowhere near real life. i said, let us pick a point in time, dr. werner. let us run through the dsm criteria here in july of 2002. i asked her, is there any tolerance? she said, no. is there any nicotine withdrawal? no. is he taking the substance in larger amounts? no. is there a persistent desire or unsuccessful efforts to cut done? she said, no, he had a successful quit. great deal of time spent taking the -- spent taking the substance? no. important social, occupational, or recreational activities given up? no. and substance use continued despite knowledge of it is bad. no. no to all seven dsm factors in july of 2002. and goes back to smoking. right after that record says he is been off it for 15 months, dr. schoonover reports that his copd is stable and he is remarkably functional. when he went back to smoking in july or august of 2002, it had nothing to do with nicotine, nothing to do with the r.j. reynolds tobacco company. that is why mr. sikes is responsible for what happened. in july of 2002, the record again reflects that he is quit for 14 months and reports that his parents had heart attacks and he is got brothers and sisters that are alive and well. and then in november of 2002 he is smoking a pack a day. that is not smoking because of addiction. after 16 months off or 15 months off, almost a year and a half off, when you go back, that is not smoking because of addiction. that is smoking because of mr. sikes. it is not smoking because of addiction. and when they use the word relapse to talk about 2002, remember, this is the time where we go 2002 to 2007. there is not another meaningful quit in between there. relapse is not five more years of smoking. that is mr. sikes. that is smoking because of mr. sikes, not smoking because of addiction. when he goes back here, no one knows, no one knows why. no one asks him. it brings up an interesting point. plaintiffs want to suggest, well, he could not stop himself. the evidence is, well, he would look away. ms. heilig told you he seemed like he was depressed and disappointed in himself for going back. they never asked him why. ms. heilig took the stand and told you that she remembers a few things about mr. sikes. and that couple of things she remembers from when she was eight years old was that they had chinese food, that it was late at night, and that he had yellow fingernails. that is what she remembers about mr. sikes. she never once asked him in 2002, why did you go back to smoking? mrs. sikes said the same thing. but more importantly, when you think about this, it is not just the lack of evidence from ms. heilig or ms. sikes, this is where you can look at the affidavit. where is it in the affidavit? where does mr. sikes write, i went back to smoking because i had to have one? i went back to smoking because reynolds told me to. where is that evidence? it is not there. the other important part i want you to remember about this time is this is years after the websites go up. all of this, any of this stuff that mr. shields spent so much time talking about meant anything to mr. sikes, it is over in 1998. the website is up in 2000. if mr. sikes had asked reynolds what he should do in 2002 before he went back to smoking, that advice would have been, if you are a smoker worried about your health, quit. and here are tips on how to quit, here's a link to the national cancer institute that will help you stop. that is in 2000. that is two years before he goes back to smoking. he goes back in '02, not because of addiction, it is because of mr. sikes. now, this is where it gets interesting. we get into 2003 and, again, plaintiffs want to believe that relapses just means years at a time, just go ahead, four years in a row. do not worry about it. it is just a relapse. it is not a relapse. it is a choice they are making day in day out. you get to 2003, he continues to smoke, he is cut back to half to one pack a day. in july of 2003 he is smoking one pack a day. in august of 2003, we saw this record this morning, this is when he is told he needs a lung transplant, say, you need to quit smoking for six months. mr. sikes said, this time i'm going to quit for good. this august 8th record is important because this is also right around the time, august 11th, where mr. sikes is referred to a psychiatrist to help him quit smoking. the doctors say, look, go see a psychiatrist to quit smoking. we asked dr. schoonover, did you see any evidence that mr. sikes went to see the psychiatrist to get off cigarettes in 2003? and he said, no. there are no psychiatric records in those 18,000 pages. he did not go to see the psychiatrist. plaintiffs brought you a psychiatrist to testify in this trial that mr. sikes did not see a psychiatrist in 2003. think about that for a second. they brought a psychiatrist in as an expert to tell you that mr. sikes did not see a psychiatrist in 2003. there is only one explanation for that. mr. sikes. it is not reynolds. this is where on redirect the plaintiffs asked dr. schoonover, is not it possible that you and mr. sikes had conversations about quitting that just are not reflected in your records? and dr. schoonover said, oh, sure. i'm sure i remember times that we talked about smoking and quitting and they just did not find their way into the medical records. if you ever have any doubt about the level of detail in mr. sikes's medical records, remember these charts. dr. williams is one of dr. schoonover's partners. in april of 2003 he notes, mr. sikes has a hamster. that is the level of detail that makes it into a medical record. he is got a hamster. in case you think it is a one-off, schoonover and his partners track the hamster. we go to july of 2003, there is dr. coley, that is dr. schoonover's other partner, hamster's still doing okay. the idea that dr. schoonover is having meaningful conversations with mr. sikes about quitting that are not reflected in the records is just not supported by the evidence. they are tracking his pet rodents. we get past july of 2003, almost a year later, bad news, he did have a hamster. had a hamster, had a hamster, did have a hamster. that is the level of detail that is in these records. if there was ever a time that mr. sikes came in and said, i cannot stop, i want to quit, it would be in these records. here's the affidavit. this may be the best evidence that he never went to psychiatrist, that he never followed up on any of this advice. my name is james sikes, i'm the plaintiff in the referenced action. we talked about the last line, during my efforts to quit, i experienced quite difficult quitting smoking because of being addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine. the phrase cigarettes containing nicotine is a quote from the engle class definition. we will talk about that in a minute. that is a direct quote from the engle class definition. people do not say that. what would he have said? i'm addicted to nicotine. he is addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine. but more importantly, as he lists some of the things that he is done to quit smoking, there is no reference to going to see a psychiatrist. there is no reference asking dr. schoonover for help. there is no reference of following up any of the advice he got from the physicians, it is just not there. this is the same approach plaintiffs want you to take. i started smoking in '61, i did a few things and it was not until chantix in 2007. that is over 45 years skipped over in one sentence. what is important about it is what is not there. what is not there is, i talked to dr. schoonover, i went to a cessation clinic, i went to the psychiatrist they told me about. where is the explanation of why he went back to smoking all the time? the one thing they want to put down is this is what happened in '94. this is what happened in '98. this is what happened in '02. it is not there. in september of 2003, plaintiff does not show up for a pft. card was sent, did not come to the office. this is the record that mr. shields says is actually six months, you can go back, there is a record before august of '03 in june that says he quit smoking for about 45 days, it is on plaintiff's demonstrative. nobody knows. all we know is that he never went to see the psychiatrist they told him to go see. but here's what is really important. we fast-forward all the way, a year later, to november of 2004. so in august of 2003 they say, go see a shrink. he never goes. over a year later, in 2004, they give him some smoking cessation literature and he leaves it in the room. that is a year later. you are not going to see a single medical record that says, patient is here because he left the cessation advice behind. patient is here because he needs more help. patient is here because he thinks he cannot stop and wants us to help him. it is just not there. this is not a relapse. when you start smoking again in august of 2002, go all the way through 2003, do not go to the psychiatrist, go all the way through 2004, leave your cessation advice behind, get another year later, still smoking, request additional cessation info, no. that is '03, '04, '05. leaving the advice behind. smoking withdrawal programs recommended for him in november of 2005. there is no evidence he ever went. no evidence that he went to that program. this is years after '03. reynolds is not driving this train. this is mr. sikes. we get to november of 2005 and it says, follow up with drs. eye, coley, and williams and schoonover as an outpatient. that is the withdrawal program. and schoonover told you -- did he follow it up? i do not know, maybe, but he never followed up with us, he never went through on the withdrawal program. that is not smoking because of addiction. that is not smoking because of reynolds. that is smoking because of mr. sikes. that is why he does not fit in the engle class. the engle class is not for everyone. it is for a certain group of people. you are the gatekeepers of that class. if you put everyone in, there will be no engle class. you have to decide whether he fits or not. the fact that he smoked and got sick from smoking is not enough to get him into the class. it is got to be because of addiction and this chronology shows that the smoking that caused his death was because of mr. sikes, not because of addiction. we get to september of 2007 and he quits smoking permanently. what is interesting about this is he says it was not very hard. he took chantix for about four or five months and he is not feeling any urges. it was not very hard. those are his own words. when it is all said and done, in 2007, when he puts the cigarettes down, he says, it was not very hard. plaintiffs want to think chantix was an antidote. do not forget what both dr. werner and dr. bernstein told you, chantix is out of your body just about as quickly as nicotine. it does not do anything permanent to change you. when you go six months without smoking and without chantix in 2001, you are in the same boat you are in 2007, after a few months nicotine's gone, receptors are gone, chantix is gone, withdrawal is gone. the only thing left is mr. sikes. that is the only thing left. the only difference between 15 months in '02 and permanent in '07, between two months in '94 and permanent in '07, between eight months in '98 and permanent in '07, the only difference there is mr. sikes. now, i want to go back over the diet. because mr. shields wants to suggest that there is only a handful of these records. you can see them all in these exhibits. you can look through them, you can make your own decisions, but the diet one is one that is consistent throughout. it starts in 1994, it is telling him, you have got to improve your diet. you just had a heart attack, you have got to stop eating this stuff. we go forward to 1997, he is eating a high-fat diet, he is back on unrestricted fatty foods and that is three years later. we fast-forward 13 years later and it is the same situation, making poor food choices, eats out for breakfast and lunch. usually has fast food for lunch like a cheeseburger and dinner is whatever his wife cooks, which usually includes canned vegetables. still eating fast food for lunch in january of 2010, that is 16 years after his first heart attack, nine years after his second heart attack. that is not eating because of addiction, that is eating because of mr. sikes. it is the same with smoking. he is not smoking because of addiction, he is smoking because of mr. sikes. and remember the reasons he went back, every single time they talk about relapse they tell you, nothing to do with the r.j. reynolds tobacco company. this is why mr. sikes is not a member of the engle class. the judge will explain this to you when it is over but basically the engle class is for people that have suffered a disease caused by addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine and you can see it right there. that is the exact phrase that they used in the affidavit. addiction to cigarettes that contain nicotine. that is who the engle class is for. and there are people out there that meet this definition. there are people out there that cannot quit for 15 months at a time, cannot quit permanently in 2007, cannot put it down every time they are serious about it. there are people out there that may have seen some of the press releases that mr. shields talked about so much, but here in this case, mr. sikes does not meet it. and the reason mr. sikes does not meet it is the smoking that caused his disease, the smoking that caused his death was not because of addiction. now, we talked at the beginning about facts being stubborn things. and instead of responding to these facts which plaintiffs have a very tough time doing, they say, well, maybe there is other medical records in there. believe me when i tell you, i talked (sic) through these medical records three weeks ago for the first time, they looked. they may show you a medical record in rebuttal when they say -- says addiction. we have tried to show you every thing we could, the ones that say addiction, the ones that say not interested, the ones that say go to see a shrink, all of them. but the idea that there are medical records in those boxes that somehow answer these charges that you have not seen is just not supported by the evidence. because of that, plaintiffs spent days, day after day in this case trying to distract you from the real facts of mr. sikes's life. and this evidence came from dr. burns and dr. proctor, and dr. krugman. but their evidence was so generic, so far removed from anything that mr. sikes did in his real life, that they all said the same thing. there is no connection to mr. sikes. my testimony has nothing to do with mr. sikes. burns said, without individual-level observation there is no possibility of forming individual-level conclusions. you remember that video, his face kind of got beet red and he said, i do not understand what you are asking me. without individual-level observation, there is no possibility of forming individual-level conclusions. before i leave dr. burns, let me just remind you, this is the 2010 sgr. mr. shields shows you pages of it, pages of it will be back there in deliberations for you. this is the whole thing. there is not an author of a single chapter identified anywhere in there. we talked about this with dr. bernstein. they have lists of reviewers, lists of editors. if you wanted to say, hey, who wrote that sentence? i want to follow up, i want to talk to the guy that said that, cannot figure it out. but here's what is interesting. we said to dr. burns, you have made over a million dollars testifying for plaintiffs in these tobacco cases. did you put that in here? this is taxpayer money that goes into this. did you disclose that you take money from lawyers suing tobacco companies? you know what he said? there is no place to disclose it. this thing is 700 pages. no place to disclose it is what he said. no place to disclose it. you have got to remember that. as you go through this stuff, these consensus statements, they are written by public health advocates, there is nothing wrong with the statements in that report. there is nothing wrong with people in the public health community encouraging smokers to stop, giving them advice to stop, all of that. but when they come in to testify as hired witnesses, things change. but here dr. burns admitted, i do not have any opinions about mr. sikes. dr. proctor said, i do not have any knowledge about his particular biography one way or the other. i do not know. i'm not his biographer. i'm here to tell the same story i tell in every trial but it has nothing to do with mr. sikes. and dr. krugman said, oh, mr. sikes, he was not the point of the testimony i was making. mr. sikes was not the point of the testimony dr. krugman was making. i think that makes sense when you look back on what krugman's testimony really was. he had ad after ad of women smoking winston lights, ads from decades before mr. sikes ever had a cigarettes, ads where he had redacted the warning label, that was dr. krugman. he is the one that has cigarettes down there with ice cream. now, plaintiff has the burden of proof in this case. we talked about this on the very first day. it is plaintiff's burden to take reynolds from zero to 51 percent on all these issues. it is their burden to prove a connection between the generic evidence they talked about and mr. sikes. there is no fault for reynolds in this case until plaintiff proves it first. that is the law in america, that is the law in florida, and that is the law in this case. and judge healey will explain that to in a few moments. from the very beginning we talked about how it is not enough for plaintiffs to show that tobacco company executive wrote something in a memo or show that there was a press conference. they have to connect it to mr. sikes. and a good way to think about this is like a bridge. think about the main street bridge. mr. sikes is on one side of the st. johns, reynolds is on the other. they have got to connect the two with evidence. it cannot just be with speculation. it has to be real evidence, a bridge of facts, plank after plank of evidence that goes from one shore to the other. and they never even came close. witness after witness admitted it. the fact witnesses may have been the most persuasive on this. when i asked mr. meadows if he had ever heard about the tobacco industry research committee from mr. sikes, he looked at me like i was crazy. he looked at me like i was crazy. no evidence that mr. sikes ever saw or heard anything from ti or ctr or tirc. his brother, we asked him, did you see the frank statement and fletcher sikes said, frank who? who is frank? that was his response. mrs. sikes confirmed it. she told you that mr. sikes did not smoke because of advertising, that mr. sikes did not smoke because of tirc or ti or ctr. there is no connection. and because there is no connection, there is no reliance. the two questions on the verdict form that relate to this, both have reliance written in them, and you will see it. and that is what reliance means, a connection. proof that a smoking-related decision mr. sikes made or did not make was driven by something the tobacco companies said or did not say. they have got connect it. they have got to build that bridge and they never came close. it would be in the affidavit. well, look at the second page. look at the second page. i regularly received a large amount of advertisements and direct marketing from various tobacco companies. i recall a number of commercials from television and watched programs sponsored by tobacco companies. i remember "gunsmoke," "i love lucy," and advertisements with the marlboro man. the only ad he remembers is from marlboro. this is proof that he did not rely on anything reynolds ever said or did. it is proof, it is right there, the one he points to is not even a defendant in this case and it relates to a brand that he did not even smoke. says, i was a fan of winston cup racing and their products were the ones i used most often. you know what is not in there, what mr. shields told you this morning, his mom smoked winston. he told you he most likely smoked winston because of his mom. but what is interesting is reynolds did not sponsor the winston cup until 1971. he said he started smoking winston two years earlier in 1969. so winston, winston ultra lights, pall mall, kool, and camel, i occasionally smoked basic, not made by reynolds, and marlboro as well. the only advertisement he remembers is the marlboro man. and here's the last line. the advertising implied that products were safe and i relied on that advertising. where did he get the phrase relied on? he quoted the class definition in the first part of the affidavit. in the last part of the affidavit he says, i remember the marlboro man and i relied on ads. this is 60 years after his dad told him these ads are bs, 40 years after -- any ad you see after 1971 has got a warning label on it. he does not put that in there because fletcher sikes' depo came about six months after this affidavit. what is really important is that it does not say, my mom smoked winston and quit, my dad smoked cigarettes and quit. it is not there. this is clearly crafted for purposes of litigation and you can see right through it. the marlboro man. now, i want to talk a little bit about some of the things that reynolds did. one of the issues that you will have to look at in this case, one of the issues mr. shields talked about is whether there is an entitlement to punitive damages in this case. the only two claims that would lead to even get to the question on entitlement are these reliance claims. i do not think the evidence will allow to get to that far. i think when you get to the two questions on reliance, you are going to have to say no because plaintiffs never built that bridge. plaintiffs never showed that something reynolds said or did was seen or heard by mr. sikes and that he took or did not take some action as a result. every time you think about reliance, remember where we are in 2002. remember that when he goes back to smoking in 2002, it is not because of addiction, it is certainly not because of advertising. everything that mr. shields would hope reynolds would say is on that website in 2000. he does not ask reynolds. he never once looked to the tobacco company to answer his questions about smoking. there is no reliance. here's some additional evidence on this entitlement issue for some reason you get that far. you heard from dr. figlar all the things that reynolds did over the years. you heard how they first developed reconstituted tobacco and filters and other products to try to reduce the risks associated with smoking. not to make them safe, to try to make them safer. and for decades they worked hand in hand with the public health community to do this. they worked with the national cancer institute and the tobacco working group, they worked with the surgeon general. you heard how dr. rodgman is thanked in the 1964 surgeon general's report, thanked by name, for cooperating and participating. there was a time when both the public health community and the tobacco industry were interested in trying to reduce the risks associated with smoking. and that is where low tar cigarettes come from, that is where filters come from, that is where the reconstituted tobacco comes from, and reynolds took it a step further. first, let me back up. i do not understand the dispute on filters in this case, i really do not. before the first filter ever went on a cigarette and ever went in an advertisement, the tobacco industry to told the ftc, hey, smokers do not smoke like machines. these numbers may not represent what an individual smoker gets. and the ftc said, we understand, we want to use it anyway because we war consumers to be able to compare products. that is where all the tar and nicotine stuff comes from. it is not part of a massive conspiracy. they told the ftc in the '50's, look, they are just averages, and the ftc said, we understand it, but we still want to put it out there. that is where all of these tar and nicotine numbers come from. but then reynolds did not just stop there. you heard in this case that the bad stuff in cigarette smoke comes from burning tobacco. and if you could just stop burning tobacco, you might be able to improve it and that is where premier and eclipse comes from. they do not burn tobacco so you do not get the carcinogens and other bad chemicals in the smoke. gets a little bit technical, all of that bad stuff in cigarette smoke is a function of an incomplete combustion of organic material. do not burn it, you can hopefully get rid of it. that is what reynolds tried to do with the premier product and the eclipse product. those are products that heat tobacco, do not burn it. they marketed premier. it did not do well. they did not give up. eclipse is on the market today. you heard that evidence in this case. you heard that reynolds looked at things like using different papers and dilution and tobacco substitutes. they looked at selective reduction. that is where you identify a particular compound and try to take it out one at time. they looked at general reduction, all kinds of stuff, and they worked with the public health community to do this. since the '80's they have been disclosing the ingredients to the department of health and human services. since the '80's, all of the ingredients are in there. they are not in there to make them more inhaleable or addictive. this is all part of the effort to make cigarettes less risky for people who choose to smoke. you heard about reynolds' scientific publications. way back -- first, let me just give you the timing of what reynolds did itself. dr. teague writes a memo in 1953. about a year later they hire dr. rodgman, who is a chemist. dr. teague is not a chemist. they put rodgman in a lab around 1955, '56, and he writes an eight-years report. that eight-year report is in evidence. one of plaintiff's exhibits. so it was 1954, about eight years, it is done around 1962. every single bad thing dr. rodgman found in cigarette smoke was disclosed to the surgeon general in 1964. he is in a lab for eight years, the surgeon general thanked him for the contributions he made to the science of identifying stuff in cigarette smoke and everything he found is disclosed to the surgeon general and it is not just one submission, it is three giant submissions of smoke constituents in 1963. when dr. proctor was here, we asked him, hey, dr. proctor, did you ever check dr. rodgman's publications to see if he was publishing on this stuff? he said, no, i never checked. we asked him, did you read dr. rodgman's speech to the american chemical society in 1969 where he drew pictures of all these different compounds? dr. proctor said, no, i did not look at that. i did not look to see what rodgman had done. i just came in here and told you he was a liar. i just came in here and told you he was a fraud. dr. rodgman is thanked in the surgeon general's reports by name. he published on this stuff and their witness sat up there and told you that it was not known, that it was all a secret, that it was distraction science and he never even checked to see what the man had done himself. that is the evidence that they are using to try to distract you from the man that mr. sikes was. it is the same with the tirc and ctr, all of it is a joke. all of it is a front. they find one memo and all of a sudden everything's a front. they published over a thousand articles. seven nobel prize winners worked for the tirc and ctr, seven nobel prize winners. they published that work. dr. proctor admitted, well, some of it is okay. 300 or so articles were cited in the surgeon general's reports. 300 or so articles. this is not distraction science. it was real scientists looking at a problem from decades ago. that is what is so hard about this evidence. people were looking at the problem. ctr and tirc were part of that effort. so what do plaintiffs do about this? they brought in dr. proctor and they brought in dr. krugman. they did not have much of a response. each one of those guys goes from trial to trial and tells half the story every time. on every single topic they addressed you get half the story until we stand up and tell you the rest of the story, the paul harvey on cross. and it is not just this trial. it is every trial time and time again. and think about what we heard in this case. first was dr. krugman and he had the advertisements, he did not even know when they ran. he did not know where they ran. he had somebody put on the screen where he had deleted the warning label. he said, well, mr. sikes is a typical guy. i said, typical? he lived in panama for years where they do not even have commercials on tv. does not matter to my opinion. they showed you ads of women playing pool and said, well, that might relate to mr. sikes. he did not tell you that up front. he knows those facts, chose to keep them from you. dr. proctor, i mentioned this earlier, the best he could bring himself to admit was that it was possible smokers might see the warnings. contrast that testimony with mrs. sikes' testimony that as a never smoker she is aware there is warning labels on that pack. the same thing with the "flintstones" and the "beverly hillbillies." first we see the commercial of jed clampett having a smoke with mr. drysdale. that is supposed be youth marketing. that is what you hear on direct. and then on cross what do you hear? wait a minute, the other sponsors of that show were alka seltzer and one-a-day vitamins, it ran in prime time. it was based on "the honeymooners." it was the first adult cartoon ever run in this country. and, more importantly, when it moved to saturday morning and became a real cartoon, well before it jumped the chart with the alien, when it went to saturday morning and became a real cartoon reynolds stopped sponsoring it. reynolds stopped sponsoring it on saturday morning. you do not hear that on direct, half the story from those guys. same thing with the "beverly hillbillies." "beverly hillbillies" directed at youth. it is a syndication show. it is a prime time show. when that audience had too big of percentage of youth viewers, reynolds stopped sponsoring it. then there were the dr. teague documents. we looked at dr. teague's document on the crucial role of nicotine and dr. proctor told you, well, this was all a secret. and here you can see that dr. teague wrote that, tobacco product is a vehicle for the delivery of nicotine. in 1964 the surgeon general cited an article from 1942, six years before mr. sikes is even born, and 30 years before dr. teague's memo that says the exact same thing. smoking tobacco is a means of administering nicotine. teague writes in '72, the habituating user derives satisfaction from nicotine. and in 1942, satisfaction is caused by stimulation of sensory cells in the brain. this is the subjective manifestation of the withdrawal. the exact same points. the last one, if nicotine is the sine qua non, in 1972, and here we go back 40 years, the deciphered factor and the effects of tobacco is nicotine. it is not a secret. it is half the story. it is the same with ph. mr. shields repeated this again today. dr. proctor stood up there and told you that reynolds freebased nicotine. reynolds designed their products to freebase nicotine. that is what he said on direct. and on cross we said, wait a minute, if the ph of the smoke is between six and six and a half, you do not even have to worry about free nicotine, there is no such thing in that smoke. and he said, that is right. we said, do you have any evidence at all that any brand reynolds ever sold had a ph above 6.5? and he said, no. that is the full story. on direct we are freebasing. they use that word on purpose. they know what freebasing means. they know the implication of that phrase. they want to think that it is freebased nicotine. and we asked him on cross, wait a minute. do you have any evidence that any brand reynolds ever sold had that level of free nicotine in it? and he said, no. now, the ph in the reynolds brands is between 6 and 6.5, and when it is between 6 and 6.5, free nicotine is not a concern. and the other thing we had to beat out of him on cross is that if you had too much free nicotine in there, it is a cigar and no one can inhale it. it all gets absorbed in your mouth. that is the other side of the story. they do it time and time and time again. the next one is when we looked at the youth marketing documents. and mr. shields put another one up again today. he said this hilton head document is one of the most significant documents in the whole case. the board of directors at hilton head. we looked at that and we said, okay, let us look at the document and they talked about two campaigns that came out of that meeting. forget that they are using demographic data. when you read that document, i would encourage you to look in the back of it from where that age group, 14 to 24, comes from. you will see that it is a demographic projection trying to see what is going to happen to the baby boomers. it is written in 1974, you read it for yourself and draw your own conclusions. but it makes clear that there is two campaigns that are coming out of that. the first is winston's candid campaign. when mr. seiden put this up, my first thought was, who is that old guy and why is he so angry? this is what came out of it. dr. krugman told you, follow the path. follow the path. we followed the path from the document mr. shields says is one of the most significant examples of youth marketing. this is where we end up. a middle-aged man in a suit saying, do not ask me why i smoke, ask me why i smo winstons, and it is got a warning label on it. then we looked at camel. the other campaign in that hilton head document is meet the turk and there is the turk. the turk looks like he is got his bedding on motorcycle in one of them, he is feeding a toucan olives or something in another. he is in a sweaty tank top, and some sort of south american ruin in the bottom one. this is what happens when you follow the path. when you look at the other side of the story, this is what you see. and just for a second remember how far away from mr. sikes we are at this point. we are nowhere near mr. sikes. this is a brand he does not even smoke. this morning mr. shields went from the hilton head document to joe camel. joe camel came out in 1987. it is a brand that mr. sikes, if he smoked at all, i do not know if he did, his affidavit has it listed, he sure did not smoke it in the '80's. but he goes from hilton head in the '70's, 15 years past that to joe camel. and, again, what did we hear about joe camel? more kids know joe camel than mickey mouse is what happened on direct. on cross we pointed out that the ftc had concluded that even though it is intuitive, that because people recognize joe camel, they might smoke, there is no evidence to prove it, no evidence to prove that joe camel made anyone smoke, let alone mr. sikes, who is in his 30's and 40's and 50's when all this stuff is going on. we counted up some of the documents. plaintiffs want you to think that there is 18,000 pages of medical records. just to give you an idea of what a brief and unrepresentative snapshot you saw in this case, you heard from dr. proctor, there is 80 million pages of tobacco industry documents available. again, all available before mr. sikes goes back to smoking in 2002. 15 million total documents available. and you saw 58 in this case. 58. 80 million pages, 15 million documents, and 58 pages. you have heard the phrase pack years in this case. you smoke a pack day for a year, that is a pack year. i'd like you to remember something called a company year. reynolds is three companies. reynolds is reynolds, brown & williamson, and american, and they are talking about 60 years of conduct. that is 180 company years. tens of thousands of men and women, that is three american companies, tens of thousands of men and women work at these companies over 60 years. you saw 58 documents. how many times did you hear, trust me, there is way more, trust me, it is massive, massive amounts of evidence. 58 documents in evidence out of 15 million. it is not a fair way to judge anything, let alone the defendant in this case. but remember what dr. proctor said on cross. we said, if you had a document to show that, would not you be in here waving it around? and he said, yes, if i had it, i'd wave it around. did you ever once get the impression in this case that plaintiffs were sitting on other documents that they were not showing you? it is just not there. it is a snapshot and it is not a fair way to judge anything. most importantly, none of this had any connection to mr. sikes and the life he is leading. they never even tried to connect the dots and that is why it does not fit. that is why in this case there is no need for punitive damages. the judge will tell when you consider punitive damages, if you get that far, the only thing you can consider is harm connected to mr. sikes. it cannot be generic conduct. it cannot be things that have no connection to mr. sikes. that is why you heard so much about all the settlements. you heard about the department of justice case time and time again. you heard about the master settlement and you heard about the florida settlement. that is where this generic conduct has been taken care of, settled with the feds, settled with all the states, settled with florida. the generic conduct, that is where that fits. in this case, if they do not connect it to mr. sikes, it does not count. we talked about this from the very first day. this case is not a referendum on tobacco or the tobacco industry. no matter how much unconnected information mr. shields shows you, you have to focus on the evidence related to mr. sikes. there is a very simple reason. we in this country have decided that adults can make up their own mind about smoking or not. this is not about banning cigarettes or whether you think they should be allowed to be sold. it is not what this case is about. we have the freedom in this country to choose to smoke or not and the price of that freedom is accepting responsibility for the consequences of what happens. our society has made our peace with cigarettes, just like ashley heilig did, remember, she smoked since 2004, ten years after the copd. three years after the second heart attack. she sat on the stand and told you, i was social smoker in college. people are making their own choices, reynolds is not causing people to smoke against their will such that they are entitled to millions of dollars in litigation. you heard this from dr. werner. no matter what, there are smokers out there that do not want to stop. some smokers out there that no matter what the consequences, they are not interested in stopping and she said, correct. correct. she told you that on average it takes three or five -- i think seven was her number, on average it takes seven serious attempts to stop, and you stop permanently. reynolds is not responsible for the fact that mr. sikes did not put in seven consecutive real efforts. think about what that means over 42 years. you have to do something seven times in 42 years to get it done. quitting smoking is not running for the senate where you try it every six years and then if it does not work, you go back to it and you go for another six years. just think about what it would take to do something seven times in 90 days. if you did it every ten days and you only had to do it seven times, if you did it ten days in between, it would take you a little over two months. you would be out the door, out the door for good, just like he was in '07. the timing of his quit attempts is not something reynolds is responsible for. and it is the timing of those quit attempts that caused his disease and death and that is why reynolds is entitled to a verdict in its favor. that is why mr. sikes is not a member of the engle class. we heard a lot about other people that smoked and quit. and the reason we brought that up is this is what plaintiffs want you to do, they want to go from addiction to smoking and skip mr. sikes. it is not that easy. there is a man in the middle, a person standing between whatever you want to call his smoking and smoking. that person is mr. sikes. the person with free will and power and the choices to make for himself. here's what is important about this. that is the only but for cause in this whole case. the only thing that if you take it away, makes a real difference is mr. sikes. this just gets me to my last topic, which is comparative fault. usually that draws a smile when you can tell the end is near. thank you again for your attention, i know i've been talking for a long time, i appreciate it. everyone here appreciates it. it is something that we all agree on. i still do not know what mr. shields's position on comparative fault is in this case. i've heard it two times, i read it in some of their pleading, i still do not understand it. what he told you was, it will be up to you to decide whether he was at fault to any degree and we recognize that based on the evidence you could reach the conclusion that he might be at fault. that is up to you. i do not know what that means. i think that means if you find he is at fault, he will accept it, but, again, we will all accept your findings, regardless of what they are. did you ever hear anyone other than mr. shields talk about this issue? did you ever hear a single witness come into this courtroom and say, mr. sikes, yeah, he takes responsibility for his own personal behavior. cigarettes do not jump out of a pack and light themselves. did you hear any witness say, mr. sikes accepts responsibility for this? you did not. not from mrs. sikes, not from his stepdaughter, not from his brother or his friends, none of them. this is a lawyer thing. the only person in this case that is even talked about responsibility or fault for mr. sikes is mr. shields. and he does it in this weird way that says, well, if you find it, okay. i do not know what that means. reynolds' position is clear. he could quit, he did quit, and when he went back to smoking, it was not because of reynolds. and for that reason he is responsible. he is responsible. mr. shields may come back on his rebuttal and say, okay, we will take 15 percent responsibility or 10, i do not know. but remember, no matter what he says, remember that you never heard it from a single witness. is it in the affidavit? no. did mrs. sikes say it? no. mr. shields: objection; improper argument under your rulings. the court: sustained. mr. boyce: it is the same with the diet. not a single witness that said, well, mr. sikes is responsible for the diet he engaged from 1994 until 2010. same with the cups of coffee. 35 cups of coffee. these withdrawal symptoms we keep hearing about, his irritability, his anxiousness, his restlessness, did anybody think that maybe he was anxious because he was drinking 35 cups of coffee a day? but, nonetheless, there are caffeine receptors in your brain just like nicotine, there is caffeine withdrawal, nonetheless, did anybody say, yes, he is responsible for his diet, he is responsible for the coffee. nothing. you will see the medical records in those composites where he refuses to take the medications his doctors prescribe. not only is he not following up on preventative care that they encourage him to do, he is not even taking the medicine they tell him to take. that is mr. sikes. that is not nicotine, that is not reynolds, that is not addiction. think about how far they had to go to try to convince you of some of this stuff. they had witnesses say, well, he smoked so much the walls of the bridge on the la cruise were coated with ash, you could not even see in there. you saw the pictures of the bridge, it is neat, tidy, shipshape is what i thought when i saw it. there is no ashes on the walls. same with ms. heilig. she came in and said, i never forget the time we went into his apartment and it was coated with ash. and then we see the pictures of their home and it is always neat. there is not a single picture of him smoking. look at his nails in there. his beard is not yellow. his nails are not yellow. this is a picture that they are creating for purposes of litigation. that is why they say, i think $10 million is about right. that is what this case is about. disconnected from the real life that mr. sikes led. lastly, remember ms. heilig used the phrase executive decision. first used the word relapse, which dr. werner said is one that experts traditionally use. but she also used executive decision, which a half hour after her testimony, their damages expert used and he said, well, that is a term of art in my field. they both described it the same way, executive decision means buying a house, financing a car, things like that. do not forget, as you go through all this and you think about responsibility, that what really matters is july 2002. copd is stable, he is remarkably functional. you have seen the pictures of him in 2002. everything that reynolds says on that website is up, all of the documents are available. never went to that website, never looked at those documents, never told anybody why he went back to smoking. i hope you saw in this case that there is much more to smoking than simply calling it a relapse or calling it addiction. it is a personal choice, health behavior. people do not smoke for 42 years because of the marlboro man or because jed clampett filmed a commercial. it is not something someone makes you do against your will. this is just like dr. hammond said in 1955. (video clip was played as follows:) good evening, this is "see it now" produced by the partnership of friendly and murrow. tonight the first of two reports on cigarettes and lung cancer. in 1952, drs. hammond and horn of the american cancer society began an extended study of the smoking habits of american men. here is dr. hammond reporting on the results of the first two years. it is now subject, in my opinion, beyond a reasonable doubt, that cigarette smoking greatly increases the probability of developing lung cancer. in my opinion people should be warned of the dangers and they are being warned. what they then want to do, whether they wish to smoke or not is their own business. (video clip ended.) mr. boyce: that is 1955. it is not much different than you heard from harry reasoner in 1964. (video clip was played as follows:) this is a cbs news extra on smoking and health, the findings of the surgeon general's committee. almost from the moment that cigarettes were introduced, they were attacked. but the attacks took a new turn ten years ago and culminated in today's report by the surgeon general's committee. this, in summary, is what the committee said. cigarette smoking is a major cause of lung cancer in men and data on women smokers points the same way. cigarette smoking is a significant cause of cancer of the larynx and probably the most important cause of chronic bronchitis. cigarette smoking may be related to other lung diseases. male smokers have a much higher death rate from heart disease, although it is not proven that smoking is the cause. on the question of filters, the committee says there is no evidence that they do any good, but it did not exclude the possibility that an effective filter might be developed. in short, the committee says, if you smoke cigarettes, you increase your chances of dying early. the sooner you start, the more you smoke, the more you inhale, the worse your chances are. (video clip ended.) mr. boyce: it is no different than what the surgeon general said on three different occasions decades later. smoking is a personal choice, health behavior. in 1982 a personal choice behavior such as smoking is impossible to randomize. you cannot dictate smoking behavior. and in 1986, cigarette smoking is addictive and the individual smoker must decide whether or not to continue that behavior. not just harry reasoner, not just dr. hammond, it is not just the surgeon general. plaintiff's own experts. dr. burns told you, cigarette smoking is addictive behavior and an individual has to decide whether to continue that or not. and do not forget where we started with dr. schoonover. on each and every day that mr. sikes smoked, he could have quit. that is why the who you are matters. that is why the man in the middle matters. it is up to the person whether to smoke or not. now, this is the last time i get to speak to you and mr. shields, i think, has about an hour left in his time. during his rebuttal and back in the jury room, i'll ask one of you to take my voice back there with you. i know that is tough but i would encourage you to remember this as you sit through the rebuttal, as you sit through his rebuttal and you start to deliberate, think about what we would say in response to some of this stuff. and remember this chart. this is what plaintiffs want you to think of as relapse, but look at it this way, mr. sikes quit smoking in 1994 when he was addicted, and he went back to smoking in 1994 when he did not meet the criteria for dependence. he quit smoking in 1998 when he was addicted and he went back to smoking in 1999 when he no longer met the criteria for dependence. he quit smoking in 2001 and he went back in 2002 when he is not dependent and he quits for good in 2007. that is five times he stopped smoking when he was addicted and four times that he went back to smoking when he was not addicted. you add those together, that is nine examples where he is not smoking because of addiction. he is quitting when addicted and he is smoking when not addicted. nine different times. nine different times after he is diagnosed where we can point to the evidence and say that is not smoking because of addiction. that is smoking because of mr. sikes. it is not enough to say that smoking -- or, excuse me, that addiction is a reason or to quote the surgeon general's report and say that nicotine addiction is the fundamental reason. in this case we have real evidence and on nine occasions he stopped smoking when addicted and he starts smoking when not addicted. nine times you can point to when you look at the class membership question and say this guy does not fit. not only did he not seen any of the press releases or press conferences, but there is nine occasions i can look and say that is not smoking because of addiction. and because of that, there is not enough addiction-related smoking to have caused his death. what caused his death is what happens after 2002. and, remember, that in '03, '04, '05 and '06 he is blowing off pft's. he is leaving cessation literature behind and he is refusing to follow up with a psychiatrist his own doctors told him to go see. what mrs. sikes said about this when she was testifying, i think is one of the most instructive things you will see in the whole case. we said, what happened here? this is why i asked her, what happened the day after the day after? if relapse is anything, you have a tough day at work, one of your buddies is smoking, you have a couple cigarettes. that is not an excuse for four years of continued smoking. i said, what happened the day after? she could not remember. never talked about it, did not really remember what happened, but she said something very instructive. i said, mr. sikes made a decision to keep smoking and you made a decision not to harp on it each day; is that fair? and she said, that is fair. that is real life. that is real life. that is not legal cause. if that is not personal choice and responsibility, i do not know what is. i know what it is not. it is not proof that reynolds was a legal cause of what happened to mr. sikes. that is why he is responsible for what happened. he made a decision to keep smoking. she made a decision to let it go. and this is the period they are talking about. they are talking about '95, '96, '97, '99 and 2000, '03, '04, '05 and '06. on each one of the quits, the nicotine is gone. the withdrawal was over. the receptors are normal. he is not addicted. he is not smoking because of addiction. it was smoking because of mr. sikes. thank you again for your time and attention, ladies and gentlemen. it is been a sincere pleasure to present reynolds' case to you. i hope that you have enjoyed your time as jurors half as much as mr. seiden and i and our team have enjoyed presenting the defense to you in this case. i know all of you will keep an open mind as you a deliberate. i'm confident that with an open mind you will see that mr. sikes is not a member of the engle class and that what happened here is smoking because of mr. sikes, not because of addiction. thank you.