2 mr. belasic: good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen. mr. skolnick was not fooled. he was a strong and intelligent man who made his own decisions about the use of a legal product. mr. skolnick was not fooled. his daughter barbara took the stand and swore under oath that in 1964, she told him the surgeon general had concluded that smoking caused cancer, and she said that there was no doubt -- no doubt in her mind that he believed it. mr. skolnick was not fooled. his own wife testified that during the periods of time from the '64 surgeon general's report, when she had discussions with him, he would tell her that he was trying to quit. and she told me on the stand that he was trying to quit because he believed that smoking was dangerous. their own expert, dr. proctor, said that when mr. skolnick grew up, it was mandatory, state law, to teach the school children in the new york public school systems that he attended that smoking was dangerous. and, ladies and gentlemen, that went back as far as 1899. and dr. proctor agreed that that was new york law. mr. skolnick was not incapable of quitting, despite the suggestions. his own experts, dr. cummings, the first expert they put up for you on video, dr. burns said that he was capable and that every smoker was capable of quitting if they made a serious, persistent and motivated choice to do so. mr. skolnick was not deprived of his choice. his own experts said repeatedly that everyone, and again including mr. skolnick, have a choice to quit. and mr. skolnick was not somehow rendered non-responsible, irresponsible. he was responsible. and dr. burns, on the stand, said that whether or not you call mr. skolnick addicted, whether we call it a habit, a dependency, dr. burns, his own expert, said that mr. skolnick was responsible for his smoking behavior. that is all of their experts, ladies and gentlemen. that is all of their witnesses. mr. skolnick was not fooled. now, a lot of what you heard this morning i think in some way explains why we spent so much time here on this trial. a lot of what you heard this morning was evidence about advertisements for brands that mr. skolnick never smoked, statements by tobacco companies that there is no evidence that he saw, conduct that they claim by tobacco companies, some of them not even defendants here, that there is no evidence linking to mr. skolnick. we are not here to retry the engle class action. when you see the verdict form, you will not be asked any questions: did the tobacco companies do something about advertising to youth? did the tobacco companies conceal something? did the tobacco companies do something wrong? when you go through the verdict form, the questions are about mr. skolnick, because this is an individual lawsuit. the claim here is brought by mrs. skolnick, and the only smoker, the only smoker that matters in this case is mr. skolnick. not the engle issues and all the other things that they are trying to talk about. the questions you are going to decide is mr. skolnick and why did mr. skolnick die. there is four key points that i think i would like to remind you when we go through the verdict form and what it is that you are going to have to decide. on these key points, there is either no dispute or the evidence is overwhelming. and the first is that mr. skolnick was aware of the risks of smoking since at least 1964. and i'm going to cover the testimony of his family members, the testimony of his expert. and when you consider that testimony, remember it does not come from a tobacco company witness. it comes from his own family. it comes from the people who loved him, or it comes from the experts that they hired and paid -- yes, as you heard, their experts have made more than $2 1/2 million in the last 20 years, or dr. proctor who made $100,000 in the last month and $800,000 in the last three years. so make no mistake about it, that evidence comes from either the family members who loved him and the experts that were paid to testify on his behalf. but, secondly, mr. skolnick was capable of quitting. his experts admit it. but only tried to cut down. and, of course, you heard a lot of testimony. well, he was always trying to quit. that is what mrs. skolnick says. i'm going to go through the evidence and look at what he did, and see if we can judge and see what mr. skolnick actually did, rather than what mrs. skolnick says that he said. third, mr. skolnick caused his own injury. you are going to see in the jury instructions that judge crow instructs you that in this case, the plaintiff says that mr. skolnick's actions were a partial cause of his own injury. the evidence is going to be undisputed that he could have avoided his injury. if, in fact, he had primary lung cancer, we concede that. if it was lung cancer caused by smoking, then his own experts said he could have quit. and if he had quit 15 years earlier, he would not have gotten lung cancer. that is their expert. finally, i think we know by now, in the radiation lawsuit, mrs. skolnick claimed that the sylvania plant had caused mr. skolnick's lung cancer and had caused her husband's death. let us look at the evidence on was mr. skolnick fooled. in '64, both barbara skolnick and mrs. skolnick said that mr. skolnick heard about the surgeon general's report. they both had conversations with him. mrs. skolnick said she discussed the health risks of smoking. she asked him to quit. there is no dispute about this. but look at what he said in response. he said he would try. this was 1964. it was 30 years before he died. he did not respond to her: i do not believe the surgeon general's report, i saw something on the news. that is the plaintiff's argument. that is what they want you to believe. mrs. skolnick said that his response to her was he would try. well, if he had been tricked, if he did not think that smoking caused lung cancer 30 years earlier, why would he be trying to quit? when i asked mrs. skolnick that, she admitted that the reason he was trying to quit, and she says it was a lot, and we will look at that evidence, but the reason he was trying to quit is that he believed that smoking was dangerous. well, it was not just mrs. skolnick, because their daughter barbara was more emphatic. she got up there and she testified that, again, she raised the issue of the 1964 surgeon general's report. and i asked her specifically if there was any doubt, did she have any doubt that he accepted the warning from that report? and remember, that report did not just say that smoking might be hazardous or smoking might be dangerous. when the report came out in '64, it says: smoking causes lung cancer. and now, almost 50 years later, we are debating whether or not this man was fooled? his own daughter says he -- no doubt he knew 50 years ago that it could cause lung cancer. she also said no doubt he believed that smoking could be dangerous to his health. and because we know that the plaintiff's lawyers have been making these arguments that he was misled or he heard some unidentified statement on the news, i asked her what the response was. you know. and he did not respond, oh, i do not believe it because i heard the tobacco companies. no, he told her he would try to quit, or try to cut down, as he told so many of his loved ones when they warned him. we know, again, two years later, then the package warning came out on every pack of cigarettes. and, once again, his daughter had the conversation with him. she told him about the health risks. this is two years after she had told us that he already believed that smoking could cause lung cancer. and remember this testimony? she actually said: here it is in black and white, holding the pack. the tobacco companies are telling you it is detrimental to your health, and you need to stop. let me ask you this. if it was true, if it was true that mr. skolnick had been tricked, cheated, deceived, if he actually believed in the middle of the '60s something that some man on television said or something from a tobacco company said, do not you think he would have told his daughter, well, the tobacco companies are not telling me it is detrimental to my health. i think they are telling me it is safe. i'm not going to quit. i asked her that, did he say that? of course, no, he did not. he said, i'm trying to quit. she told him the tobacco companies are telling you it is dangerous. she said there is no doubt in her mind that he believed the surgeon general. now, we have all heard many times that two years later, in 1968, mrs. skolnick decided to change her life and change her smoking. she would been smoking for 26 years. she said she was smoking a pack a day. she was smoking the same exact brand as her husband. she was not some occasional smoker; 26 years, a pack a day at that point, the same exact cigarettes. whatever was in those cigarettes that they want you to imagine, it was going into mrs. skolnick. she made the choice. we know what happened. he would not even watch the tv show with her. we know he did not choose to quit. we know he choose to continue. he would not even watch the tv show. and you will be instructed, obviously you are the judges of the facts, you use your common sense, your intelligence, your experience. if he actually wanted to quit smoking, do not you think he would have sat on the couch for an hour with his wife? does it make sense that he really wanted to quit, but their story is, well, he thought he would cut down a little at a time? thirty years later, he still had not cut down. he is always telling people, i'm going to cut down. does it make sense? did he really want to quit? or did he choose to continue? he made a different choice than his wife. we know she chose to quit, we know she chose to follow through. she watched all five episodes, and at the end of that she was a nonsmoker, and she never smoked again. and for 25 years, from 1968 until 1993 when mr. skolnick passed away, he had a living, breathing example of a nonsmoker. and you know what? she said that not once did he ever ask her, how did you quit, honey? how did you quit? does that make sense if he really wanted to? if you wanted to change your life dramatically and your own spouse had done so, if you really wanted to, do not you think you would have asked even once, how did you do it? he chose not to quit. he made a different choice than her. at the same time, mrs. skolnick said in 1968 that she knew cigarettes were addictive. this is 20 years before the surgeon general's report changed the definition of cigarettes from habit to addictive, 20 years before. she got the same information her husband did. they were not fooled. not just mr. skolnick. she was not fooled. he was not fooled. now, we know that by the mid 1970s, her husband had stopped smoking in the car. and remember when dr. burns came? dr. burns, obviously he never met mr. skolnick, but he read all of the deposition testimony from mrs. skolnick, from barbara, from the son robert, from amy skolnick, the daughter-in-law. he read all of that. and he agreed that by the mid '70s she had stopped, and he agreed that mrs. skolnick reported that the reason -- the reason her husband (sic) stopped smoking in the mid '70s was because everybody knew how bad it was. everybody knew how bad it was. there was not any doubt that he knew smoking was bad. now, i've got to be fair here. do you remember dr. burns speculated maybe they were just talking about secondhand smoke? maybe they meant secondhand smoke was bad and everyone knew that. imagine if that was true. if it was true in the mid '70s, that mr. skolnick thought secondhand smoke was so bad that they could not even be around it, well, is not it obvious that he knew smoking was bad for him. even if you accept that rank speculation from dr. burns. and remember, this is ten years after their daughter swears under oath that there is no doubt that her father believed the surgeon general's report on lung cancer. we know that also his son robert warned him repeatedly. we saw that, and dr. burns agreed. we know robert the attorney, he did not testify, but he testified under oath at a deposition. dr. burns agrees that robert warned mr. skolnick about the risks of smoking and asked him to quit all throughout the 1970s. and this is the way dr. burns put it. he used a little more formal language than i did. he said that robert consistently provided a message to mr. skolnick to quit. so it was coming at all directions, from the people he loved the most, from the people he trusted the most. and those people, including his daughter, report that he was not fooled; that he was not saying, i think smoking is safe because somebody said something on tv. under oath, they testified that he believed it was dangerous. and we know, as we heard before, that mr. skolnick was told that his sister sunny had died from lung cancer. i heard mr. schlesinger say, well, he probably would have disputed that. that is not really the issue. no one in this room knows whether she died of lung cancer or not, but it is undisputed that is what mr. skolnick was told. that is what mrs. skolnick said. that is what dr. burns said. he was told his own sister had died of lung cancer from smoking. and when i asked dr. burns how big a proof is that, the emotional factor of seeing in real life, dr. burns said that it was virtually irrefutable, irrefutable demonstration to mr. skolnick that smoking causes lung cancer. so this is their expert, this is the gentleman that they picked to come in and give an opinion on addiction, and he admits in 1978, basically no doubt, irrefutable that mr. skolnick knew that smoking causes lung cancer. that is the same thing his daughter said way back in the '60s. now, you heard a lot of different themes in plaintiff's counsel's argument, and we heard a lot of different themes and messages about what the issues in this case are. and i would submit to you that those messages from the plaintiff, from the plaintiff's witnesses, from the plaintiff's attorneys have been contradictory. one of their arguments here is that mr. skolnick did not appreciate the risks because of something a tobacco company said. and the only evidence of that is mrs. skolnick said at some time she was sure they were watching a news item where some tobacco company person was testifying, and it was on tv. but yet when i asked mrs. skolnick, how can you say he tried to quit all the time, she said: well, he tried to quit all the time because he thought smoking was dangerous. they cannot have it both ways. either mr. skolnick wanted to quit all the time because he thought smoking was dangerous, or he had been somehow tricked, and in which case he would not want to quit. but they are trying to have it both ways, and it is simply contradictory. now, at times they have suggested he could not quit because of the effects of nicotine, and even today we saw that. even today when mr. hammer was talking about we take a certain percentage of fault, and he said that mr. skolnick was only 20 percent responsible for 50 years of choices about smoking. he actually used the phrase because of his "inability to quit." and a minute later, he was saying of course he could quit. it is contradictory. either he could quit or he could not quit. their experts say he could quit. their admission and judge crow's jury instructions tell you that they admit that he caused his own injury in part because of his failure to quit. he could have quit, and he caused his own injury. and, again, that is not something a tobacco company is saying. that is what the plaintiffs admitted in this lawsuit. that is what judge crow was instructing you. now, we know the biggest contradiction, and you have seen it from the very first five minutes of opening statement when i showed you that sylvania case. you had not heard anything about the fact that mrs. skolnick said that her husband had been killed by toxic exposures, radiation, from the skolnick plant (sic). from the very beginning, you saw that. she did claim in this case that smoking caused lung cancer and death. but she claimed years before in another lawsuit that it was radiation that killed him. and that is an inherent contradiction. we are going to go through that, and i'll address what mr. schlesinger said about it. well, it is not just the contradictions and themes. mrs. skolnick's testimony is the opposite of her own daughter. she says at one point that her husband relied on unidentified statements. i asked her when they were, are you sure you are not thinking about the 1994 testimony, which obviously would be after her husband had passed away. she said no, she was sure it was at some point -- she could not even state the decade. she said she just heard it was sometime after the surgeon general's report. but when we asked barbara, what did your father think about the surgeon general's report, she said there is no doubt, no doubt that he believed it. mrs. skolnick says he experienced withdrawal symptoms, although you heard the withdrawal symptoms. she said she was edgy and fidgety. that is not the kind of withdrawal symptoms we typically think of as interfering with an ability to function. yes, i suppose you would not want to be fidgety or edgy, not the kind of serious withdrawal symptoms that their experts talked about. but when we asked barbara under oath, she said she does not remember her father having any withdrawal symptoms. now, why would barbara, who knew him -- she was born in 1950, she was able to observe him throughout the '60s, '70s, '80s, and '90s, why would barbara say something under oath that is the exact opposite? you will have to make that decision. mrs. skolnick even contradicts herself. we know she says he relied on some unidentified statements. but you saw and you will remember this was the point when i was cross-examining her, and i had to put up about two pages of her prior testimony that she gave under oath in this lawsuit. and in there, she described how she told mr. skolnick that the surgeon general was right, the tobacco companies were wrong. and mr. skolnick, he did not tell her, honey, i think the tobacco companies, you know, that i think it is safe or i'm being misled. no. he said he would quit. she is contradicting herself even in the same hour when she was on the stand. mrs. skolnick's -- her testimony about filters was contradicted by her own expert. she said repeatedly that they -- meaning, she and mr. skolnick -- switched to filtered cigarettes as soon as they came out, she said. as soon as they came out. dr. proctor explained how that is not true. he said filters came out in the early '50s, and mrs. skolnick said the very first time they smoked filters was pall mall. and pall mall did not even have a filter until 1966. so for almost 15 years these filters were out, these filters and the statements that they say are somehow tricking them, they were not smoking them. and what she said, her own expert says was not true. she says that they thought they were safer. when we asked her why did you think they were safer, who said what? did a tobacco company say something? was there actually an advertisement for pall malls that told you they were safer? she does not know, she cannot identify anything. and then we asked dr. proctor. i put up all the pall mall advertisements, including in the years before they switched to filters, and those were the ones that said long on taste, mild. long on taste, mild. and he agreed that those ads never said filters were safer. because when the filter came out, it was the same statement. and he said -- this was his description, his word. honest. he actually used the word "honest" to describe a tobacco company. he said american tobacco company was honest about filters. now we know that mrs. skolnick has contradicted herself. she told us under oath that she was not suing for radiation, when she sued verizon and the sylvania plant. she told us under oath that she was only suing for colon cancer. and then we saw her own wrongful death claim. he did not die from the colon cancer. she is claiming he died from lung cancer. and her claim in that case was wrongful death from lung cancer. we saw that in her own handwriting, sworn and under perjury. here's what we saw. this is her verified declaration for allocation of settlement proceeds in the radiation lawsuit. there is who she is suing, verizon is now one of the owners of that radioactive site. look at what she brought. this is not a claim for colon cancer that was cured through surgery in 1980. this is a claim for wrongful death. the specifics of the claim. she has to know when she is filling this out that her claim, as she writes, is for lung cancer. we know that she knew it was a wrongful death claim. it was literally on the inch above where she signed. we know that she swore and said that under penalty of perjury that she read the foregoing; that the same was true to her knowledge. she swore it was true under penalty of perjury. you know, mr. schlesinger said -- he went through the same things i did, and he said, hey, that was true, that was true, that was true. well, of course, we are not claiming it was not true. what is true is that three years before she brought this lawsuit claiming smoking killed her husband, she had already sued corporations saying they killed her husband. although she was not saying smoking was the cause. she was saying radiation was the cause. so no one is disputing that she was writing down here what she thought was true. this is proof that what she is saying now, it was only colon cancer, i never knew it was a wrongful death claim. with all due respect, this is proof that what she said simply is not credible. once again, it says the specifics of the claim. notice what it instructs her. the first words in the instruction: for the claimed injury, she writes lung cancer. that is what she was suing for. even though she says under oath now, that is not what i was suing for. same thing again. give us the specifics of the claim. she talks about death from lung cancer. now, look, i'm not going to say -- i'm not going to talk about corrupt motives or say all the other bad things that mr. schlesinger said about dr. mcgregor. you are going to decide. and i know that mrs. skolnick is 86. i know her husband passed around 20 years ago. from everything we have seen, her husband sounds like a wonderful man, and she deserves to be treated with respect. i think i did. but with all due respect, you can conclude from this evidence that mrs. skolnick has simply not been credible about her prior lawsuit; that she took a position that was beneficial to her in that lawsuit, suing for money, saying radiation was the cause, and now she is taken that position here. and we have seen that her testimony, not just on radiation, her testimony on smoking, contradicted by her own daughter, contradicted by her own experts. sometimes even contradicting herself in the same session on the stand. and i would submit to you that, again, with all due respect -- and we have sympathy for her. but you have agreed to put aside the sympathy that you have for her. but her testimony simply does not add up. and it is contradicted by what we now know are facts. so we know that mr. skolnick was aware of the risks for at least 30 years, and he was capable of quitting and tried to cut down. we know the plaintiffs have agreed that at least in part, they have admitted that he caused his own injury. let us look at the verdict form. this is going to be what your -- the actual verdict form you are going to decide. here is the first question. and even though it is one question, it really is three different parts. was mr. skolnick addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine? and if he was, was such addiction a legal cause of his lung cancer and death? and of those three issues, first we know the plaintiff has to prove that he has lung cancer. their experts agree that if it was lung cancer that spread from somewhere else, then it is not caused by smoking. their experts agree if it is spread on the colon, no one claims that that was -- that that was caused by smoking. it is their burden to show that he actually had this primary lung cancer caused by smoking. of course as mr. schlesinger said, they also have to prove that he was addicted. this is the most important part, and that is what you did not hear from the plaintiff's lawyer. they have to show not just that smoking caused his cancer, but that addiction -- that addiction was the legal cause of his lung cancer and death. now, whatever definition you use, was his addiction an actual cause, apart from his choice to smoke for those years? here's their burden of proof. we know that plaintiffs have the burden of proof on each of those issues. they are going to need to prove that smoking medically caused a primary lung cancer. they have to prove it was addiction. and then the third point, they have to prove that addiction was a legal cause. and i'm just going to briefly review some of the evidence on this medical causation. mr. lombardi is going to talk about radiation, and he is going to address that and what dr. mcgregor actually said. but let us just briefly talk about. they brought in two doctors that treated him. what they did not bring in was the doctor, dr. rosenthal, the gastroenterologist. because he is the man, he is the doctor who treated him for colon cancer. you did not see him testify. we just have his records. the other two doctors, pulmonologist and radiologist, are doctors who are trying to remember something that happened 20 years ago by looking at whatever is on their medical records. you have to decide, was it primary lung cancer? did it spread from the colon? we know dr. mcgregor has already said that radiation caused the colon cancer. and now mrs. skolnick, now her new position is she was only suing for colon cancer in the verizon case. if that was true, then even mrs. skolnick would have agreed that radiation caused it. we know that everyone agrees it was not caused by smoking. but it was the same cell type as the tumor they found in his lung. now dr. mcgregor says that that colon cancer, the colon cancer that may have spread, was caused by radiation. if colon cancer spreads, where does it go? we asked their experts. we did not bring in someone. we asked their experts. where would it spread? dr. burns said it spreads to other of the major organs, but the two most common are the liver and the lungs. and dr. burns, their expert, specifically said that it goes first to the liver on the way to the lungs. so just common sense, if you wanted to know, is there a possibility that colon cancer spread to the lung? after what we learned from dr. burns, you would want to know, well, did he have a tumor in his liver? well, here is what we found. they did the radiology. they found at least three hepatic masses. their doctors agree hepatic is the liver. there were three masses in his liver. two of them measured approximately two centimeters. two centimeters is about three-quarters of an inch. that is two of those tumors and a third one. they say specifically -- and again, no tobacco company made this up. these are his actual records. they say these three masses in the liver could have been missed. and, of course, they never biopsied them. no one went to find out if those were cancerous. never biopsied. they put dr. davis on. dr. davis is not an expert on colon cancer. but we asked him about this. one of the lesions was on the ct scan, and one of the reports said it could have been missed. and then dennis murphy asked him. that is not uncommon that testing done on a patient might miss a lesion on a mass. and dr. barry davis -- and this is the doctor they picked out of all his doctors to come in -- said it can, it can be missed. we are not making it up. it is on the medical record. and no one went, no one went to check if those three large masses in his lung were cancer. the second thing you are going to have to decide and then the third thing are related. plaintiffs like to argue -- all you have to decide was, was he addicted. come on, he smoked 30 years, he smoked a lot. common sense, he must be addicted. that is what plaintiffs tell you is the position. but we know, and you will see on the verdict form, that they also have to prove that addiction, not just smoking, that addiction was the legal cause of his death. let us look at the evidence on both. first of all, mr. skolnick enjoyed smoking. i do not know if anyone else found it surprising that the witnesses were not asked that. but sylvia gross did. and remember, sylvia gross was a woman around mrs. skolnick's age, one of the skolnicks' close friends. and she said without question, he enjoyed smoking. none of the other family members were asked. could he really have smoked 40 or 50 years and not enjoyed it? could he have smoked after meals and not enjoyed it? did he not enjoy it? well, the only person not tied to this family when asked that question immediately said, sure, he enjoyed smoking. that is one of the reasons he smoked. now, on addiction, dr. burns, their expert, admitted there is no consensus definition. there is not some checklist or some criteria that you can use. we know there is evidence he enjoyed smoking. there is evidence from barbara that he smoked to relieve stress. she said that one of the reasons that meditation -- that he was interested in meditation was that in general he wanted to relax more, wanted to reduce stress. we know from barbara that he had no real withdrawal symptoms, the kind of symptoms that an addict, that a drug addict, as mr. schlesinger says, that a drug addict would have. and we know this. none of his doctors diagnosed addiction. think of all the medical records that you saw and all the different doctors, and they only called two. but none of those medical records said the patient is addicted. patient is nicotine dependent. none of them did. now, dr. barry davis came in and said he does not remember him. but he said 20 years after the fact he would say that. but while they were seeing him, there is not any evidence that his doctors actually diagnosed addiction. and as we are going to see, the evidence is that it was actually his choice to smoke and not stop. it was not something that he was being compelled by nicotine. the judge will instruct you and you can see when you go to the section on legal cause, what is legal cause? does it mean it is legal to cause something? no, legal cause means that something directly and in a continuous sequence contributes substantially to a result. so if you were arguing he was addicted, whatever definition they are going to use -- and i have not seen one yet -- but if you are arguing that he was addicted and you wanted to know if it caused lung cancer, you would have to ask, did it directly cause it? was it in a continuous sequence? and did it contribute substantially? let us look at the evidence on that. first of all, how can addiction be a direct cause when you admit that the smoker can quit and avoid his injury? they are saying addiction caused his lung cancer. but their experts on addiction say addiction does not mean you cannot quit. you can still quit. how is addiction a direct cause when a person can stop and not get the injury that they claim addiction caused? it is not a cause when a smoker has the ability to quit or a choice to quit. and when we asked dr. burns and dr. cummings, their experts, they agree that it is up to the smoker to choose the quit, and that the smoker is responsible. you know the old line that no one put a gun to his head -- and that seems like an extreme example. but in this case, it is true. because his experts say he could still quit. and i do not -- is there any way that someone can say you caused an injury to a person when that person has the ability to make a choice, and if they make it -- if they make that choice, they can walk away and not be injured. and this is separate from the issue of whether smoking's the cause. the judge is instructing you, the verdict form is instructing you. you have to find that addiction is a cause. here's the instruction you are going to get. and this is the court -- judge crow telling you that in this regard, plaintiff has admitted that the acts of leo skolnick relating to the duration and frequency of his efforts to quit smoking -- so the duration and frequency, how long and how often -- were a partial legal cause of his injuries and death. and, of course, the plaintiffs, they do not want to take full responsibility. they want to say it is also the fault of defendants. but think of that. the plaintiffs are admitting that mr. skolnick caused his own lung cancer and death. but they say, just in part. what does this mean? how could leo skolnick, how could they admit that he caused in part his own death? well, it has to mean that mr. skolnick knew that smoking was dangerous and continued to smoke. because if he did not know that, would the plaintiffs have admitted that he was a partial cause of his own death? and it has to mean that he had the ability to quit. because if he could not quit, how could the plaintiffs say that his actions with regard to quitting were a cause of his own injury? and we know his experts say, including dr. burns, that mr. skolnick had the ability to quit smoking at a time that would have prevented his death. now, mr. skolnick was not someone who was in a car with no brakes or strapped to the wheel, hurdling down a highway where he could not escape and he was inevitably going to crash. on this highway of smoking, their own experts, dr. burns and dr. cummings, say that there are off-ramps, there are places where the smoker can stop. he had the choice and the ability to quit, and that is from his own experts, not from someone the tobacco company brought. he had the choice to quit. and dr. burns says he could have quit at a time that would have prevented his injury. given all that, how can you say, how can plaintiffs say, well, addiction was a direct cause of his injury? it just does not have to be a cause, it has to be a direct cause. their own experts say that mr. skolnick had the ability to choose to break that chain at any time. now i have this up here on the board, and i have to admit this is really just a reminder for me to point you to the board. this board is sort of like a tree of choices. i'm not going to go over them all again. obviously we do not know when he started smoking. no one saw him. dr. burns tried to say, well, if you look at the statistics, men in his age group started at a certain point. i asked him a few questions about that. but everyone agrees no one knows when he started with direct knowledge. nobody met him in this case before 1947, when he was already 29. but he had a choice. he could become a regular smoker or do not start. we know in '64 when the surgeon general's report came out, the first time he heard it, he had a choice. the first time his daughter barbara warned him about lung cancer in '64, he had a choice. the first time his wife told him about the surgeon general's report, and she asked him to quit, he had a choice. two years later when the warning came out on the pack, he had that choice. and when his daughter barbara came to him with the warning and told him the tobacco companies are telling you it is bad, you need to stop, he had a choice again. and two years later, when mrs. skolnick quit, he had that choice. and in the '70s, when a different warning came out on every pack, he had a choice. and in the mid '70s and mid '80s, when even his own wife admits he knew it was dangerous for him and when his son robert was warning him, according to dr. burns on a consistent basis, he had a choice every one of those times. and it is simply second-guessing now to say he made the wrong choice, that he made the wrong choice and as mrs. skolnick is now saying, because her husband made a regrettable choice, a choice that every one of us sympathizes with, she now wants $9.1 million for the choices he made year after year after year after year. he was not a robot. he was not a zombie. according to his own experts, he had the ability to quit. i want to show you the flip chart. this will just take a minute. i think everybody remembers. dr. burns said if you quit smoking, your risk of lung cancer goes down. after a year, it goes down; after two years, it goes down more; after five and ten years, it goes way down. and he said after 15 years, it goes down enough that he could agree that if he would have quit 15 years before he died, that more likely than not he would not have developed lung cancer. and that is the standard, the greater weight of the evidence, more probable than not. that is the standard in the court of law. that is why i asked dr. burns that way. he says: mr. skolnick quits 15 years, 1978, then more likely than not he does not get lung cancer. well, if you look at the choice tree, really every single day of his life he had that choice. but look at all the different times that the risk of lung cancer was put right in his face, was put directly to him by the people he loved, the people he trusted most in the world. he made those choices. at any one of these times before 1978, he could have quit smoking. that is what his own experts say. and according to dr. burns, then he would not have gotten lung cancer. now, how can you say that addiction was a direct cause when you say at the same time addiction did not stop him from quitting, and if he chose to quit, he does not get cancer. you can play a word game. you can say addiction means these things. he smokes a lot. he smokes in the morning. i could come up and say, well, i think it is better to say it is a habit. it is a perpetual or continual behavior. another person like dr. cummings might say it is a dependency. let us look at the psychiatric definition. you can put whatever label on it you want. but in the end, to show that addiction is a direct cause, they have to show that it directly -- hooked him into substantially and continuously causing him to develop lung cancer. but his experts do not say, oh, no, he was directly and continuously caused to develop lung cancer. they admit that he could have quit. they admit that he had a choice. dr. cummings also agreed within 15 years, the risk of cancer disappears. mr. schlesinger called it a -- he said this was my favorite number. i suppose in a tobacco case about whether people have to quit, it might be. because the idea that 50 million people can accomplish something and then to just pooh-pooh that and say, well, this one man whose wife just happens to be suing for 9 million, he could not. what makes more sense? 50 million people have quit. some of their experts said 60 million. it is the most common health behavior that people do to improve. dr. cummings says it is been known hundreds of years, and even the surgeon general has referred to it as personal choice. dr. cummings, who they put on by video, said that the 50 million people who quit were addicted; that more than half of the people who had ever smoked had already quit, and that addicted smokers can and do quit every day. he said that anyone could quit. let us look at what he said about whether individual smokers have a choice and whether they must decide. (video clip was played as follows:) q. doctor, do you agree with me that the individual smoker must decide whether or not to continue smoking? a. i do. (video clip concluded.) mr. belasic: this was their first expert. this was the person they chose to bring you on addiction. this is the only expert that does these large-scale smoking cessation groups that he counsels. no one -- i certainly do not dispute, no one disputes that dr. cummings is an expert on this stuff. look at what he said. (video clip was played as follows:) q. of the 50 million smokers who have quit smoking, the majority of those people were addicted to cigarettes, correct? a. yes. q. so, when we talk about addiction, we do not mean that someone cannot quit smoking. true? a. that is true. q. because addicted smokers can and do quit smoking every day? a. yes. (video clip concluded.) mr. belasic: and, finally, dr. cummings said this: the success rate for a certain type of person -- let us see what type of person it is -- but the success rate for a certain type of person to quit is one hundred percent. not 10, not 50, it is one hundred percent. look what he says. (video clip was played as follows:) q. and when smokers come to your stop smoking clinic, you tell them that the success rate for quit among people who really want to quit and stick to it is one hundred percent, right? a. yes, i do say that in my literature. q. and you have testified in the past that anyone can quit if they make up their mind to do it, right? a. i have testified to that, yes. (video clip concluded.) mr. belasic: not quite as quick with the answer, but you see that he said yep, that is true. really want to quit and stick to it. dr. burns also agreed that anyone is capable of quitting, and dr. burns, when i asked him, addicted smokers, even if you call them addicted, they are still responsible. they do not get to say, i'm not responsible, i inhaled nicotine. he agreed addicted smokers are still responsible for their smoking behavior. well, was mr. skolnick the kind of person who, quote, "really wanted to quit," was motivated and stuck to it? because dr. burns, his own expert, said one hundred percent of those people can quit. let us look at the evidence. we know that the u.s. department of health has said that scientific studies suggest that everyone can quit smoking. but let us judge the evidence on mr. skolnick. y'all know in real life there is a difference between what somebody says, yeah, you will do this, that sounds great, honey, and what somebody actually does. let us review the evidence on what mr. skolnick said versus what he actually did. we know that mrs. skolnick says that he told her that he would either try to cut down or sometimes she phrases it "try to quit." but when we explore with mrs. skolnick, with barbara skolnick, we find that what they are describing is he is actually saying he is going to cut down. and then at some unknown point in the future, that he might quit. and we know that he never just put his cigarettes down and just said, i'm not going to smoke now and i'll see how long i can go. let us look at what he actually did. from 1947 -- and we have no evidence beforehand -- throughout the 1950s, there is no evidence in the record that he did anything to quit smoking. in the 1960s, there is no evidence in the record that he did anything specific to quit smoking. and think about that. think about all the evidence that is in the record about he saw the surgeon general's report in '64, his wife talked to him. barbara talked to him. his son robert talked to him. he saw the warnings. but there is no specific evidence that he actually did something to try and stop smoking during that entire decade. now, in the 1970s, we know he went to -- mr. schlesinger called it hippie-dippie. he went to an est meeting for two hours. also, in the 1970s -- i put down 1970s, because i think that is what barbara said. but mrs. skolnick was uncertain. we do not even know for sure the date of the meditation. if you think of that, in the entire decade, all he did to quit was go to one meeting. remember, he quit est. he did not quit smoking. and he did meditation for a certain period of time. what about the '80s, ten more years? what about the '80s? we do not know. mrs. skolnick said he would put a plastic cigarette in his mouth for one or two months. she said he might have gone to hypnosis. she is not positive. i just put down an hour. she said he might have gone. now, you add this all up and you are looking at 45 years, a couple hours at one meeting, one hour maybe at hypnosis, a month or two of putting a plastic cigarette, and then meditation. and the evidence on meditation is people are not even certain if that was directly to quit smoking. and the evidence from mrs. skolnick is he never cut down. she did not observe him cutting down smoking, certainly not quitting during meditation. so that is it, for 45 years. and dr. cummings said that a smoker who is truly motivated to quit would throw away his cigarettes, and we know mr. skolnick never did that. throw away ashtrays. we know mr. skolnick did not do that. dr. cummings, this is the expert that they picked, said if you were motivated, you would pick a quit date. no evidence mr. skolnick did that. dr. cummings said you would consult a doctor. now, he went to lots of doctors, we saw the medical records, you heard a lot of different doctors, we know he went to doctors when he had a problem. whether it was colon cancer, finding a tumor in his lung. we know he went to doctors. but no one ever suggested that he asked one of his doctors at any time for any help in quitting smoking. and that is his right. no one is blaming him. he had that right. he had a choice like everyone to use a legal product or quit. but when plaintiffs say he really wanted to quit, why did not he ever ask a doctor for help? why did not he ask his own wife how she quit successfully? why did not he take the steps that their expert says a truly motivated person would do? here's the things he did not do. we know he would not even watch the cessation program, the tv program with his wife. he did not throw away his cigarettes or his ashtrays. he never asked his wife, how did you do it? he never asked a doctor. he never went to an actual smoking cessation program. you know, his daughter barbara said it took her two years to convince him to go to est, and supposedly she said he thought est was a way to quit smoking. so, again, if you really want to quit and you think this meeting called est is a way to do it, why would you procrastinate for two years? does not that sound more like someone who does not want to quit? but we do know he never went to a smoking cessation program. and when nicotine gum was out, he never tried that either. you have heard the evidence on what mr. skolnick actually did. let me ask you to consider this. if i told you that i was on a serious exercise program, i really wanted to get myself fit, and you asked me what did you do, and i said last year i went on the treadmill for two hours or i dieted for two hours or i went to the gym -- mr. schlesinger: excuse me, judge, objection. the court: sustained. do not make it personal, counsel. mr. belasic: all right. think about this. if someone exercised once in a year, if someone went on a diet for a couple times a year, would it be reasonable to conclude that that person, the person who just exercised once in a year, was seriously motivated to exercise? was seriously motivated to lose weight? if someone said that in the entire time in the 1960s, all i did was go to a two-hour weight watcher meeting; the other nine days, 364 days, i did nothing. of course no one would say that that person was motivated or they were making a serious and persistent effort. yet in this lawsuit, under the plaintiff's theory, it is somehow different for a smoker. that they say that if someone did one thing in a decade or meditated for a few months or even a year in 45 years, that we are supposed to believe that that person for 45 years was motivated and successful in quitting. if this was not a tobacco lawsuit and you just compared it to real world efforts, what we would say is over the course of 45 years, there is very little evidence that mr. skolnick was doing any serious effort to quit. and, remember, that even what he was doing, the evidence is he was telling people i'm doing it to cut down, and cutting down is not quitting. saying you are cutting down is saying you are continuing to smoke. eventually he needed to stop smoking. and he did not do the efforts that his own expert, that his own expert said would show he was motivated. dr. burns agreed with me. he said while he talked about cutting down, no one actually observed him actually cutting down, at least for any significant amount of time, in the '50s, the '60s, the '70s, or '80s, and that is their expert. i did not have to bring someone. there is no dispute over who he favors. dr. burns has been paid $2.5 million to testify in these lawsuits for plaintiffs who sue a company, and he agreed that no one ever saw mr. skolnick cutting down, period, during those 40 years. and barbara agreed. that is his daughter. there is no reason that his daughter would not tell the truth about something like that. now, we know that there is no direct evidence of what happened to mr. skolnick before 1947. dr. burns told you that he thought mr. skolnick had become addicted before 1947. let me ask you this: to what? what was he smoking before 1947? was it an r.j. reynolds brand? was it a philip morris brand? did r.j. reynolds do something to addict mr. skolnick before 1947? dr. burns said he probably was addicted. did philip morris do something wrong? there is no evidence in this case that r.j. reynolds or philip morris did anything wrong to cause mr. skolnick to smoke. we do not know where he smoked. we do not know what he smoked. there is no evidence of when he started and what brand it was, and there is no evidence that either defendant caused him to become addicted. because dr. burns said when mrs. skolnick met him, he was already addicted. now, one of the things you have agreed to do is to decide this case solely on the evidence. i would submit to you with no evidence whatsoever, it is simply a guess. how do we know what he was smoking in 1942? or 1938? or 1940? we do not know. we do not know if he was smoking a cigarette made by another defendant. of course the plaintiffs, it would be very convenient for the plaintiffs for you to just assume that reynolds must have done something, but that is not evidence. and it would be convenient to assume, well, maybe he tried a philip morris brand in the 1940s, but there would be no evidence. and they do not dispute this. mr. schlesinger: objection, judge. the court: overruled. mr. belasic: there is no evidence what he smoked or who addicted him. and yet now they want to say, well, it was addiction to reynolds' products. really? if he was already addicted for years, according to dr. burns, if addiction means what they say it means, that somehow he is compelled and caused to develop cancer. if he was already addicted. if r.j. reynolds and philip morris had gone out of business in 1947, had not even existed, according to dr. burns, he was already addicted. and there was no evidence that he did anything before that time period that was wrong. including lung cancer. remember that when dr. proctor, their historian, came up, i asked him some historical questions. and knowing that there is no evidence in this case, no evidence in this case at all that r.j. reynolds or philip morris did anything wrong that caused mr. skolnick to become addicted, or caused him to smoke before this 1947 period, i asked him: when does dr. proctor, their expert, he is been paid more than a million dollars, he made $100,000 just the last month to testify. he said: well, you should have warned about lung cancer in the mid 1950s. but he would been smoking we know for a long time. and dr. burns said he was already addicted. addicted when there is no evidence that r.j. reynolds did it. and no matter how much sympathy you feel, no matter how angry you may feel at some of these documents, and they look ridiculous now in the 2000s, no matter how angry you may feel, you still have to decide the case on the evidence. and they have not presented a shred of evidence that r.j. reynolds made this man become addicted, whatever their definition is, or philip morris did. there is simply a blank before 1947. and dr. burns comes here and says, oh, he was addicted years before. i think he may have said as far back as eight to ten years. but dr. burns did not say it was reynolds' fault, because no one has that evidence. their own expert. they could not meet their burden of proof. and because of that, you cannot vote yes on the first question. it cannot be a direct cause. not when they admit he was -- that he was addicted already, and there is no evidence that it was from anything that r.j. reynolds or philip morris did. one of the last things i would like you to think about on this topic is we know mr. skolnick and mrs. skolnick made different choices. even though they made different choices, they lived together in the same environment, saw the same information, same advertising. they had the same cigarettes, whatever was in the smoke. the same nicotine went into them. but they made a different choice, and they met a different outcome. so mr. skolnick got lung cancer. they say it is primary lung cancer. they say it is from smoking. mrs. skolnick made a different choice. she never got lung cancer. everything else that r.j. reynolds did, good or bad, everything else that philip morris did, good or bad, was exactly the same for mrs. and mrs. skolnick. so how do we explain the difference? why would one get lung cancer and the other did not, when r.j. reynolds and philip morris acted exactly the same? it is obvious. they made different choices. and that choice, the choice to continue smoking that mr. skolnick made and the choice to quit that mrs. skolnick made, that is cause, one hundred percent. that is the one hundred percent difference. everything else was the same. one got lung cancer because he made a different choice than his wife. you know, even the recent surgeon general's report in 2010 agrees to this extent. the surgeon general says -- and this is one of the manuals they keep showing you -- it says: that tobacco dependence accounts for only a modest amount of variation in the risk of relapse. when you look at people and people who do not quit and relapse and continue smoking, is it addiction that is the direct cause? is it addiction that is a substantial cause? no. they say tobacco dependence accounts for only a modest amount. well, what is the reason? look what the surgeon general says. it is consistent with the notion that relapse, going back to smoking, is a function of multiple person factors; that it is the person, that it is the choice. a hundred percent of the difference in the outcome, the reason that mrs. skolnick is here today and the reason that she is now saying that she should get $9 million because her husband made the wrong choice was, in fact, the choice. the companies did nothing different to her or to anyone else. now, i will show you question 2. for all those reasons you should vote no on question 1. addiction was simply not a direct cause, even if they could prove the medical link between the smoking and the cancer. if you answer yes, you will go to question 2. and you are going to be asked to apportion negligence and to put this percentage there. and remember, the plaintiff has already admitted that leo skolnick's actions were a partial legal cause. now, mr. hammer said, well, only 20 percent. so all of these choices, all of the years that he made those choices, they are still going to say it is eighty percent the fault of the manufacturer of the legal product, and they want you to say only twenty percent. well, we know that they would not be admitting that mr. skolnick caused his own death if he did not have the ability to quit, and if he could not have quit at a time that prevented his death. we know dr. burns says he quits by the '70s, more likely than not he does not get lung cancer. could he have quit by the '70s, his experts say he could have. the clerk: you have used one hour. mr. belasic: now, let us go back to what i'm talking about here. even if r.j. reynolds and philip morris go out of business, does anyone think mr. skolnick would not smoke? we know he already smoked another brand. chesterfields, made by liggett. we know that. mrs. skolnick said -- mr. schlesinger: objection, judge. may i approach? the court: yes, sir. [#deleted sidebar#] the court: okay. the objection is sustained. you may proceed, sir. mr. belasic: nothing that r.j. reynolds or philip morris could have done would have prevented mr. skolnick's death. this was a man that wanted to continue to smoke. remember what their own experts, dr. cummings and dr. burns said. it sounds stupid, but if you want to quit, you have to choose to quit first. you have to want to quit first. that is what they say. that is their expert. only he had the ability to prevent his death. r.j. reynolds and philip morris, they could not send someone from north carolina or somewhere to stop him from smoking. he had to choose. he had to make the choice. his wife made that choice, even though whatever r.j. reynolds was doing was exactly the same for her. she made the choice. she quit. now she is here to sue, because her husband made the wrong choice. and the only difference in outcome that we have seen, what is the reason that mr. skolnick got lung cancer if you believe it is caused by smoking, that the plaintiffs are right? what is the reason he got lung cancer and his wife did not. same brands, same many years of smoking, same information. well, it is because he made a different choice, and that choice did not cause twenty percent of his cancer, and his choice did not cause 50 percent of his cancer. that choice is 100 percent responsible for the difference. it has to be. because there is no difference in what r.j. reynolds did that could have affected mrs. skolnick and her husband. the difference in outcome is because they went in two different paths, and he made a different choice. for that reason, you should find 100 percent it is unfair to now have mrs. skolnick second-guess her husband's decision and say that she should be rewarded with $9 million for that decision. that is because of the different decisions that we saw repeatedly on the decision tree. now let us go to questions 3 and 4. questions 3 and 4 on the verdict form -- oh, sorry, i think counsel is saying i should fill this out. leo skolnick's choice, as proven by the difference between outcome, between him and his wife, was one hundred percent responsible. what philip morris and reynolds did was the same to barbara (sic) skolnick as to leo skolnick. the only difference was leo skolnick's different choice. now, questions 3 and 4 talk about whether or not something that r.j. reynolds or a tobacco company said or philip morris or a tobacco company said caused mr. skolnick's death. one thing i want to point out here is, when the plaintiffs say that they are taking 20 percent responsibility or they ask you to take twenty percent responsibility, you should know that that would not apply to questions 3 or 4; that if you voted yes on questions 3 and 4, that admission of responsibility, that twenty percent, fifty percent, one hundred percent, even if it is 100 percent, that would not apply if you find yes. now let us look at what the judge is going to tell you you have to consider. you have to determine whether leo skolnick justifiably relied on a statement of material fact made by each defendant that intentionally omitted material information about the health effects or the addictive nature of smoking cigarettes. so basically you have to find did he rely on something that philip morris said or r.j. reynolds said that omitted material information. but here's the big thing. may 5th, 1982. when did you ever hear that date in this trial? did you hear it in opening statement from the plaintiffs? did you hear it from any of their witnesses? may 5th, 1982? well, because you are going to hear it now. this is on the verdict form. the entire time of this trial, this was going to be the question you were going to ask. did he rely on something after may 5th, 1982. now think about how many days, how many days we spent in this trial talking about the 1950s, or the 1960s, or the 1920s, or the 1930s. think about how many hours they played that video of dr. cummings talking about ctr in the '50s and '60s. think about the two days that dr. proctor was on the stand. may 5th, '82. the judge is going to instruct you he -- he has instructed you. when you decide whether he relied to his detriment on a statement, you may not consider evidence of statements, concealment, or other conduct that occurred before may 5th, 1982. they wasted your time, ladies and gentlemen. we spent a week talking about conduct before may 5, 1982. mr. schlesinger: objection, your honor. the court: sustained, counsel. mr. belasic: none of that, none of that evidence is relevant to questions 3 or 4. none of it. judge crow is instructing you that mr. skolnick -- you cannot find that mr. skolnick reasonably relied upon a statement if he knew it was false or if its falsity was known to him or if the fact that it was concealed was already known to him. now we know that for 20 years, he was being warned by his family. he was being told by his son, his daughter, and his wife that the health effects of smoking were dangerous. he heard it from the surgeon general. and we know from his daughter that there is no doubt that he believed that it caused cancer, no doubt that it was dangerous. we know that when he responded to them he did not say, hey, i do not believe it, i'm relying on a company statement. he said, i'm going to try to quit. his own daughter says there is no doubt. there is no evidence -- there is no evidence that after may 5th, 1982, that mr. skolnick thought that smoking was safe. remember his sister died in '78. and remember what their own expert dr. burns said, he said that was irrefutable. irrefutable demonstration to mr. skolnick personally. he knew that smoking could cause lung cancer. that is '78. but the truth is, his daughter barbara said there is no doubt he knew it could cause lung cancer in '64. and this is the cutoff. this is the cutoff that applies, and it is the cutoff that makes all that evidence, all those statements and videos of old men on television, irrelevant to questions 3 and questions 4. you cannot consider anything other than something after may 5th, 1982. and there is no dispute -- there is no dispute that by 1982, he would known that smoking could cause lung cancer for almost 20 years, there is no dispute. even mrs. skolnick said that everyone knew it was dangerous by the '70s. here is what dr. burns said. 1975, seven years before this 1982 cutoff. more americans knew cigarette smoking was more dangerous for them than knew the name of the president of the country. dr. burns, again, this is their expert, their expert that they chose, '81. so one year before the cutoff. he said: it is not that smokers do not know the risk. 95 percent of them are thoroughly aware of the health dangers. ninety percent realize their health could be affected. now that is countrywide. when it comes to mr. skolnick, we know from his loved ones that he would known back since the '60s, and he believed, he believed since the '60s, that smoking could cause lung cancer. what do they do? do they have any evidence after may 5, 1982, mr. skolnick saw something? do they have any evidence at all that he said, wow, now after 20 years of thinking that smoking could cause lung cancer and wanting to quit, now i think smoking is safe. they have no such evidence. so what do they do? they talk about filters. here is what their own expert said. dr. proctor. he said filters came out of the early '50s. did mr. skolnick rush to switch to a filter? no. mrs. skolnick said they did not switch to filters until pall malls came out in 1966. and their own expert agrees. so this idea that he had been tricked by filters and he was trying to do it, it does not make sense, it does not comport with what their own experts say. look what dr. proctor said about the pall mall ads. he agreed. i showed him the ads. those ads did not claim that filters were safer. that is the brand they picked. that is the filter they picked. those ads did not say safety. they talked about flavor. he is the one that said that american tobacco, american tobacco made the pall malls, that they were the most honest company on filters. here is these ads. these are ads from before the filters came out. look what they say: the long cigarette, long on flavor, they are mild. look what the filtered ad says. does this filtered ad say it is safe, it reduces your risk? do not quit? is this the kind of thing that told mr. skolnick that he did not have to quit? no. it is the exact same thing. the long cigarette that is long on flavor, outstanding and they are mild. and when i showed those to dr. proctor, he agreed. that is the company and that is the brand that said nothing about safety. dr. proctor agreed. he said honest. i did not use the word. he said american tobacco company and their pall mall filter ads were honest. and there is no other evidence. there is no other evidence. no one here seriously came in and said, in 1983, mr. skolnick thought that smoking was safe. no one even made that claim. because the family, the people that knew him best had already admitted that at least by the '70s, and as early as '64, that he already thought it could cause lung cancer. now, i asked dr. burns, even if, let us say, he saw something in 1982 or '83 from a tobacco company, let us say. or if he did not see it and he quit, what would have happened? dr. burns agreed that if he quit after this date, if he quit after the 1978 cutoff, remember dr. burns said, i hate to call it a cutoff. but he agreed. if he quit after 1978, he said more likely than not he gets lung cancer in 1993. that is the only evidence. that is the only evidence on what would happen if mr. skolnick had quit after that date. mr. schlesinger: your honor, i object. because it misstates the evidence. that -- may i approach? the court: yes, sir. (the following discussion was held at sidebar:) the court: can i see the chart? mr. schlesinger: that is not from the testimony. the court: hang on. just a minute. mr. schlesinger: we have the entire transcript. if he wants to quote from it, that is fine. we can draw inferences to the evidence. but this is the second time they are saying something the witness did not say. it is not a matter of i'm drawing an inference. he did not say that. the court: specifically what did he say that you are saying? mr. schlesinger: he just said that if he quit -- if he quit after 1978, he still gets cancer in 1983. it is absolutely not what the witness said, at all. did not say it. he said he could not say with a reasonable degree of medical probability he would not have developed cancer at some time. he did not say that any time he did not quit after '78, he was going to get cancer in '83. utterly false. in this case, a wrongful death case. and your honor knows this from what you used to do for a living is, a wrongful death action is about wrongful death on the day you die. that is what the case is about. on the day you die. if the wrongful death occurs on that day, it is a wrongful death case. it is their burden to say when it would have occurred. he does not have that testimony from that witness, and i challenge him to show you in the record that he does. that is too far, judge. mr. belasic: flat out wrong. the questions i gave to him were more likely than not. first he said more likely than not if he quits before '78, he avoids his lung cancer in '93. then i say, what if he quits after '78? he then cannot say more likely than not that he would have avoided lung cancer in 1993. i asked then asked him about 1982. all of their questions, they then came back on redirect and said, well, does not each cigarette contribute? could it have accelerated it? might he have lived a little longer? none of those were to a more likely than not. it is not an inference; it is what he said. the court: i'm going to overrule the objection. okay? thank you. (sidebar discussion concluded, and the following was held in open court:) the court: ladies and gentlemen, let me remind you, you are the finders of fact in this case. what the attorneys say is their understanding of what the testimony has been, but you are the one who determines what the facts were. go ahead, counsel. mr. belasic: there is a reason i made this chart with dr. burns, so you could see what dr. burns was saying. dr. burns did not dispute this. if he quits before '78, more likely than not he avoids his cancer in '93. if he quits after, and i asked him particularly what if he quits in '82, can you say that more likely than not he avoids his cancer? he said no. that is the only evidence about when he gets cancer. where is that important? why is that important? well, because they do not just have to show that he relied on a statement. they have to show that relying on a statement caused his death; that somehow something he read in 1983 or 1984 was the legal cause of his death. now, dr. burns said even if he quit then, he could not say he would have avoided it. it is their burden of proof. but all of this is much ado about nothing. because everyone agrees that by may 5, 1982, he believed smoking was dangerous. he had thought smoking caused cancer since the '60s, and this is what changes it. may 5th, 1982. there is nothing in this record that says that anything after that makes a difference. nothing in this record that says after '82, he thought smoking was safe. it does not matter how many filters he smoked. nobody is claiming that he did not know those filters were dangerous. they had the exact same warning, including the lung cancer warning, that every other pack had. so you should vote no on both 3 and 4. and it is because of testimony from barbara skolnick, testimony from dr. burns. there is no doubt dr. burns says it was irrefutable by 1978 when sunny died, when his sister died, irrefutable that he knew that smoking could cause lung cancer. i want to talk briefly about damages. they are asking for $9 million. $9 million because mr. skolnick continued to smoke and passed away, while his wife made a decision to stop. and as they said, she is healthy today. remember that when mr. skolnick died in 1993 -- first of all, that was 20 years ago. when he died, he was 75 years old. 75 years old. and you heard talk about life expectancy from mr. hammer. did you ever hear a shred of evidence on what a 75-year-old man's life expectancy was? remember, he was a 75-year-old man who already had colon cancer. was there a shred of evidence in this case what the life expectancy of a 75-year-old man with colon cancer was? you know. when mrs. skolnick testified, it was extremely emotional, and there is no doubt she loved her husband. in the record, it appears he was a wonderful man. but you agreed to put your sympathy aside. so when you talk about life expectancy, obviously it sounds cold. but you understand, i have to address this, because mr. hammer is talking about life expectancy, and he is talking about in the future. you know, when mr. skolnick died, he was 75. that was 20 years ago. today he would be 95 years old, and they wanted another five years of future damages. they are basically saying that he would have lived to be 100 without a shred of evidence. mr. schlesinger: your honor, object. this goes to mrs. skolnick. i object. the court: overruled. mr. belasic: they want five years of future damages, until 2018. five years from now is 2018. he was born in 1918. he was 75 when he died, and there is no -- why -- did a doctor come and testify? could they have asked his doctors? mr. schlesinger: your honor, may i approach? (the following discussion was held at sidebar:) the court: yes, sir. mr. schlesinger: the damages are mrs. skolnick's damages for her life expectancy from this point forward, not for his life expectancy. no such claim. future damages. mr. belasic: but -- the court: excuse me. excuse me. go ahead. mr. schlesinger: in other words, we did not say he would be 95 or 100 or anything like that. we got the future damages line in because mrs. skolnick is a hale woman, and she is well met, and she is 86, and she has her future pain and suffering for the years she lost leo, regardless of whether he is alive or not. the court: as i understand the law, in determining duration of such losses you may consider the joint life expectancy of mr. skolnick and mrs. skolnick together. so that is joint life expectancy. you cannot get to the rest of her life if he was not going to live. let me give you a classic example. suppose he was dying of some other disease, but died of lung cancer before. you do not get her life -- it is joint life expectancy is the measure of damages. it says ... companionship, protection, mental pain and suffering, resulting ... in determination of duration of losses, you may consider the joint life expectancy of mr. skolnick and mrs. skolnick together with the other evidence in the case. you cannot get loss of companionship if he was not going to be alive. i do not mean to argue. mr. schlesinger: okay. my recollection was -- mr. belasic: i think we have argued for that. but furthermore, they were more direct. mr. hammer said that he would have been able to see his grandchildren's graduation. their graduations, in 2012 and 2013? the court: i'm going to overrule the objection. (sidebar discussion concluded, and the following was held in open court:) mr. belasic: as i was saying, there is not a shred of evidence that he would live to be 95, 100, 90, 85. he was 75. he had a history of lung cancer. everyone here wishes they would live forever. wished that he would have had a long life. but they have a burden of proof. they do not just get to say look at mrs. skolnick, she is healthy, and say that he would have lived. that is not evidence. mr. hammer wants you to believe that he could have lived for many, many years. but where is the evidence? three doctors took the stand: dr. burns, dr. barry davis, and the initial doctor, the radiologist. and there was no testimony. no one even presented a shred of evidence. and yet that is what this $9 million. $9 million, because now, totally understandably, she regrets the decision that her husband made to use a legal product. but there is not any evidence on that. let me talk finally about -- let me talk finally about question 6. i think i've lost my clicker. question 6 is this question of is mrs. skolnick entitled not just to the $9 million, but for additional damages. please state whether you find by clear and convincing evidence that punitive damages are warranted. and you saw the jury instruction. he read it. it had to be gross and flagrant to show a reckless disregard of human life. it said there has to show an entire lack of care that wanton and recklessly disregarded the safety. well, look, their main argument is that somehow mr. skolnick was deceived, and they have said for 50 years there was this conspiracy to conceal information. was the information about the risks of smoking, was it really secret? and what i mean is not that did the tobacco companies go out and say some confession that mr. hammer said. but was it secret? if you did not live in a tobacco company, were you able to know that smoking could be dangerous or addictive? you saw all this stuff. one hundred years ago, the florida health department. no help from the tobacco company, saying addictive. a hundred years ago. it was not a secret. you can argue about what should they have said, when should they have said it, should they have acted in a different way. the tobacco companies today will not even disagree with that. you can argue that. but to claim it is secret. this is 100 years ago. 1915, that is 100 -- 98 years ago. all the things from reader's digest. you probably thought at one point this was a trial about who could put up the most reader's digest articles. but the point was, it was the single most popular magazine, it was the common source of information for ordinary people that were not scientists, that were not lawyers, that were not tobacco company executives. even as far back as 1924, we saw that it was saying that smoking could cause cancer. how did they know if the tobacco companies had this huge conspiracy to conceal. mr. schlesinger: objection, judge, we have findings on this. the court: overruled. i'm going to allow it. mr. belasic: of course, as dr. proctor says, there is no conspiracy before 1954. as dr. proctor said, he did not even think the tobacco companies had a duty to warn then. and yet mr. skolnick was smoking. we do not know what brand. and dr. burns says mr. skolnick was already addicted. so how could this conspiracy that did not start until after this man was addicted, that did not start until after this man was addicted to a brand we do not know, made by a company that we do not know is r.j. reynolds or philip morris, how did that cause his harm? and remember, the instructions say that when you consider whether to award punitives, it has to be for conduct that caused the damage to the plaintiff, in this case to mr. skolnick. not for something else that caused harm to others. the instructions say you have to look at what caused harm to him. mr. schlesinger: objection, your honor. the court: sustained. mr. belasic: so reader's digest, 1950. mr. schlesinger: your honor, i move to strike the last comment. the court: the jury should disregard the last comment. go ahead. mr. belasic: let us go back to the jury instructions. punitive damages are warranted. this is what judge crow has given you: if you find by clear and convincing evidence that the conduct causing loss to the plaintiff. that is the express black letter instructions. you have to determine if the conduct causing loss to the plaintiff. so not some brand that he did not smoke, not some camel that has a pink or an orange box. it has to be evidence that relates and causes loss to the plaintiff. not injuries to others. that is the instruction. now, it was not even disputed that all throughout the '50s, there was all kinds of public awareness. it was in life magazine. we know that they had -- they had life magazine in their house, they had reader's digest in their house in the 1950s. we know that he was an avid newspaper reader. here you remember this, they just talked about claude teague. and again, mr. schlesinger brought up their latin term sine qua non. well, here is a 1950s article written by a boxer, not a chemist, not a tobacco company executive. a boxer, 22 years earlier, was writing in the most popular magazine in america that nicotine was the essential ingredient. this was not secret. they want to take a sentence and say, oh, this looks bad, now we get 9 million. that is not a secret. that was common knowledge in the most obvious place in the world, reader's digest. we know that he was an avid reader of the new york times, the new york newsday on long island, and sometimes the new york post. it was widely covered over and over and over again. we know that as a result, millions and millions of people quit when they saw the warnings. millions and millions of people quit. we know that more than 50 million have quit. and they quit on their own. look at this, ninety percent quit on their own. they did not need -- they talk about today you have drugs or chantix or other things, ninety percent of those people were quitting on their own. that is what mr. skolnick could do. that is what their experts admitted, that not just smokers in general, but mr. skolnick could have done that. now they brought up some charges, they say you tricked the surgeon general. we know that the surgeon general relied on a 6,000 -- on this monograph that was provided. he actually thanked the companies. we know that every one of the constituents and carcinogens that were listed in the surgeon general's report were provided by the tobacco companies. they were not keeping a secret what the chemicals were when they did smoke analysis, and that was from dr. proctor. we know from dr. proctor that it was a legitimate dispute at the time, that a lot of physicians were not prepared to understand the statistical data, that it was not wrong to say, hey, we do not think statistics by themselves are proof. even dr. proctor admitted that. the surgeon general says that here. the surgeon general's report said that statistics by themselves could not prove cause and effect. and yet time and time again, when they would show you some statement, a statement that mr. -- a statement that mr. skolnick never heard, it would be about whether there was enough proof, whether statistics are needed, whether there was animal evidence. the surgeon general himself said that there was a debate over this. they mentioned polonium -- the clerk: you have used about an hour and a half, sir. mr. belasic: okay. thank you. they mentioned polonium. and they had a clever drawing of a pack of cigarettes, and it was a smokestack. obviously that was meant to imply it was like sylvania. polonium 210. i do not know if you remember who testified on polonium 210. that was dr. proctor, their witness that has been paid 800,000 in the last three years. and here's what he said: polonium comes from fertilizer, in the ground from fertilizer. he said there are only trace amounts. he admitted that the surgeon general studied it, and that the polonium in smoke that comes from fertilizer is not important to cancer. and really important, their favorite surgeon general's report, the one they go to over and over again, 2010, says that filters remove significant portions of the polonium. remember that when they say filters are a fraud. that the one thing in smoke they complain about, the one thing in smoke that the surgeon general says is not important to cancer, they claim filters cannot do anything, polonium is so important, the current surgeon general's report says that it does remove it. we are not making this up. here is what we showed dr. proctor. this is the surgeon general's report, polonium 210. we talked about the range is 1 to 50 picocuries. i asked dr. proctor, and he agreed that in the amount mr. skolnick did, it would be about 4. so almost at the bottom end of this range, barely above zero. and look at what the surgeon general says: of some importance, only in the case of relatively high concentration, but not important at reported levels. and dr. proctor agreed with me. he did not dispute it. they did not present any evidence that the tiny amount of polonium that comes from fertilizers that are used not just to grow tobacco, but to grow lettuce and tomatoes and other things fertilizers are used for. they did not present a shred of evidence on that. but they want you to be scared about polonium 210. the surgeon general and their own expert said, quote, "not important." they talked about crack cocaine. i'm surprised they brought that up because i -- crack nicotine. because i asked dr. proctor about that. i said: wait a second. crack nicotine? that is the chapter of his book and this ph. i said: did not the surgeon general find that the ph of the normal smoke is below this level, 6.5? it has only the bound nicotine, none of this free nicotine? he admitted that. this is what the surgeon general found. that was a snazzy chapter title, crack nicotine, but dr. proctor did not fight me. he admitted that in normal cigarettes, mainstream commercial cigarettes, you do not have, quote, "free nicotine." and this is the surgeon general looking at it. not tobacco company evidence. so that is just something they toss out there to scare you. dr. burns said that even today, the cigarettes today are not more addictive; that they have done studies. the people that are smoking today -- there is still plenty of people that enjoy smoking and choose to smoke. the people that smoke today are no more addicted than the ones who stopped. and, in fact, there is a higher percentage of occasional smokers. and the new generation, their behavior is consistent with less, rather than more addiction. and that is dr. burns' writings. that is their expert. he agreed. smokers today are less addicted. they have never denied that this is a secret document. secret document from the president of reynolds to dr. murray senkus. dr. proctor knew about it, and he agreed that the president of r.j. reynolds was commanding his top r&d guy to say -- to cooperate with others, push the work concerning tobacco and health, promote the relationships with government, and if there is a safer cigarette, let us continue and increase our efforts. that is what dr. proctor agreed. that is a secret document. they were not doing that to look good. internally they were telling their top guy to cooperate. and, of course, they did with the tobacco working group. we found that for five to ten years, according to dr. proctor, they made hundreds of specialty-designed cigarettes in cooperation with the government. it was voluntary, they did not have to do it. he said they looked at almost every possible design, and what happened? the government shut it down in 1978. you can only judge the punitive damages on conduct that caused his injury. and we know that every single one of those things -- mr. schlesinger: objection, judge. the court: sustained. mr. belasic: we know that every single thing that r.j. reynolds or philip morris did also was done in the same environment as mrs. skolnick. she did not get lung cancer because she made a different choice than her husband in 1968. so you should vote no on number 6. the only way you can explain the difference between the outcome for mrs. skolnick and her husband -- and there is no doubt she misses him and he was a wonderful man, but the only way you can explain the difference is their different choices. it was not r.j. reynolds or philip morris's conduct. it is been a long trial. i know every one of you made a personal sacrifice to come here every day. give up your lives, your work. so i mean, all i can say is you have my sincere appreciation. i thank you for your attention today. when they get up, mr. schlesinger has 45 minutes for rebuttal. i do not get to respond. so i ask you to think about the evidence and think about maybe what i would say and what evidence i would point out to counter what mr. schlesinger is going to say. thank you again. mr. lombardi: thank you, your honor. may it please the court, counsel, ladies and gentlemen of the jury. good afternoon. here i am, the last guy to talk to you today, and i can tell you it was with mixed emotions that i figured out that i was going to be talking to you at quarter of 3 after you heard arguments starting at about 9:00 this morning. so i'm going to do my very best to be expeditious. i am going to do my very best not to take 54 minutes, even though i could, and i am going to do my very best not to be repetitive. but first, let me say, again, thank you to y'all. we have all been here for a long time. all of us are here because it is our job to be here. and we know that you all have been here when it is not your job to be here. you have other things going on, and you have made lots of sacrifices. so i very much appreciate your efforts, and i think the best thing i can do to show my appreciation is just get going. and so i'm going to do that. i'm going to talk about two topics. two topics. the first one is going to be filters, and the second one is going to be radiation. we are going to talk about filters because we have heard a lot of talk about filters. mr. schlesinger has talked about how filters do not do anything, how filters were a illusion, how they were a health reassurance. so i am going to talk about what the facts actually are about filters. and i am going to talk about radiation. radiation is important for two reasons in this case. the first reason radiation is important is it explains. it explains why mrs. skolnick said what she said in the declaration that she submitted in that prior lawsuit. and the second reason radiation is important is because it shows that plaintiff cannot sustain the burden of proof she has, the burden of proof that she has, to prove that the lung cancer in this case was caused by smoking and not by something else. so those are the two things i'm going to talk about. let us go to filters right away. and when we started this morning, i wrote down something that mr. schlesinger said. mr. schlesinger said nothing was being taken out with filters. nothing was being taken out with filters. that is something they have said this whole trial. let us talk about what the facts are. what the facts actually show. and let us talk about what the facts show in the words of their own expert. the great man of science that mr. schlesinger talked about, dr. burns. doctor, filters remove a fraction of particulate matter from the smoke by keeping it within the filter; is that right? dr. burns says: that is correct. what else is in the evidence? the surgeon general's report from 2010. remember the plaintiffs read from the surgeon general's report 2010. frequently. what does it say? studies have also shown that cellulose acetate filter tips remove both volatile nitrosamines and tsnas. filters are removing things. what else does the surgeon general's report 2010 say? the presence of a filter and the type of filter used can alter the amount of polonium. this is what mr. belasic was just talking about. filters remove things. so what does that tell us? what do we know? what do we know when we look at the facts about what the health effects and what the history of filters were. and y'all may remember, i think it was back with dr. proctor, way back with dr. proctor at the beginning of the case. i talked to dr. proctor about how filters came about and why they came about. and you might remember, i actually did a handwritten chart, something like this. but i turned it into a chart like this. and dr. proctor confirmed that what happened back in the 1950s, was that scientists made a link between cigarette smoking and cancer. and specifically what they made a link to was tar, the tar in smoke. so scientists saw that there was tar in smoke, and there was cancer going on. they put the tar on the back of mice. you might remember there was that kind of nasty picture of mice in life magazine, and they put the tar on them and it caused cancer. so they said if tar is bad, then less is better. if tar is bad, less is better, and filters were going to reduce the tar. and so that is what everybody was saying back in the 1950s. they were saying because tar is bad, let us make less of it, let us have smokers get less of it, and let us use these filters which we now know from dr. burns and the surgeon general's report of 2010, remove things, let us make it better. that is what the public health community said. that is what the surgeon general said. that is what academics said, that is what everybody said starting back in that period of time. and then what happened? and then what happened? recommendations were made. you should quit smoking. that was the first thing. you should quit, for sure you should quit. but if you are not going to quit, you should smoke a filtered cigarette. and what was the basis for those recommendations? this is a chart that i made when dr. burns was on the stand. dr. burns was on the stand. and we talked about something called epidemiology, which is a science. and it was a science that studied cigarettes. the basic idea of the science is it is a science of populations. so you look at a population of people and compare it to another population of people, and you see what diseases arise in both populations of people. are there differences? could the differences be due to the differences in the people? so the populations that we were talking about with dr. burns was the population of people who smoked filtered cigarettes and people who smoked unfiltered cigarettes. and what the epidemiology showed and still shows to this day -- to this day, is that smokers of filtered cigarettes get less disease. less disease occurrence. meaning lung cancer. that is what dr. burns said when he was on the witness stand right there. smokers of filtered cigarettes get less disease than smokers of unfiltered cigarettes. this is real-world smokers. this is not theoretical science, this is not some article where we are just talking in the abstract. this is looking at actual real-world smokers and tracking what happens to them. how many of them get lung cancer in the filtered camp? how many get lung cancer in the unfiltered camp? less disease occurrence in the unfiltered camp. and the thing about this testing, the thing about this study of epidemiology, millions of people -- millions of people were studied when they did these studies. millions of people. and there is one other important thing about this epidemiology. had nothing to do with the tobacco companies. this was epidemiology done by independent scientists, done by government scientists, done by people at the american cancer society. this was not done by the tobacco companies. and so what dr.-- they found, starting in the 1950s, is that the epidemiology, this independent science, showed that there was less disease among the group that smoked filtered cigarettes. and we went through. we went through some of the surgeon general's reports to show what the surgeon general was actually saying and recommending over time. this is the surgeon general's report from 1975. this is the surgeon general. this is not the tobacco companies, this is the surgeon general. a smoker who switches to filtered cigarettes and has smoked them for ten years or longer has a lower risk of developing lung cancer than a smoker who continues to smoke nonfilter cigarettes. less disease occurrence in filtered cigarette smokers. 1979, surgeon general's report. again, the long-term use, ten years or more, of filtered cigarettes is associated with lower death rates from lung cancer than those experienced by persons who smoke an equal number of nonfilter cigarettes. less disease occurrence in filtered cigarette smokers. surgeon general's report, 1981. today's filter tipped, lower tar and nicotine cigarettes produce lower rates of lung cancer than do higher tar and nicotine predecessor. less disease occurrence in filtered cigarettes. so what happens then? skipping ahead to shortly after mr. skolnick passed away. 1996. nci is the national cancer institute, part of the united states government. what did they say? filtered tip cigarettes produce lower rates of lung cancer than do their higher tar and nicotine predecessors. that is what was going on. that is what was actually happening during the time periods in question in this case. now, dr. burns, to be sure, changed his mind. dr. burns told you from the witness stand. he said that for this entire period of time -- not all the way back to the '50s, because he was too young then. but he started working in this field in the '70s. from that time up until 2000, he himself was recommending filtered cigarettes. he was recommending low-tar cigarettes. but he changed his mind in 2000. why did he change his mind? why did he change his mind? well, he changed his mind not because of any change in this. he confirmed that it is still the case. that if you look at filtered cigarette smokers, they get less disease. if you look at unfiltered cigarette smokers, they get more disease. but what dr. burns changed his mind about was he said, well, maybe the difference in those two groups is not because of the filter on the cigarettes. he said maybe the difference is because this is a healthier group overall and they get less disease because of that. but the fundamental fact is that filtered cigarette smokers still show less disease occurrence. now, they brought to trial dr. burns, and that was his view. that was his view. he changed his position. but not everybody agreed with dr. burns. others disagreed. others believed that filtered cigarettes provided benefit. so we saw the international agency on research of cancer from 2009. very recent. that is an international cancer research organization that looked at the same question. and they concluded, compared with smokers of medium tar, filtered cigarettes, risk was higher among men and women who smoked high-tar, non-filtered brands. they took a different view than dr. burns, they took a different view. the surgeon general's report of 2010, when it talks specifically about filters, it seems to recognize that there is a difference in view. it says: the wide variation in filter technology across brands and over time precludes general conclusions about whether filters increase or decrease exposure of smokers to toxicants. so they recognize this is an issue here. there is an issue. even today there is an issue. but that does not mean it is a fraud for somebody like iarc to say that filtered cigarettes provide a benefit? filtered cigarette smokers get less disease still. unfiltered cigarette smokers get more disease still. that is still the fact today. so there is no fraud. there is no great deception by the tobacco companies, when it is everybody but the tobacco companies that are saying filters are good, based on the evidence that they had. now, one other thing to keep in mind about this, others disagree. there is been a lot of talk in this case about tobacco company documents coming out and that changed the world. that changed the whole world. so people realized that filtered cigarettes were a problem when these documents came out. but those documents came out here in 2000. iarc, the surgeon general 2010 that disagreed with dr. burns on the filter point, they did so after the tobacco company documents came out. afterwards. and one other thing i just want to caution you about. counsel goes to frequently read from the surgeon general report of 2010 and says that it says such-and-such and such-and-such. there are all kinds of issues covered in the surgeon general report of 2010. all kinds of issues covered in that report. there are filter issues, there are low-tar cigarette issues, there are light cigarette issues. counsel put something up in front of you. make sure that it is about filters when we are talking about this issue. this is not a case about low-tar cigarettes. this is not a case about light cigarettes. counsel, i think said, i think said that mr. skolnick smoked light cigarettes. that is not true. never did. not an issue in this case. when you look at where the surgeon general report deals with filter technology, it says less disease occurrence in filtered cigarettes, more disease occurrence in unfiltered cigarettes, after looking at millions and millions of people. now, let us talk about mr. skolnick specifically. because that is why we are here. mr. skolnick started smoking filtered cigarettes in the 1960s. around 1966. you heard mr. belasic talked about the pall malls and the whole conversation with dr. proctor about pall malls and how mrs. skolnick said that pall~malls were the first filtered cigarette they smoked. so that was not until the 1960s. now mrs. skolnick said they started to smoke filters when they first came out. that would have been the '50s, so that is not accurate. but 1960s is when mr. skolnick first started to smoke filtered cigarettes. the clerk: 39 minutes left. mr. lombardi: thank you. mr. skolnick smoked filtered cigarettes from the 1960s until he passed away, that period of time. and throughout that entire period of time, the surgeon general, the american cancer society, every public health organization were saying that filters are good. and if you are going to continue to smoke, mr. skolnick and others like you, you should smoke filter cigarettes. the entire time, that is what they said. the entire time, that is what they said. so there has been no intentional omission of important data, important health data, material health data by the tobacco companies about filters during this time period. mr. schlesinger: your honor, i object. it contradicts the findings. the court: overruled. that is argument, counsel. mr. lombardi: during this time period there was no -- mr. skolnick was doing exactly what the public health authorities were saying he should do, which is smoke filtered cigarettes, and that is what he did. now, there was a discussion among some of the witnesses about why mr. skolnick switched to filtered cigarettes, and barbara skolnick said that he had certain information about filters. he told her about this. and she said that a filter would take some of the harmful things from cigarettes away. we have seen that is true. and that if you were unable to quit smoking, this was your best alternative. that is what she said her father told her about what he learned and why he switched to filters. but the tobacco companies never said that. you can look through all the documents that you have back there for as long as you want to. you are not going to find something where a tobacco company said if you are unable to quit smoking, you should smoke filtered cigarettes. who was saying that? well, dr. proctor said public health, surgeon general, physicians, epidemiologists were saying if you are going to smoke, smoke filtered cigarettes. that is what dr. proctor said. so that is where the information -- that is where the information that mr. skolnick had came from. i think mrs. skolnick gave similar testimony at first. but at the end of her testimony, she said that she knew that this information came from the surgeon general and others like the surgeon general. now, this testimony that the whole filter point relates to questions 3 and 4 that mr. belasic already talked to you about. it is in addition to everything he said. i agree with everything mr. belasic said, and i'm not going to repeat everything he said about the 1982 date and the other things. but what makes this relevant here is, for instance, in 3, they have to show that each defendant intentionally omitted material information concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes. philip morris and r.j. reynolds did not omit -- intentionally omit any material information concerning the health effects. mr. schlesinger: objection. the court: overruled. mr. lombardi: now, let me take a minute. one other thing about this. mr. schlesinger: may i approach, judge. the court: yes, sir. [#deleted sidebar#] the court: okay. ladies and gentlemen, let me give you a brief instruction. to the extent that defense counsel's comments are contrary to the findings that you have been told you must apply in this case should you find that mr. skolnick was a member of the class, what we call the engle findings, you should disregard counsel's statement. counsel's statements are only related to filtered cigarettes. you may proceed. mr. lombardi: yes, your honor. and so 3 and 4 again, talking about this before, and obviously i agree with mr. belasic, for the same reasons that he expressed that the answer there should be no. if the answer there is no, then you do not get down to question 6. you do not have to go there. and that is obviously what we think ought to be the outcome here. but if you do get to question 6, i just want to point out a couple of things about question 6. question 6 is the part that counsel said earlier he considers the real part of the case. the real part he wants to get to with more evidence and more arguments. and question 6 has special standards in it. heightened standards in it. so if you do get to question 6, look at those heightened standards. and the heightened standards state that -- i want to make sure i have the words right. of course i misplaced it. but the heightened standard states that you have to be -- have an immediate reaction, a reaction that it has to be the case, that question 6 should be answered yes in order to do so. you will see it is a standard above the standard that we have been talking about for the rest of the case. and for that reason, in addition to everything else you have heard, question 6, in our view, should be answered no. firm belief without hesitation. it has to be a firm belief without hesitation in order to answer question 6 yes. and i do not think you will have a firm belief without hesitation. i do not think you will get to question 6, and that is what we say the outcome should be here. now, let me tell you a little bit about mr. skolnick. we have not talked that much about marlboro and where marlboro fits in here. so i want to make sure you know where his smoking of marlboro fits in. he did not start smoking marlboro until the late 1960s. by that time, he was in his late 40s, and he would been smoking for a long time. mr. skolnick did not smoke a philip morris brand until after the 1964 surgeon general's report. why is that important? because that is the report that said smoking causes lung cancer in men. it was front page news, he knew about it. every package of marlboro that he purchased had a warning label. the warning label started in the late 1960s. so when he started smoking marlboro, it had a warning label on it. that warning label changed over time, because there were changes made by congress in what the warning label said. but the warning label was there on every pack. every pack of marlboro that he purchased had that. mr. skolnick did not smoke a philip morris brand until after he had rejected mrs. skolnick's request that he sit down by the television and watch the quit -- the quit program. did not start until after that. and mr. skolnick, as mr. belasic has already said, did not rely on any philip morris statements, just like he did not rely on any rjr statements made after 1982. and that is the end of the line on 3 and 4. that is where the may 1982 language is. so there is nothing like that with respect to mr. skolnick. now, there is something else about marlboro cigarettes and all cigarettes. cigarettes always were a legal product and still are a legal product. and you cannot hold philip morris liable merely for manufacturing, advertising, or selling a cigarette. you have to have more. they have to prove more about this particular plaintiff and the smoker in this particular case, mr. skolnick. and they have not done that. now, i'm going to talk about radiation now. probably when you came into this case after voir dire, you had no idea we were going to end up talking about radiation in this case. but radiation is important for two reasons, as i said before. first, it shows you exactly -- exactly -- why mrs. skolnick gave the answers that she gave on the declaration that you have seen already in this case. she gave it because the radiation was real. she gave it because the radiation caused disease, and she gave it because she was making a claim to that effect. second, radiation is important because under question 1 -- question 1 is a question that mr. belasic went through with you, and he broke it down into about four different questions. one of the questions that is kind of within question 1 is whether mr. skolnick's smoking caused the cancer that is at issue. whether it caused the cancer in the lung that is at issue here. and so the radiation goes to that. they have the burden of proving -- they have the burden of proving that the cancer here was caused by smoking. and the fact of the radiation establishes that they cannot meet their burden of proof. we do not have to prove anything. they have to prove it. and so that is where the radiation, the second part, the second reason for talking about radiation, that is why it fits in. it is there under number 1, and it is an additional reason for you to answer no, in addition to the reasons that mr. belasic pointed out. so, let us talk about radiation. let us start with the basics. notwithstanding what mr. schlesinger thinks and what he said in his argument earlier, everyone agrees that radiation causes cancer. dr. mcgregor, dr. burns, dr. proctor, dr. davis. everybody believes that radiation causes cancer. and mr. schlesinger said in his argument that uranium is not dangerous. that is not what dr. burns said. not what dr. burns said. it is an example of the difference between lawyer argument and the actual facts. dr. burns said uranium causes radiation. radiation causes cancer. everybody except perhaps mr. schlesinger agrees. and that is kind of a lesson. when you hear a lawyer -- and hold me to this too -- when you hear a lawyer state something, make sure that there are facts to back that up. you are the finders of facts in this case. you have heard the evidence in this case. you are the ones that are going to decide what happened. if i say something and it does not look like it is supported by the facts, hold me to that. but also hold the plaintiff to that. because when he comes before you and he raises uranium and he says: nobody -- uranium is not dangerous. says who? nobody in this case says uranium is not dangerous except mr. schlesinger. every expert says uranium is dangerous. so where is this sylvania plant? this is the google map that we put up with dr. mcgregor. it is very similar to the google map that we put up with mrs. skolnick. and this is the neighborhood. this is where the site was for the sylvania plant. that is where the site was. and how far was the skolnicks' house? well, it was here on maxwell drive. dr. mcgregor said she did the google search and it was about right there. that distance, when you use the scale on google maps, is 500 yards. 500 yards. it is close. now, we asked mrs. skolnick about the neighborhood a little bit, and mrs. skolnick said: yes, that is the neighborhood. i do not remember all the street names, she said. she said: this makes it look a lot closer than it really was. and she said: i had no idea that sylvania plant was right here. that is what mrs. skolnick said. but she also said -- i think she also said she could not tell you where on maxwell drive she actually lived. it was on maxwell drive, but she could not tell you where it really was. she told you that the temple that she and her husband were founding members of was located right there. just down the road from the plant. she told you that this was a park that her children played in. just down the road from the plant. she told you that there was a golf course right here. the clerk: you have 24 minutes. mr. lombardi: thank you, sir. there is a golf course right here where mr. skolnick played sometimes, not all the time because he belonged to a private club that was located elsewhere. there was a golf course right here that mr. skolnick went to, just across the road from the sylvania plant. but mrs. skolnick, her testimony is, she never saw the plant in 25 years of living in the neighborhood. but we have the testimony of somebody else who lived there for a long time. somebody who lived there when mrs. skolnick lived there. do you remember mrs. gross? she was very early in the case, and she is one of mrs. skolnick's old friends from westbury. she was up here on the witness stand. she is in her 80s, very pleasant. affable lady. and we asked mrs. gross: you lived in this neighborhood? do you remember the sylvania plant? she said -- ma'am, you lived across the street from the plant? yes. you lived about the same distance from the plant as the skolnicks? yes. well, mrs. gross knew about the plant. mrs. gross knew about the plant. so the bottom line, ladies and gentlemen, is that plant was close. whether mrs. skolnick knew it was there or does not know it was there, that plant was close by. and it was close enough that there would be problems if there was something going on at that plant that should not have been going on at that plant. and so you heard the story of the sylvania plant, and you heard that story from dr. mcgregor. i'll talk more about her in a minute. but it really is an extraordinary story. who knew that in the suburbs of the united states you could have a nuclear processing plant? the skolnicks did not know. i do not think anybody in that neighborhood knew. who knew that? but it was in a different era. it was back in the cold war when we were in this arms race with the russians. we needed to make nuclear weapons. so they were making nuclear fuel rods. and what were they using to make it? they were making it out of uranium. and, yes, they were making it out of enriched uranium. mr. schlesinger got up and said to you there was no enriched uranium there. there is fact and there is argument. dr. mcgregor told you there was enriched uranium there. the documents show there was enriched uranium there, and also shows there were other hazardous substances there. nickel, beryllium, thorium. when you are working with nuclear fuel rods, you are working with some nasty things. they go in nuclear weapons, they make bombs. so you are working with some nasty things. and what else did dr. mcgregor tell you? that when you work with this uranium to make it into fuel rods, you mill it, you lathe it, you shape it. that means you create scraps, you create scrap material, scrap uranium. what are you going to do with the scrap uranium? she told you that at first -- this was really amazing, i thought. she told you at first they sent it to new jersey in these big drums, and then they took it off the coast of new jersey and dropped them in the ocean somewhere, and then they said that is not a good idea. so what did they do? they burned the uranium. they burned the uranium inside the plant where it would go out a smokestack, they burned the uranium outside the plant in the yard, and that is in addition to what happened to the uranium that sat in the drums. this uranium that mr. schlesinger says is not dangerous, it spontaneously combusts. it catches on fire. there are accounts of a drum of uranium being in the yard and the lid blowing off and the thing catching on fire without anybody doing anything to it. argument, fact. the barrels of uranium were stored outside and spontaneously caught on fire. that is how dangerous this stuff is. they had extensive safety procedures, and dr. mcgregor went through this. they had respirators, they had incinerators, they had gloves, they had film badges. this was the real deal. this was the real dangerous stuff. in a new york suburb. who would have known? and dr. mcgregor talked about the smokestacks. she told you about what was the size of this building. so the sylvania plant was actually a one-story building. it was not a big skyscraper. it was a one-story building. which is what you would probably expect if it is in a suburban neighborhood. and it did not have a 200-foot smokestack to take the smoke up and out and as far away as possible. the smokestacks for the -- for the outside was 10 feet, and for the inside burning was 20 feet. something like the ceiling, a little higher than that, with a 10 foot. and that is where the smoke from the burning uranium went, about that high. where is it gonna go? it is gonna go to the neighborhood. that is where it did go. there was also contamination at the time in the water at the plant, in what they call the sumps, in the leach pools. you saw a document that dr. mcgregor specifically directed you to where they had a measurement of dispersal of 1100 dpms per m3, which she told you was something on the order -- multiple, multiple times, over the standards that existed at the time. and you heard her say that there was -- at the atomic energy commission, which looked at this plant, which inspected this plant, told them frequently, you are not keeping good enough records. you are not keeping on top of things. so that is what was going on at that plant. that is what was going on at that plant. over the course of the time that it was working with uranium, 6 to 13 million pounds of uranium went through that plant in suburban new york. and a lot of it got burned, because every time they worked with it, they made the scraps. and when they made the scraps, they had to burn it. and when they had to burn it, they made the smoke, and in the smoke were uranium particles. and when there is smoke that has uranium particles and the uranium particles get in the lungs, you heard dr. mcgregor say that is a serious health problem. and lung cancer is a serious risk. so that is what was happening. that is what was happening at that plant. and it was so bad at that plant that even today, at the same site, there is still contamination. there is still uranium there. you heard about the 1990s, the nuclear regulatory commission said that there was radioactive contamination there then. you heard in 2000 that there was cleanup of a site that began, that there was still a significant amount of radioactive materials. what is this, like 35 years after the last time they used uranium at the plant? 2001, they did more investigations, and this is the 2005 army corps of engineers report which you saw and is in evidence in this case which talks about all of these things. so the uranium at the plant -- what is the fact? what is not the argument? what is the fact? it was dangerous. it is still dangerous. that site is still dangerous. now we are something like 50 years later. uranium is dangerous. and the facts -- not the argument, the fact -- tell you that. now, let us talk about dr. mcgregor. i was interested in the argument about dr. mcgregor's qualifications this morning. counsel said that dr. mcgregor is completely unqualified. she is not like one of the great men of science, he said. completely unqualified, he said. dr. mcgregor was corrupt. he said that. and why did he say that? mr. schlesinger: objection, judge. the court: sustained. let us talk about something else, counsel. mr. lombardi: dr. mcgregor's qualifications were called into question. and the fact is, you got to see dr. mcgregor. the fact is that dr. mcgregor was the single most qualified person to come in this courtroom to talk about radiation and to talk about what happened at the sylvania plant. she is a medical doctor, just like dr. burns. she has a master's of public health. she specializes in environmental and occupational medicine. dr. burns does not. nobody else in this case does. when you specialize in occupational and environmental medicine, you are dealing with exposures to dangerous substances. that is what you do. that is what she does. and you heard that she actually was one of the very first doctors to ever work on the eeoicp -- and i think i got all those letters in the right order. but that is the program she told you about that she works on, where they deal with these kinds of nuclear reactor plants, and they determine whether people have suffered exposures and whether they deserve compensation for those exposures. she is more familiar with this kind of plant than anybody who set foot in this courtroom. and to call her unqualified without a fact to support it is outrageous. argument, fact. the most qualified witness in this case. dr. burns, has he ever -- dr. burns, i admit, has done a lot of things in this career. but has he ever done this kind of work? no evidence. no evidence that he did. and the evidence in this case of what dr. burns actually did is pretty shocking. so let us look. dr. mcgregor's materials reviewed. she told you that she went through a huge quantity of materials in this case. she went through atomic energy commission, nuclear regulatory commission. all of these reports, she went through them to try to understand what happened at this plant. the 2010 army corps of engineers report. she told you that alone, 6,000 pages long. 6,000 pages long. so she went out there. she not only has expertise in this area, she did the work to make sure that she could come in and tell you what happened at this plant. fact, argument. what did dr. burns do? and i actually do not blame dr. burns for this. but what did dr. burns do? what documents did dr. burns look at in this case? dr. mcgregor looked at all of these. dr. burns looked at one of them. he looked at the 2005 army corps of engineers report. he did not look at the 6000-page document. he did not look at the other documents. he did not do the work to be able to tell you what happened at that plant. and whether radiation at that plant got into the neighborhood. he had not done that work. but i said i do not blame him for that. because i asked him, when he was up there on the witness stand, where he got the documents he relied on, he got them from plaintiff's attorneys. he took the documents that he got from plaintiff's attorneys and worked with them. so dr. burns, if you take a great expert and you do not give them the information he needs, he is not reliable. does not matter how many credentials he has. you have to give him the information he needs. they did not give dr. burns the information, and i'm going to show you why. look at the things that dr. burns did not know about. he did not know what work was done at the plant. he did not know -- you remember, you might have heard the word "pyrophoric." we talked about that a couple times. i asked him what it meant. that is what it means when you spontaneously combust. pyro for fire, and blown up. he did not know what the word meant. he did not know that uranium spontaneously combusts. there is another fact about uranium. uranium not dangerous, argument. fact, uranium spontaneously combusts. how was uranium processed at the plant? he did not know. how was scrap uranium created? he did not know. did the burning uranium create smoke? he did not know. that is the way dr. mcgregor said the contamination got into the neighborhoods that got to people like leo skolnick. that is burning uranium. he did not know. the clerk: you have nine minutes left. mr. lombardi: how much? the clerk: nine. mr. lombardi: i think i lied about the timing. dr. burns did not know. he was not given the information. dr. mcgregor was. she told you that the plant created uranium, that particles of uranium got into the neighborhood; that the uranium contamination was sufficient to cause mr. skolnick's colon cancer, and to be a risk factor for mr. skolnick's lung cancer. and she is -- nobody disputes her. nobody that has knowledge in this case disputes her. there is more here. what does that leave you, by the way, if dr. burns was their only expert to talk about this, and he does not know what is left? well, what is left is argument. but argument is not fact. so let us go to the next point. colon cancer. this is an interesting thing. colon cancer, mr. skolnick had colon cancer. well, did they bring dr. burns in to tell you what the colon cancer was caused by? well, he said it was not caused by smoking. and he -- again, he was not asked to form an opinion about what caused the colon cancer. the plaintiffs did not ask him to form an opinion about colon cancer. what caused it? what was the evidence? there is no treating physician testimony. they have not provided any treating physician testimony on what caused the colon cancer. there are no medical records showing the cause of the colon cancer. dr. burns does not know what caused mr. skolnick's colon cancer. said it could not have been smoking. there is no information from that side. so who is the only person to talk about it, dr. mcgregor. and she testified that mr. skolnick's only risk factor for colon cancer was radiation. that is the only risk factor. she said to a reasonable degree of medical probability, if the only risk factor is radiation, then she says that is the cause of the colon cancer. how does that relate to the lung cancer in this case? there was enough radiation to cause mr. skolnick's colon cancer. the radiation is a risk factor for lung cancer. there was enough radiation to cause the lung cancer. if there is enough radiation to cause the colon cancer, there is enough radiation to cause the lung cancer. and interestingly, the cell type for the colon cancer was an adenocarcinoma. same cell type for the lung cancer. so when you have two risk factors for a lung cancer, you cannot determine the cause just by looking at the cancer through a microscope. that is what dr. burns told us. you cannot determine which of the risk factors caused the lung cancer. that is what dr. mcgregor told us right there. so what does she say? she says: colon cancer was caused by the radiation. i cannot tell you for sure about the lung cancer. but there were two risk factors. there was smoking, and there was radiation. and you cannot tell which one caused the lung cancer. you cannot tell that. now, plaintiff put up -- this is another fact thing. plaintiff put up something, they said: look, dr. mcgregor agrees that smoking cigarettes was one of the causes of the smoking -- one of the contributing causes of the smoking. he said: see, that is it. that proves it. it is admitting that the smoking caused the cancer. well, you got to look at the whole question. and to the extent that it is true in this case -- he is asking her to assume that. that was not her testimony. her testimony was that the lung cancer -- there are two risk factors, and you cannot unwind those risk factors to make a determination. so can they carry their burden of proof concerning the cause of lung cancer? the answer to that is no. not when the radiation is in the neighborhood. not when the only expert who did the work and had actual expertise in the area has said that uranium contamination caused the colon cancer and so forth. the answer is no, they have not -- they cannot sustain their burden of proof when the treating physicians -- counsel gets up and says: all these treating physicians, they said that smoking was the cause of lung cancer? that is true. not one of them knew about the radiation. not one of them had any reason to know about the radiation. so, of course, they are going to say the only risk factor was smoking. that was the cause. they did not know about the radiation. they did not know what you know, they did not know what dr. mcgregor knows. and they cannot sustain the burden of proof when mrs. skolnick, the plaintiff, files an affidavit under oath in another case against another defendant where she says that the lung cancer was caused by radiation. mr. schlesinger: objection, your honor. i move -- i would like to approach. the court: okay. (the following discussion was held at sidebar:) the court: i think there are two reasonable interpretations of the document, and i'm going to allow both of parties to argue what this means. mr. schlesinger: this is when she says it was caused by radiation. the word is not on the page. the court: okay. mr. schlesinger: the word is -- he can say she thought it was. but he said "she said," and that is her handwritten statement. and then i do not have enough time to go and unravel things that are past the pale. that is flat-out misstatement. the court: i'm not sure -- mr. schlesinger: flat-out. mr. lombardi: judge, that is a reasonable interpretation of this document. she was filing a claim for radiation, and that is what it -- mr. schlesinger: where does it say radiation? the word "radiation" -- the court: relax, please, sir. relax. mr. schlesinger: i'm sorry, judge. the word "radiation" does not appear on the document. the court: i'm going to sustain. rephrase the question in terms of it was related to the -- whatever happened at the plant. okay? that is all i'm going to say. mr. schlesinger: you will instruct the jury -- the court: no, sir. (sidebar discussion concluded, and the following was held in open court:) the court: go ahead, sir. mr. lombardi: yes, your honor. and so mrs. skolnick gave these answers to questions concerning what happened at the sylvania plant. she said that the lung cancer was caused by what happened at the sylvania plant and it was not just once. mr. schlesinger: same objection, judge. mr. lombardi: was not twice. the court: i'm sorry? mr. schlesinger: same objection. the court: overruled. i'm going to allow it. mr. lombardi: you see the number of times that she filled in "lung cancer" in that declaration. now, mrs. skolnick today says that she read the declaration in a different way, she did not know what wrongful death claim meant, she did not know a lot of different things about this. but i suggest that if you consider what is going on here, a lot of these answers become clear. why it was that the neighborhood was fuzzy in her mind, why it was that mrs. gross recognized where the sylvania plant was and she did not. in one case she swore that the lung cancer was caused by what went on in that case against a different defendant. in this case she comes in and swears that the lung cancer is caused by smoking. you cannot sustain your burden of proving that the lung cancer was caused by smoking when you have sworn and made a claim that the lung cancer was caused by rad -- was caused by what happened at the sylvania plant. you cannot sustain your burden of proof. they have the burden of proof, and this is question 1. the answer should be no. dr. mcgregor's evidence indicates that, mrs. skolnick's evidence indicates that. and when counsel has said that this -- this is just something the tobacco companies came up with, remember mrs. skolnick filed the declaration, mrs. skolnick completed the declaration, and mrs. skolnick, so there is no confusion, had access to lawyers in new york. she has a son who is a lawyer, and the last little clip that we played that led -- that one minute and 13 second deposition, probably the happiest you have been about a deposition in this whole case, she said that she gave the claim form to her son, and he took it to his office. and she said that was just to mail it. but you are entitled to weigh the credibility and to consider all the facts when you consider this declaration and when you consider whether they can meet their burden of proof that the smoking caused the lung cancer here. now -- the clerk: one minute left. mr. lombardi: i will not be here long. thank you again. now, as mr. belasic said, we are not going to be able to talk from here on. you can imagine with lawyers, you have seen how much we talk. you see how we all want to have the last word, and you know that we are going to be frustrated. that is the way it goes. they have the burden of proof. they go last. but i ask you to remember when you only hear one side of the story, you do not always hear the facts. you do not always hear everything. when you hear one side of the story, you might hear the argument. but you do not hear all the facts. i ask you to help us by keeping that in mind and asking questions in your own mind when counsel gets up to close the case. so, again, thank you for your patience, thank you for paying attention in the middle of the afternoon to the last guy getting up, and thanks for your service. thank you very much.