3 mr. schlesinger: counsel; ms. skolnick. ladies and gentlemen of the jury, good morning. i am not unmindful and -- we, as the members of the court personnel -- and i'm talking about the lawyers that represent their respective clients, and i'm talking about our clerk, our bailiff, our fine judge, our "carpal tunnel developing" court reporters -- are all mindful of the difference in what it is that the experience of this trial means from our perspective as from your perspective. so today i'm going to try to take some time -- and it is not enough time to cover a hundred years of history, it is not enough time to talk about what the world was like in 1918, when leo skolnick was born, when women were just getting to vote in 1918, where florida was a sandbar, with a few outposts, it is not enough time to do it all, so we have to try to simplify it. but i'm not -- we are not unmindful -- and i speak, i believe, for defense counsel, as well -- that things get tedious, and it comes to a point in time where, as they say, that a great percentage of human communication -- we are human beings, we interact with each other -- is non-verbal. it is not just what you say; it is your body language, it is your body position. and you were telling us, at least i interpreted it, that we have heard enough, give us this case. and we respect that. so let me try to make some arguments to you. let me try to stitch this together a little bit in a way that gives our perspective from some of the evidence that was there, hope you will continue to be patient with us, recognizing that, for us, the most important part of this case is yet to be tried before you all, and we have to prove our case to you in a satisfactory way, and then you have to embrace that duty that you have discharged thus far so willingly to continue on if the evidence justifies it. and what i'm talking about is an industry that has perpetrated an extraordinarily great wrong on our society for decades. we live in a world that is still suffering the scourge of a tobacco epidemic that kills indiscriminately in a generation of people that are the grandparents and parents of our current generation and in a way that has not been fully corrected. so there are numbers that you have heard. we will talk about some of them, but some of the numbers you have heard. a number they love -- a number they love -- 50 million. fifty million smokers have quit. a number they hate, 44 million people continue to smoke. a number they hate, 443,000 americans every single year die from the ravages of the tobacco epidemic that we have in our country. and of those near half a million americans who die, many of whom were addicted in the '30s and the '40s and the '50s, before folks had an understanding, a full conceptualization in any real way of what smoking was. physicians were advertising it as being healthy for you. the most glamorous movie stars of the day were hawking cigarettes. and you heard how many of those folks, despite being paid to do so, succumbed to the deadly diseases of the actual product they were using. conceptually, it is so difficult, and it takes a long time -- only because of our own experience as lawyers in this case -- it takes such a long time to understand that this (indicating) is only one thing. it is only one thing. this is drugs. this is addictive drugs. whether it was a drug sold illegally on a street corner, a cocaine drug -- objection, your honor. the court: sustained. counsel, let us stick to the facts of this case, okay? mr. schlesinger: as the surgeon general said, the drugs in these products are as addictive as heroin and cocaine. that is a scientific fact. there is no smoking without nicotine. this is a nicotine-delivery device. but what does it look like? it looks like a normal consumer product. a totally normal consumer product. it is got -- nowadays, it is got every imaginable color under the sun. this looks like a creamsicle. every imaginable color under the sun. and it is, as dr. proctor testified, normalized. we look at it -- if you go into a 7-eleven, if you go into a cvs pharmacy, it appears to be in a package that is designed and pretty in colors and letters and what have you, like a million similarly sized products, little boxes of candy and things like that. and who are the only customers that the tobacco industry targets and sells to, to maintain their business? it is children. now, that is the dirty little secret that exists for decades and decades, that when you were selected amongst a huge group of potential jurors, all of you all came in and everyone talked about what they knew about cigarettes, because cigarettes has touched all of our lives. the culture in which we live is a culture that was saturated by cigarette advertising, marketing, and the emergence of a consumer culture in our country in the industrial ages of the '20s, to the '30s, to the '40s, the '50s, and the '60s, and we are now immersed in it and saturated in it. and, as his honor told you, mr. skolnick's reliance can be inferred from what everybody did; what mr. skolnick did in being your typical, generic smoker of that era, who began at such a young age, so dependent upon the nicotine in cigarettes so long before there was actually a warning on a label that would obligate him to change his behavior, despite the fact that even in the face of the warning, the tobacco companies embarked on a powerful campaign to confuse and cause doubt, and they would call out, let us get headlines planted in the newspapers that say, in the headline, controversy, doubt, unproven, other factors, undetermined, to give smokers the psychological crutch to keep smoking. and then they put filters as a health reassurance campaign; and then filters went from zero percent of the market to nearly a hundred percent of the market, and smoking continued to go up, and the cancer, made by the filters that were fraudulent all along, never worked, were designed in a way to give smokers a psychological crutch to keep smoking. these are drugs. i will show you the documents. it is a nicotine-delivery system. the pack of cigarettes is to be -- we are a highly stylized segment of the pharmaceutical community. we better watch out what we say about it, because we could come under food and drug administration regulation. now, we are going to talk about things like choice, opportunity, motivation, control; but what is very important to remember is, step one is about belonging to a group, a class, a proud class, a group that, when i think about it -- and you will see these -- these -- the findings, the determination, the blood, sweat and tears, the decades of litigation that resulted -- objection, your honor. the court: sustained, counsel. let us talk about this case, okay? mr. schlesinger: this case is an engle progeny case. it is the emergence and it is the offspring of a case that was tried for a lengthy period of time. objection, your honor. the court: overruled. i'm going to allow that. go ahead. mr. schlesinger: many years ago, a lawsuit filed in '94, tried in the year 1999, findings approved by the florida supreme court as if you found them yourself -- objection, your honor, "approved by the florida supreme court," your honor. the court: sustained -- sustained, counsel. let us just talk about the engle findings, if we could, sir. mr. schlesinger: we will talk -- leave those up for a second. but today, even though you have seen enough, heard enough, your body language tells us you are ready to go, you are going to -- you have honored your duty. i know you are going to give us the attention we need to give us the chance to get to the important -- super important part of this case, phase ii, based on the reprehensibility of the conduct. is the conduct reprehensible, did it evince, did it show a reckless disregard, a lack of caring about people, so that knowing harm would occur, a company did it anyway. now, it is a company. there is an instruction. the instruction says a corporation gets to be treated like a person. they are entitled to be treated in this courtroom like a person. that is good for a number of reasons. because outside the courtroom, they are not equal, they do not have the same sort of power as an individual. they have a great deal more power economically, politically, legally, and you will see the documents that support it. so i think of them as a really big person. if you ever drive on us-27, there are those gigantic metal racks where the power lines go, and when we are driving by them, i tell my kids, what is that? that is the giant man because it looks like a really giant man. so, if they are a person, they are a really big person; but if they are being treated here equally in a courtroom, it is because, in a courtroom, a jury -- six folks, you guys -- get to treat them equally. my client, mrs. skolnick, 86 years old, lost her husband in 1993. she gets to stand on equal footing with them, and she is able to go toe to toe with them because they have a jury here as what we call a great equalizer. let us see thomas jefferson. red, white, blue. inspirational closing argument suit. red, white and blue flag, just to inspire us to think a little bit about, you know, what we are all about. thomas jefferson said that trial by jury is the best of all safeguards for the person and property of every individual. and the fact of the matter is, is that, you know, there are books being written now called the death of the american trial, because the trial by jury is a -- objection, your honor. the court: that is beyond -- just argue the case. mr. schlesinger: okay. so the -- the first conceptualization that folks need to start thinking about, and we hope that -- when you were jurors, you came in, you knew what you knew about cigarettes, to the extent you knew something about cigarettes. we hope that the evidence you saw about the conduct and activities of what the cigarette industry did, what an industry, treated as a person, is obligated to behave in the moral and ethical fashions as all people, if you would like an instruction that allows us to treat you like a person, the important thing to do is act like a person. and how do we act like a person? we are decent to each other. we are moral to each other. objection, your honor, it is beyond the law and the facts in this case. the court: i think it is a legitimate argument. you can go ahead, sir. mr. schlesinger: so let us put up the -- here's the instruction. both are persons in the eyes of the law. no problem. if you want the rights of the person, you have the obligations of the person. the obligations of the person are act like a person, be decent to each other. everything i ever needed to learn, i learned in kindergarten. robert fulghum's book, the title, itself, tells you what you need to know. be decent, do not hurt each other, do not lie. and so we are here to try to correct a great wrong. show the reckless disregard and the punitive damage instructions. in order to get there, you are going to have to work through a bunch of questions on the verdict form, which i'm going to work through with you, but i want to talk about the punitive damages. and if you find that the unearthing of the documents that occurred in the year 2000, that if you look at the surgeon general '12 report, and i -- i had those books. these are in evidence. everything you want to know about this case, almost everything we talked about, is documented in one way or another in these books in evidence. it is the highest statement by the highest public health officials in our land; and we were honored -- it was a proud honor to bring into this courtroom giants in the field that dedicated their lives to trying to make this country a safer place from the scourge of tobacco addiction. an epidemic that is enduring because a powerful industry depends on its perpetuation. without nicotine, there is no smoking. nobody has become a smoker without smoking nicotine. our customers die. now, what is it about the cigarettes -- and i tried to think about this -- i tried to think about this in terms of human nature, what are we as people. maybe it is that when something does not immediately kill you -- it is not a bullet, it is not a gun, it is not one of these outrageous spasms of -- of irrepressible violence that we see in our news that makes headline news, it is not the kind of things that rivet our nation for days on end and days at a time, that we do not -- it does not affect us the same way. i guess the human behavioral survival instinct is if something does not kill you right away, or it does not hurt you immediately, you do not perceive the risk of it. well, that makes for the elements of what is the perfect storm for an epidemic. little kids, 12-year-olds -- this is the first document i carried around. i've been carrying this around. do we have this one? this is one of their analyses. they have code words. compound w is nicotine. zephyr, a warm breeze? the cynicism that "zephyr" means lung cancer in their secret documents. the chilling, ghastly things that human beings, men of science -- what could these men, what could the claude teagues and the dunns, and the ceos, what could they have done if they had dedicated their lives to pursuing good and cancer cures? what could they have done if -- when, in the '50s, they discovered our product kills people, there is no doubt about it? they said to the public, if there is something bad, we will take it out. we would never sell anything bad to you. your health, the public's health, is our tantamount responsibility. and it was -- it was a madison avenue, hill & knowlton public relations gambit to put away the cancer scare that came out in the '50s. and, sure enough, cigarette sales shot up. and more than half of the men in the country were smoking because they knew that nicotine is the sine qua non of smoking. what does that mean? it is latin. it means without which there is nothing. now, this is a business plan. if i'm sitting in my house and my neighbor comes over to me and says, hey, i got a great idea for a business, we are going to make this product, people are going to eat it up like hotcakes, they are not going to be able to get enough of it, they are never going to be able to stop using it and we are going to make a ton of money. there is only one problem. after a while, a lot of people are going to die from it, it is going to kill them; but, man, we are going to make a lot of money. would you do it? would you do it? would somebody enter into that kind of -- objection, your honor -- the court: sustained. -- golden rule. the court: sustained. mr. schlesinger: would a person do it? judging by a person. so we are going to talk about this. this document talks about 12-year-olds. twelve-year-olds. there is a movie, the big lebowski. there is a line in the movie that john, the big guy, along with jeff -- you may have never seen it. anyway, they are talking, they say 12-year-olds, dude, 12-year-olds, okay? now, that -- that is -- that is unacceptable, that is abusive, that is intolerable conduct to children, to recognize -- to do the science and recognize that the teenage brain, the pediatric brain is in a growth spurt, just like the rest of the body, and those frontal lobes are forming, and that it is in those adolescent years that the brain is uniquely and critically susceptible to addiction and a permanent hooking by a drug, nicotine, from which these surgeon general reports will tell you 3800 kids today -- the surgeon general report in 2012, 3800 kids today will begin the smoking habit. two of the three will continue to smoke, and one of those two will die. twelve million people have died thus far just in the last 50 years in the united states from smoking cigarettes. the filters they put on the cigarettes to reassure the public, knowing full well they did not work, knowing full well they were a fraud, were done to get folks to rely -- to keep people smoking, and it worked. now, 99 percent of all cigarettes are filters. mr. skolnick smoked filtered cigarettes in reliance on that fact. there was a pervasive overwhelming period of years where they fooled the federal trade commission. they fooled dr. burns. what an honor to get dr. burns here. the man was, essentially, the chief science office -- officer for the surgeon general. and dr. proctor. these men are, in their field, giants. i do not know if you have ever heard of tedtalks or anything like that; but nowadays, in our modern world, you can go to the ted lectures on the internet and see smarty-pants guys talking about a bunch of really cool stuff and teaching us. and getting these guys in here is a fantastic thing. now, they were cross-examined on things like money; they were cross-examined on did you meet with the lawyers. well, any good lawyer meets with the witness before he puts him on; otherwise, what kind of lawyer would you be? but it was not until you heard dr. mcgregor come in that you knew that, yeah, they met with dr. mcgregor. they met with dr. mcgregor more times, over more hours than anybody else combined in the whole case. so you take the evidence as you find it, you hear what the truth is about cigarettes. and the fact of the matter is, is there is a couple of pillars of extraordinary wrongdoing that give rise to the concept that they should be punished. they should be punished not just for what they did to mr. skolnick; but as the instruction will say, the harm they caused others. so, the engle year-long trial that resulted in those findings that you must accept as your own is super important. we will talk about those. but we also gave you a window into what was really going on behind the scenes in the world of tobacco, and what -- how they effectuated this ghastly business plan, and intending to keep it secret, and successfully did for many, many years, only in 2000 or so, to have it forced into the public light so that you all could see it. now, i want to go back to the -- the teague -- the last one. no, no, the last one with the red, please. the last one. you had it up a minute ago. no; but you can leave that up for a sec. but -- anyway, this is a report on smokers. they talk about the youth market, the importance of the youth market. and look at the age of the kids. twelve years old, 13 years old, 14 years old, 15 years old, 16 years old, 17, 18. 68.7 percent start by 18; over half start before they are 17. the median age is 16.7 years. but these are their customers. the industry cannot exist without replacing the smokers that are leaving the market. the smokers that are leaving the market are the older ones that are either quitting or dying. they are leaving the market. nicholas cage left las vegas in similar fashion. if you ever saw that movie, he drank himself to death and died. so i hear "leaving the market," keeping a business in equilibrium by reestablishing getting youthful children into the market, that just -- that cannot square with any notion of what should be acceptable behavior. we cannot ever be comfortable selling a product which most of our customers would stop using if they could. that is to say, if the exit gate from our market should suddenly open, we could be out of business almost overnight. these are exhibits in evidence. i want the teague one. here. now, i talked about sine qua non. i'll do this quick. they know that the tobacco product is the vehicle for the delivery of nicotine. they know this. this is what the whole business is on. all smoking is based upon nicotine. no matter what you say about marketing, no matter what you say about packaging, the federal trade commission, in the '60s and the '80s, said it is wall to wall, it is saturation advertising. there is no way to avoid advertising. they use peer pressure to get people to smoke. you are going to hear the defense saying, we do not know specifically which ad he saw, and his wife began smoking filters and he began smoking filters. they were smoking filters for safety. it was the plan in place by tobacco to keep their smoking -- smokers smoking, to give them a psychological crutch, and say let us keep them smoking, what can we do to reassure when they are in their -- deep in their biological depths, some fear, an irrational fear, no matter what pooh-poohing logic we put out there, that the smoker could have a problem with this cigarette, how do we keep them smoking? and it worked. the business worked. what would have happened if, in the '50s or in the '60s, instead of lambasting the surgeon general's report and calling it half-baked and in certain years saying the surgeon general is trying to intentionally mislead the public, what would have happened if they had come forward and said, this is bad, we know it is bad, we are changing our business, we are never going to sell it to kids, we are going to help people that want to get off cigarettes, if we have an 18-year-old or a 12-year-old that started smoking and now they come to us and they are 25 and they want to quit smoking, we will help them, we will give them cessation products, we will give them denicotinized cigarettes, we will give them something, we will help them get off cigarettes? what did they do instead? they created this situation. the delivery of attractive dosage forms of nicotine, manipulated with additives and ammonia to make the nicotine freebase, like crack cocaine, the molecular structure, so it hits the brain in seven seconds so hard that it addicts the pediatric brain at a moment of vulnerability. fishermen use hooks in bait to catch fish. that is the whole purpose behind fishing. the fish do not know the hook is in the bait. that is the whole reason behind it. so making a business, saying we have got -- we have got this drug, it sells great because a good number of folks -- we do not know which ones, but if we cast our net wide enough, if we throw enough lines in the water, we are -- we are-- enough of those triers of cigarette smoke are going to become permanent, lifelong customers; and when they die, we will replace them with their children. is that -- i mean, are we so -- we have not become, in this country, so cynical, so enured to everybody does something wrong, that we cannot come back into this courtroom, in front of a jury, and say, we reject this and we speak, through the jury, to the tobacco companies, with a roar of moral outrage -- your honor -- mr. schlesinger: -- which rejects -- -- you ruled out this type of argument. the court: sustained. mr. schlesinger: okay. i get fired up. when you guys go back in the courtroom (sic), you have to coolly, calmly, dispassionately, weigh the evidence, without prejudice for any other side, without prejudice to the tobacco company, but based on the science and the evidence, without prejudice for mrs. skolnick, because you have sympathy or you care about her, or prejudice against her because some of the things that the tobacco company said about her, which we will address. let us get to this. the sine qua non of tobacco products. the attractive dosages form of nicotine. they have got to get him to try something, to try something that he does not know what is in it. you got to get a kid to try something; emulate a figure, a sports hero, to look cool in the peer group, you have got to do that. and it says: we have deliberately played down the role of nicotine; hence, the non-smoker has little or no knowledge of what satisfactions it may offer him and no reason to try it. instead, we must convince him, with wholly irrational reasons, that he should try smoking, in the hope that he will then discover the real, in quotes, satisfactions obtainable. that is one of the code words for addiction. now, that is some cold-blooded stuff. that is -- when i read it -- and i've read it a -- hundred times -- it is -- objection, opinion, your honor. mr. schlesinger: -- i think -- the court: sustained, to the extent not your own opinion. mr. schlesinger: okay. i submit to you that you could conclude that that is chilling, that is an intent to hook children. let us go to the children board, please. if our company is to survive and prosper over the long term, we must get our share of the youth market. for the pre-smoker and learner, the physical effects of smoking are largely unknown, unneeded or actually quite unpleasant or awkward the expected or derived physiological effects are largely responsible for influencing the pre-smoker to try smoking and provide sufficient motivation during the learning periods to keep the learner going, despite the physical unpleasantness and awkwardness of the period. the fragile developing of a young person needs all of the support and enhancement he can get. the self-image enhancement effect has traditionally been a strong promotional theme for cigarette brands and should be continued to be emphasized. and it talks about the top five brands. you will notice these are the brands that mr. skolnick smoked. we know he started somewhere between the ages of ten and 17, back in the '30s. he was dependent upon the drug in the cigarettes to some degree, to some meaningful way that kept him smoking. his wife was able to quit. he could not quit. he tried. back at the time, the hippie-dippie stuff they had like, erhard seminar training, or transcendental meditation -- and this is a guy that was a little old for that generation of stuff. he gave it a shot. he tried. he sucked on plastic cigarettes. he cut down. he could not stop. but that is not the determination of whether or not he is a member of the class. one of the issues for you to decide is, is he a member of the class, does he belong in the class. well, did the lawyers have a problem finding class members? i mean, 443,000 people a year die; right? a lot of people every year die. florida represents a substantial percentage of that population. the period of time that the class members come from is from '92 to '96. and there are a tremendous number of folks who were the addicted smokers whose addiction drove that smoking behavior to the point where they got illnesses from it. nobody smokes a pack, a pack and a half, or two packs of cigarettes a day for 40 or 50 years unless they have a dependence. "dependence" and "addiction" are the same thing. a dependence, a need for that drug in the system, which has changed permanently the pediatric brain and drives that dependence process. that is just the fact of the matter. the internal documents that came out are a revelation. they say in the preface, in the introductory statement, in the surgeon general 2012 report, our scientists are analyzing these internal documents to learn now what was really going on. we are coming to understand what tobacco knew and bragged about. we are years ahead of the public health industry, what we know about the nicotine we sell. they bragged about that. martin luther king said -- objection, your honor. mr. schlesinger: -- that the -- the court: counsel, let us not have comments from other -- stick to the argument of this case. mr. schlesinger: can -- i cannot give a quote from a famous person? the court: sustained. mr. schlesinger: no? the court: sustained. mr. schlesinger: okay. so, another thing. from time to time, when describing market categories and target audiences, we use references such as young smokers, young market, youth market, et cetera. in the future, when describing the low-age end of the cigarette business, please use the term "young adult smoker" or "young adult smoking market." so they have the 12-year-olds and now you will see in that page, under "12-year-olds," it says "young adult smoking market." they are calling 12-year-olds, 13-year-olds, 14-year-olds, young adults. that is not true. what do you tell -- what does -- a parent is obligated to teach their child about the dangers or hazards of smoking. the parents have the obligation to teach the kids. what does the parent explain to the children about products like this when they ask mommy or daddy, what about this stuff, and mommy and daddy cannot say, try it or use it because, you know, it is bad; and we know that the rebelliousness of youth is such that they have a tendency to rebel or go against what parents say. if the parent says, do not use it, that even puts a risk in the kid of using it -- of a child of using it. so what do you say, when it looks like such a normal product, to keep kids off of the cigarettes? ninety percent of smoking disappears if nobody under 21 gets cigarettes. that is just a fact. nobody -- kids -- people over 21, if you take -- if they want to do the right thing and they want to have a business in this country, and they say, we are ready to choose to do the right thing, we admit this is a highly dangerous product, it is hurt an awful lot of people, we want to do the right thing, we want to help, we have chosen to make arrangements to keep cigarettes out of the hands of anyone under 21, ever, because that will reduce this epidemic to one-tenth of what it is now, they would still have a business, but the business would truly be a business from at least folks that are closer to being fully brain-developed adults that are out of that vulnerable period of extraordinary susceptibility, and give folks a chance to not end up an addicted smoker for life and succumb to a -- the terrible diseases that end up causing folks to die in an ignominious way, in a way that is painful and great suffering. the books before you say that -- you want to talk about healthcare crisis in this country? $97 billion a year today, in today's dollars, in -- the harm caused in our society from tobacco. now, if you -- if you look at the -- i want to look at the definition of "punitive damages," please. so -- did i already do this? i did the whole thing? okay. the conduct causing loss to the plaintiff was so gross and flagrant as to show a reckless disregard of human life or of the safety of persons exposed to the effects of such conduct, so that it is the loss to -- the plaintiff is the personal representative of the estate, mrs. skolnick. and the question is, is what tobacco did in the conspiracy -- you know, there is a group effort to hide the health effects and maintain and sustain the business -- so gross and flagrant as to show a reckless disregard for the life or the safety of persons exposed to the effects of such conduct. it has to do with all of the folks that were hurt and sickened, the millions that never got a day in court, the millions of folks that did not have the benefit of the -- of what was forced to be admitted when the states attorneys general came out -- objection, your honor. the court: sustained. same objection, your honor. you have already ruled this out. the court: sustained. mr. schlesinger: it was not until 2000, pursuant to compulsory proceedings, that a lot of these internal documents were shaken loose. and it is current, they are still being analyzed and studied today. now, let us go to the engle findings, please. okay. so question 1 -- and i keep trying to skip over and go back to it because i think that question 1 is clear, and i think that you all have seen evidence un-rebutted. in other words, all of the evidence, all the people, lay people, doctors, treating doctors, independent eyewitnesses -- dr. davis, who came in here, he is an independent eyewitness like a man standing on a street corner that sees an accident and the policeman says, did you see something? he says yes. no axe to grind. he has no interest in being a courtroom doctor; he just likes to treat patients. he was involved in the diagnosis and treatment of leo's lung cancer. he said it was clearly from smoking. ninety percent of all lung cancers are from smoking. he was unrebutted. and as dr. burns reflected on, all the other physicians who treated -- berkowitz, rosenthal, cohen -- every treating physician, all of the innocent, independent, believable, unimpeachable witnesses said the man had a smoking-related disease. he smoked an awful lot of cigarettes a really long time, just like any generic smoker; he succumbed to smoking-related cancer, and it killed him. there is no doubt about that. there is no opposing testimony to that effect. there is rumor, innuendo, speculation, supposition and arguments by the defendant to try to picket it, punch some holes in it; but i think that the evidence has been very -- i think you will find the evidence is manifestly apparent that it is clear, it is simple, what he died from. and here's an example: when it suits the purposes of the defense -- when it suits the purposes of the defense for them to use something having to do with smoking-related cancer in what could be a very simple proposition -- meaning, did leo skolnick die from smoking cigarettes? yes. you could say that in two seconds flat. dr. davis could say that. the death certificate says he died of lung cancer. in two seconds flat, you could say that. did he die of smoking cigarettes? it should not be a hard thing to determine. we know now, even though conceptually it is hard to wrap your mind around the fact that there is a thousand documents we found that say that ain't nothing but a nicotine syringe, that ain't nothing but drugs, and it makes you addicted, it makes you dependent, you continue to smoke and your free choice is impaired, it is constrained. we know that. that should be simple. you get a guy like dr. davis, he comes in in two minutes, bom, boom, bing, no doubt about it. dr. kleinman testified from the cat scans the man had lung cancer. he did not have colon cancer. they kept giving him colonoscopies. the colonoscopies were normal. is that fair to put forth a defense to suggest a man -- bring in a witness, a gastroenterologist. dr. rosenthal -- objection, your honor, unfair argument -- the court: overruled. i'm going to allow it. mr. schlesinger: dr. rosenthal is the treating doctor that took care of him for colon cancer. he was -- the testimony is he was cured of colon cancer. two months before he was diagnosed with lung cancer, they did a colonoscopy. he did not have a recurrence of colon cancer. why would they -- why suggest that? if you want to come in the courtroom and say, we have a defense, here's what it is, put up some evidence of it, not just take a potshot at our clear evidence -- because folks -- folks like to fill in the blanks. folks want to say, you know what? we heard a bunch of stuff, but what did not we hear? what blanks do you want to fill in? and so i think question 1, all the folks said addiction, there was not any fuss about that. lay people said it, treating doctors with no axe to grind said it. the world's leading authority, dr. burns, synthesized it for you and said, yes, your smoking behavior is as a result of some part of your constrained choice, you can no longer say it is a free choice; and so, therefore, you continue to smoke lots and lots and lots of cigarettes for a really, really long time, and over a period of time the genetic changes occur and eventually you get lung cancer. so that is -- that is the class membership for the folks from the period of time from '92 to '96, is that they were addicted to the nicotine in cigarettes and got a smoking-related disease. that is a simple question and answer. dr. davis remembered he was a heavy smoker. it was a vague recollection, but he remembered it, and we put that evidence before you. now, it was arduous -- and we do not know how much evidence you need. we do not know. and that is one of the things that i apologize for. i'm sorry. it is like studying for exams when you are in college, and your head is so full of information, it is leaking out of your ears and your mouth and your nose. when i wake up in the middle of the night, tossing and turning, i'm writing stuff down. i cannot even -- i can hardly read what i wrote down, but i say, i got something to say, i know it is here, i know it is going to come out of me, i do not know what it is. i got a head lamp, i click it on, write something down, because i want to tell you something, because i want to convince you, i want to persuade you, i want you to see it our way, without distractions, as to what the true evidence is. and i'll give you an example. sunny. sunny. was there any debate in this courtroom -- was there any problem from the defendants, from these fine lawyers -- and they are fine lawyers. they do a good job, smart guys, for their client. no -- no getting around that. was there any debate, though -- when mr. belasic came up and said on many, many occasions, when it suits his purposes, that, well, mr. skolnick -- his own beloved sister died, and she smoked cigarettes. and the skolnicks associated the smoking of cigarettes with her death, and should not that have been a piece of information that would have helped him quit? he had the choice to quit, why did not he quit? he knew this was harmful. why did not he quit? it is a fair question and we are going to talk about that in the fault phase. in the fault phase. but it is got nothing to do with class membership. question 1 is only this (indicating); and whether or not mr. skolnick could have quit is not in dispute. we accepted some responsibility when we get to those percentages of fault. we did not have to. mrs. skolnick wanted to accept, and said the human weaknesses -- he -- could he have tried harder? fair game. could he have? we know a lot of people have quit, but a lot of people have not quit. we know a lot of people try to quit, and something like only three percent of people in the given course of a year, out of millions, succeed in quitting, that it takes many, many times to quit. it is a relapsing brain disease. and a lot of people do not get around to quitting until it is too late. and here's a man that is so addicted, that that nice lady -- i forget her name -- came in and said, who smokes after you get addicted -- after you get diagnosed with lung cancer and you are sneaking cigarettes, you are taking cigarettes from your friend that are nasty, dirty, half-smoked cigarettes and sticking them in your pocket? that is addiction. so that is an easy question. there is nothing in there that is going to say what the definition of "addiction" is. this book has got a million and one consensus ways of determining addiction, talking about smoking in the morning when you are depleted, smoking a lot of cigarettes. eighty to ninety percent of regular smokers, pack-a-day smokers, are dependent upon the nicotine, and it drives them. so if some of his smoking behavior -- a significant, important part of why he smoked was because he was dependent on nicotine, and it can be for no other reason. their own internal documents say, in absolute terms, we are in the nicotine-delivery business. that is it. but there was no problem whatsoever -- the clerk: you have used 45 minutes. mr. schlesinger: thank you. there was no problem whatsoever when they talked about sunny. nobody said that we debate whether sunny's smoking was the cause of her lung cancer. why was not that a debate? because tobacco companies, in the year 2000, finally, under duress, had to admit smoking causes lung cancer. objection, your honor. the court: sustained. mr. schlesinger: in the year 2000, and never before -- never before -- you saw those -- the ceos raise their hands, and all gather before congress, the ceos, the major executives of gigantic, huge companies, raise their hands and lied right to your face, in 1994, tobacco is not addictive, okay? there was no problem, though, inferring that the smoking that sunny did was the cause of her lung cancer when it suited their purposes, so they would argue, well, that should have motivated leo to quit. okay? if she was in here trying to establish that claim, do you think we would see it? objection, your honor. the court: overruled. this is argument. i'm going to allow it. mr. schlesinger: if she was in here, do you think they would accept that so easily? no. because tobacco has admitted that -- now, that cigarette smoking causes lung cancer, just not in people who sue us. tobacco has admitted that cigarette smoking is addictive, just not in people who sue us. objection, your honor. the court: sustained. it is litigation. the court: sustained. mr. schlesinger: how many times has dr. burns had to come into court to testify about these simple, obvious facts? objection. may we approach, your honor? mr. schlesinger: will you hold my time? [#deleted sidebar#] the court: ladies and gentlemen, you should disregard counsel's last statements, and it should play no part in your deliberations in this case. you may proceed. mr. schlesinger: please the court. i want to talk to you about the -- i was still on the reprehensibility? the reason why we showed you as many of the internal tobacco documents, which the surgeon general '12, to this day, show how current they are, is saying it is still being analyzed by scientists, still subject to scientific analysis, is because this is current. so, if the -- if the concept of class membership -- if mr. skolnick is a class member, as we hope the evidence shows, because he needs to have had a dependence to nicotine that drove, to some extent, to a meaningful, significant extent, smoking for a long enough period of time to get a smoking-related illness, he is a class member. so, then, when a class membership is determined -- and that should be a threshold question, it is a preliminary question, and, most importantly, it does not address the concept of fault. do not let the distinction get blurred in your mind, that if mr. skolnick could have tried harder to quit -- which we will concede as a matter of his human weakness, he could have tried harder -- that goes to a determination of the degree to which you believe he was partially responsible for what happened to him because he did not work harder to quit. that is fault -- objection, your honor, it misstates the law, particularly douglas. the court: ladies and gentlemen, this is argument. let me, again, remind you that what the lawyers say during their argument or, for that matter, at any time, is not what the law is. the law that you have is, what i have given you, that is what you follow. this is argument of counsel, and the lawyers do not talk about the -- are not evidence of the facts of the case. you recall what the facts are. this is argument of counsel. and the same applies to the defendants. you may proceed, sir. mr. schlesinger: in any event, we are many years down the road from the engle case. these are engle progeny cases. this is a request to you that he is a member of the engle progeny class. threshold determination, has nothing to do with compensation for her loss of her husband, the years that she did not get with her husband. think about that when you determine how to parse relative degrees of responsibility. when i talked about a reprehensibility of conduct, the important point i'm trying to make with you is we are here for a day of reckoning, punishment for past deeds. it is the last question on the verdict form: do you find, by clear and convincing evidence, that punitive damages are warranted? and we ask you to -- if you see it our way, to indulge us with that finding, so that you may find the tobacco company, for what they did for over 50 years in engaging in an enterprise which traded disease and death, knowledgeably, with intent, on purpose, with full understanding, for profits, for corporate profits, that it was wrongdoing that does not square with what we consider to be reasonable in our society, and we are not so cynical and our society has not degraded to that point, our society is progressing, we are learning to live together and respect each other, and we are moving forward from past mistakes, and it is the past mistakes and the airing out of them, and the recognition of them and the rejection of them by jurors like you that send a deterrence to others, and a recognition, a rejection of the conduct, saying we -- we used to trust our businesses -- leave it to beaver, the skolnicks, 1918, 1930, world war i, world war ii, people trusted their government implicitly, they trusted their corporations implicitly. now -- objection, beyond the scope of the evidence. the court: sustained. you can go ahead. go ahead. mr. schlesinger: so these are how we would like you to answer these questions -- the very last question. you will have to go a little bit further. you will have to come and listen to a little more evidence and try to get it done; but that is -- that is why -- that is really why we are here. and mr. skolnick is a conduit to that because he is one of the victims. he is one of many. and the evidence you saw of all the wrongdoing supports the idea that he is one of many. and the conduct you can consider not just to him, but to everybody similarly situated, the millions of americans who are sick and dying by being misled about cigarettes. now, there was lots of information out there. there was songs like "smoke, smoke, smoke," but the guy in "smoke, smoke, smoke" says, i've been smoking them all my life, and they have not bothered me yet. and it was a catchy tune with a jingle, and cigarettes sales kept going, and profits kept going, and they spent a quarter trillion dollars in advertising. and emerson foote says in this book, in the 2012 book, that it never ceases to amaze him that only does the tobacco industry suggest that their sales do not -- that their sales are not driven by advertising. it is only in that world. the fact is, the 2012 book on youth smoking has come to the definitive conclusion that advertising, peer pressure and the like, cause kids to smoke. can we put up 79, please? now, just an example. i cannot do all -- i cannot do it all. you have got the evidence, you can read it. i cannot do it all. i do not have the time. here's an example of just an out-and-out falsehood, lie, deception. did not you see the statement of regret from -- from dr. burns, that all those years they faked him out, how many people died because they did not know about the filters? did not you see that? here's what it says, in 1961, in the internal documents. and this is not from a couple of stupid people; this is from the chief scientists, the chief corporate officers. huge amounts of -- amalgams of attorneys and scientists, scientists that were either duped and unwitting, like dr. burns, whose intentions were good, but were misled by the fake filter fraud, the filter that causes worse cancer, filter cancer, deeper adenocarcinomas in your lungs, because the filters do not work, but it will make people think something bad is coming out of it. and some guy invents a color-changing filter that is got a food color dye in it, so when you suck on it, it turns brown; and even though it does not do anything for the filter, people attach significance to it. objection, your honor, contrary to the evidence. the court: overruled. ladies and gentlemen, again, you are the judges of what the evidence has or has not been in the case. this is argument, counsel. mr. schlesinger: that is a document in evidence you will see, disclosure of invention, signed off by a bunch of people. people attach a great amount of significance to the brown -- that snowy-white filter turning brown at the end; and if we could put a color-changing dye in there that would change color, preferably brown, folks will think the benefits are obvious, even though it probably will not do anything to help filter anything out. nothing was being taken out of those filters. so here's one. here's what they knew. this is an internal document. carcinogens are found in practically every class of compounds in smoke. present technology does not permit selective filtration of particulate of smoke. meaning, we know -- and that was that page with all those cancer-causing chemicals. this is what their internal scientists knew. that was in 1961. then, when the surgeon general report was being put together and they were giving information to the surgeon general, here's what they told the surgeon general: we are prepared to submit the chemical and constituents of smoke. none of the chemicals listed -- none of the chemical substances listed therein, to our knowledge, has been found by scientific research to be harmful to the health of the smoker in the amounts reported in smoke. it is possible, of course, to modify the chemical composition of cigarette smoke by the use of filters. cancer, no cancer. it cannot be removed by filtration, it is impossible. it is possible to remove it by filtration. these things are not acceptable. what we try to get you to do in this courtroom is see things as they are, break through the immersed desaturation effect of advertising, decades of the normalizing of tobacco, to say, hey, you know what? everybody had some idea about tobacco, we know it is bad; but nobody, unless they have read these internal documents, knows just how bad it is. that is what is so important to -- to think about. the other thing about coming to a decision that there should be punishment is that this is a civil side of a courtroom. it is not a criminal side of a courtroom. it is not a state attorney/prosecutor talking about jail time and sentencing. this is in the civil realm. the civil realm provides for the redress of wrongs with fines and punishments. so you sit in judgment and you are permitted to make a determination that there should be punishment. and one of the questions you have to answer to get to that point is, you have to decide was there reliance, was there inferred contemplated reliance. as the judge instructed you, it does not have to be anything specific; it can be that wallpaper, that endless onslaught, that campaign of controversy and doubt -- can we put that up, the controversy and doubt, doubt is our product? -- that keeps smokers smoking or gives them a doubt or gives them a psychological crutch to continue smoking, and using the illusion of filtration to keep it going so folks think, hey, something bad's being taken out. now, there is going to be a couple of questions that pertain to both rjr and philip morris, the two largest tobacco manufacturers. they conspired with the groups that they bought, owned and maintained: the center for tobacco research, the tobacco institute research council, the tobacco institute. those were the guys -- they put out that frank statement, saying, we accept as a paramount responsibility among all -- above all other responsibilities, the duty to safeguard the public health, even above our own business. and they said a bunch of times, if we ever find anything bad, if we are doing something bad, we are going to take it out. well, that is promises and lies. they made promises, but they told lies. and so they said doubt is our product. it is also the means of establishing a controversy. go up to the top. the committee has been formed, it is been a successful defensive operation. next. we have to offer the smokers a psychological crutch and self-rationale to keep smoking. and then, obviously, the key word is "confusion." anything we can do to confirm such a situation works to our advantage. this is a smattering. there are millions and millions and millions of pages. we can only show a few. down here. and this is -- what we are saying in the cigarette controversy, the doubt campaign that they created, is that it is going to be -- it could be subject to the charge and may be subject to the finding that we are making false or misleading statements to promote the sale of cigarettes. it is an admission that what we are doing is illegal. and these are the documents we have. the most important story is the one that -- objection, your honor. mr. schlesinger: -- casts doubt -- the court: overruled. mr. schlesinger: and down here -- i already did that. down here, please. the ctr and the industry have publicly and frequently denied what others find as truth, in quotation marks. like what stephen colbert says on his show, "truthiness." right here: let us face it, we are interested in evidence which we believe denies the allegation that cigarette smoking causes disease. and they kept that going in the '50s, when they had the health cancer scare, and then the smoking shot back up in the '60s, the '70s, the '80s, and the '90s. they never admitted it, and so the reliance continued by leo skolnick, who there is no evidence that he rejected what they said. the only evidence is from his wife that he heard, in those congressional hearings and what have you, that the companies were looking into it and waiting to see what was going to happen, and companies would not do that to folks and we are going to see what happens. his behavior to continue smoking, his behavior of going to "light" cigarettes, is evidence of his reliance on what they had to say. and -- the clerk: you used an hour, sir. mr. schlesinger: thank you. and the findings that are so -- that -- it is as if you found them yourself. i think of those findings as -- i think about the statue at iwo jima, where they took iwo jima and those guys were holding the flag up, because we cannot ever underestimate or overemphasize the importance of the conclusions that were such -- such important things to create. it is like -- it is like an oak tree is growing, an oak tree of truth, planted with the roots of those findings that i'm asking you guys to water today and keep it alive. and if they take it and they shake it, they can knock a leaf off now and then. that can happen. but the truth that the evidence showed us in this case is that a powerful industry, dependent upon the perpetuation of a tobacco epidemic, with no regard for the kind of harm it caused, traded it for profits, and it should -- no matter where we get to, that must not be considered acceptable. let us look at slide 68. who has the willpower? okay. let us look at the -- slide 70, 2004 sgr on addiction. give you an example: does nicotine addiction cause disease? 2004, nicotine addition. the scheme linking nicotine addiction and lung cancer via tobacco smoke carcinogens are their induction of multiple mutations in critical genes. so, nicotine addiction leads to cigarette smoking, various biochemical changes, some of which were explained by dr. burns, all the way through to changing in the miscoding of the dna, mutations, and then lung cancer. but you see, this is the surgeon general: nicotine addiction causes disease. choice to quit is fault, is a percentage of fault. we will go to that next. let me show concurring. let me show concurring cause, the original concurring cause language, please. slide 7 or 1. no, not that one. do you have it? okay. i saw eyes rolling in your heads. and this is a standard instruction in many, many different cases, it is a standard civil instruction. it is the idea that more than one thing may cause -- may cause a problem, or that an illness can be caused by more than one thing, or -- it is not all or none. it is not black and white. it is not always one or the other. the judge gives you the law. you see, you have a certain power. i'm putting up this board. now, i'm going to talk about something different, but we will leave the board up. all the power shifts to you. every single thing we do, we turn over to you, and then we sit and we bide our time. and it is your case, and you have the power. each one of you has the complete power and authority to talk, to deliberate, to look at the evidence, to consider it, to decide the believability of the witnesses, the frankness or lack of frankness of the witnesses, and you have a special power. one of the special powers you have is that folks that call themselves experts, that come in to give opinions, as opposed to personal observations, like an unbiased witness, like a dr. davis, who said he was an addicted smoker that got lung cancer, that should be the end of story. they did not put on any witnesses to say he did not have lung cancer from smoking. they did not put on any witnesses to say that he was not addicted. they could have put those witnesses on. they provided no evidence. they took potshots at ours. but in the believability of expert witnesses instructions, i want to tell you something that gives you great power, because we hand over great power to you today. today, you have more power as citizen government, as jurors, than you might ever have in your entire life. this is a day of incredible power. we turn it over to you, and it is yours, okay? here's one of the powerful tools i want to give you. i want to give you the powerful tool of the instruction regarding expert witnesses, because expert witnesses are different than regular people. an expert witness that comes in here to give an opinion is supposed to give an opinion because he has qualifications, because he has a scholarly life contribution to offer, with teaching, and a life well lived, dedicated to a meaningful, great purpose. that is a great expert. that is how you judge how much does this guy know. if you hear someone who calls themselves an expert and their opinion does not square with what you think is what a true scholastically valid expert should be, you are authorized, specifically in the language for experts, to reject that opinion. you can roll that opinion right out of the courtroom. and that is what i suggest you do with dr. mcgregor, because when she came in here, her opinions were unqualified and preposterous. she did not even know the half-life of uranium. uranium -- and the half-life of uranium, a radioactive substance, the half-life of it is dependent upon its -- the dangerousness of it is dependent upon its half-life. if you do not know the half-life, you do not know how radioactive it is. and that whole business was a distraction. the whole -- the whole piece of paper that they brought from the one case from mrs. skolnick does not go to her being a double-dipper or getting paid more than once. the judge did not -- his honor would never let us do anything for improper purpose. objection, your honor. mr. schlesinger: it was supposed to come in -- the court: sustained, counsel. do not comment about the court. mr. schlesinger: the law says -- and there is an instruction they read -- that this came in for the purpose of determining whether or not the cause of this gentleman's cancer had something to do with an exposure to radiation, okay? there is no evidence of it. there is just no evidence of it. and the witness that they put on to say there was evidence of it, that talked about thousands and thousands of pages, came up with very little evidence to prove it. and i submit that her testimony does not come anywhere near the real experts, the world experts, who came in here to talk to you about what really caused this gentleman's cancer, and that -- that the -- that even not recognizing, from 115,000 to $180,000, how much she was making -- and that is a lot, a lot, a lot of money for what she did and what she had to say -- she did not have the qualifications or the proof to do anything -- and she did not say that anything from the plant -- any of the pollution from the plant caused the cancer; but she did say that, of the causes, lung cancer was a cause of his cancer. concurring cause instruction, please. okay, here. let me just do this for you. ready? blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah. okay, take that down. go to the next one, okay? that is because it is -- it is like it is such an important instruction, and we have committees and supreme court committees, we try to work out the language, and it bends everybody's mind. here is an easier way of looking at it, okay? and i'm not doing this to insult your intelligence; i'm doing it because i cannot understand the darn instruction. in order to be regarded as a legal cause of lung cancer and death, cigarette smoking need not be the only cause. cigarette smoking may be a legal cause of lung cancer even though it operates in combination with radiation. "radiation," what a great word. what is -- what could be worse than cigarettes? a nuclear bomb. plutonium, that could be worse. ooh, it is like a jolly rancher, a sour apple jolly rancher, mmm, it tastes so good. i can say there was radiation, that is worse than cigarettes. it is a distraction. there was no radiation. and if there was -- if there was, sometime in 1959, 1966, if there was, in order to be regarded as a legal cause of lung cancer and death, the cigarettes need not be the only cause. cigarettes may be a legal cause of lung cancer even though it operates in combination with radiation, if such radiation occurs at the same time as the cigarettes and the cigarettes contribute substantially to producing the lung cancer and the death. show her testimony to that effect. and she testified and conceded to the point we promised we would get you to have her concede, in our opening statement, which was if there are multiple causes, one of those significant causes of death was smoking, and she did not say that one of the significant causes of death was radiation. it is a dupe and a dodge, and it is a -- it is a distraction. show my -- the multiple risk factors. this is dr. mcgregor: to the extent that that is true in this case, we are talking about multiple significant contributing causes of mr. skolnick's lung cancer. you will agree that smoking cigarettes was one of those causes, true? answer: that is true. okay. so, let us go to my cigarette pack. there is radiation, there is a smokestack. cigarettes -- the smoke in the cigarettes contained polonium-210. polonium-210. that is an ionizing radiation with a very short half-life, and over the course of 50 years of smoking, it is a known, proven, contributing cause of lung cancer. the distraction is alternative cause. i want to show the verified settlement affidavit from mrs. skolnick. i'd say we had a toxic exposure in this courtroom from dr. mcgregor. she exposed -- objection, your honor. the court: sustained, counsel. mr. schlesinger: pardon me? the court: just argue the facts in evidence. mr. schlesinger: yeah. i think, in this courtroom, what we heard about was another substance. i'll call it "bolonium-180," because that is what i think dr. mcgregor was talking about. and i think she was talking about it not for the honest purposes of men of great concern for public health, but for the corrupt purposes of an expert paid way more -- objection, move to strike counsel's opinion. mr. schlesinger: -- than she should have been paid. he just said "i think." the court: sustained. mr. schlesinger: i think -- i'm sorry. i hope you can draw from the evidence that conclusion. so, again, this is with regard -- this evidence is received by you for causation. i have to rebut this defense -- i'll discuss it again -- but it is for causation. it is to show you that everything mrs. skolnick wrote on here was true. mrs. skolnick said she filled this form out. and we like to highlight and emphasize important parts, but when mrs. skolnick had the piece of paper from -- hearing a decade after her -- her -- from hearing -- after a decade after her husband was dead, right, in the 2000-plus years, and decades and decades -- '66, '67, they closed the plant. he smoked cigarettes the whole time. he was in the plant where there was supposedly something -- something coming out, and we will talk about that on rebuttal a little bit. at some point, she was involved in a case. remember, this is one piece of paper from the case, offered so that you know mrs. skolnick wrote something, and it is going to be used for causation, not to prejudice. there is -- the law says do not -- do not let prejudice infect your verdict. do not let a misuse of it suggest something that it is not for. it is for, is there causation. so, mrs. skolnick is not an expert witness. if mrs. skolnick had filled this out in this case and said cigarette smoking caused lung cancer, you would not be allowed to see it because expert witnesses testify about causation of disease, unlike addiction, which folks can recognize, because it is a dependence upon a chemical. proof of the cause of an illness comes from an expert doctor, a medical trained physician that learns about it. so here's what the page looked like. and mrs. skolnick wrote her name in. next page. next page, please. okay. background information, her name, his date of birth, 1918. it is going to be a hundred years ago. and remember, when you talk -- well, i'm going to let mr. hammer deal with the damages as soon as i stop and give him time to do it. and i will, okay? next page. the clerk: you used an hour and 15 minutes. mr. schlesinger: yes, that is why i'm wrapping. okay. where they lived -- 1959 is when she said she moved to maxwell drive in westbury. next page. background information. next page. okay. they emphasize the top of this generic form, one page out of a giant lawsuit that you do not know anything about except for this, is whether or not this matters for causation. okay? the illnesses or injuries you are claiming that caused the decedent's death, the date of diagnosis and the decedent's age at that time. for example, john doe, decedent, was diagnosed with lung cancer in 1994, at age 52; right? and what does she write down? injury/illness, lung cancer; date of diagnosis, october '92; age of diagnosis, 74. let me just look at it from the perspective you guys are looking at it. is there a word on there that is not true? it is truth. is there a way in which an attorney can interpret it to mean that she meant something that she did not mean or going to get into a state of mind? you will take that in mind. can she testify as to what -- whether uranium or whether cigarette smoking caused lung cancer? is she qualified to do that? no. and has everybody testified that cigarette smoking caused lung cancer? yes. and even if there was some uranium -- and there was no plutonium at that plant, there was no enriched uranium in that plant, even if there was some -- some particle -- there was that movie with dustin hoffman, with the germ, and he went (indicating), and it got in his mouth. it was like a cartoon. even if that happened and it was a contributing cause, the law permits you to recognize that as long as that smoking, that -- that pictogram i showed you was an important cause of it. he takes -- he takes the next step. he gets you guys to answer the question and we move on. next page, please. okay. for the claimed illness and injury, the symptoms the decedent experienced before being diagnosed. it was lung cancer; hoarse -- hoarseness and coughing, 1991. it is true. she wrote down what they asked her to write down. she filled out the form. next page. how it was diagnosed. lung cancer, x-ray. truth. next page. find a lie in here. this page, i submit, is being used as a distraction. and if you follow the law that says i will not let anything cause me to be prejudiced against this woman, then you will not be distracted, you will stick on the fact of what tobacco has done to all these folks for all these years, and you will get us to the point where we can show you and discuss with you punishment for reprehensible behavior of an immoral business plan. next. next page, it talks about treatment. that is true. barry davis, he testified -- and here, additional information about the -- for the special master about the specifics of the claim. this is a worksheet. i mean, this is a work in progress, and you saw nothing else -- objection, your honor, no evidence. the court: it is argument. overruled. mr. schlesinger: and, of course, you will not see, on the verdict form, a reference to verizon, sylvania, as to whether or not they have a percentage of negligence in this case. you will not see that question when we talk about the percentages. real quickly, look here. here's something you have not seen. this document will be in evidence. read it, consider it. we did not bring this up in opening statement because i do not want to be in the defendant's defense. but now that it is here, let us talk about it. the diagnosis was ultimately confirmed at his death. please provide any information you have that confirms the diagnosis of the injury/illness, as well as any other information about the claim that you would like the special master to consider. his diagnosis was ultimately confirmed at his death. the death certificate, which was previously provided, states that lung cancer was leo's cause of death. all true. and how about this? leo also was diagnosed with colon cancer in 1979 approximately, while we were still living in westbury. he had surgery which stabilized his illness. that is truth. and if you want to be complete and candid and give her the benefit of the doubt -- and the standards of proof give us the benefit of the doubt; and if you go back there and you have some doubt -- remember, doubt, controversy, other factors, that is what their documents say. doubt, controversy, other factors, unproven. that is a truthful statement. he had lung cancer, he had colon cancer. he lived through the colon cancer, he died from the lung cancer. she answered the questions truthfully. if you think she can determine cause -- where in there does it say uranium exposure caused it? where in there is there an expert report, a doctor, somebody that came in and said that it caused it? there is not. there never will be. the only person they brought in was dr. mcgregor. with regard to the percentages of fault for philip morris and rjr -- i'm leaving time for mr. hammer, and i would like to -- i think i'm going to give him the floor for the next 25 minutes. okay. put it up. put it up and i'll do it. so, question 3 and question 4 are what get you to punitive damages. you have got to jump over these hurdles, you have got to answer these "yes." if you see it our way and you want to get to be able to reject this kind of conduct by an american business over a 50-year period of time, over a conspiracy, as laid out by those engle findings and things like that, here's what you need to do. you will determine that he did, in fact, justifiably rely to his detriment on an intentional statement of material fact made by each defendant after may 5th, 1982, that intentionally omitted material information concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes. and was such reliance a legal cause of mr. skolnick's lung cancer and death? and the answer to both of those questions is "yes." dr. burns explained it. you quit smoking, you get healthier. would he have died on the day that he died if he stopped smoking afterwards? the answer is no. continued smoking accelerates the disease process. continued smoking makes it happen sooner. there is a much stronger certainty he never would have gotten lung cancer if he had stopped smoking by 1978. but if they had come clean, if they had said, you know what, what we did was wrong, we are going to let you know, we are going to hand you the truth of what we know internally now, and we are going to say we are not going to sell it the way we sold it, we are going to help people get off cigarettes, we are not going to oppose the introduction of -- objection, your honor. mr. schlesinger: -- nicorette gum -- the court: sustained. it is not evidence or a claim in the case. the court: sustained. mr. schlesinger: they opposed the introduction of nicorette gum by merrell dow. we will show you -- mr. lombardi: objection, your honor. mr. schlesinger: -- those documents. the court: sustained. mr. schlesinger: they are in evidence. the court: sustained, counsel. okay. that is the second time, judge. mr. schlesinger: in evidence we have documents from merrell dow. put up the merrell dow documents. in '84, '85, where there was an opposition to the introduction of merrell dow, okay? if you look here, '82, '82, '85, when merrell dow came up with nicorette gum, which is the chewing gum, and one of the first things as a nicotine replacement product in the early days, the tobacco industry reacted with harsh rejection of it and they threatened, they lodged protests, and then they stopped buying chemicals from merrell dow. they were buying millions of dollars worth of chemicals, and they thought about it, with merrell dow, and they said -- and you will see the letters in here -- that it interferes with their business. anything that merrell dow would do to give smokers a way to get off cigarettes offended the cigarette companies, they boycotted the chemicals that they bought to use in their cigarettes -- like the ammonia they used -- and they were lodging protests, making merrell dow stop putting out the anti-cigarette smoking newsletters, and pushing to stop a way of helping people get off cigarettes. and this was not the first time. in the '70s, leo abood came up with a scientific study to look for a chemical antagonist to nicotine, a way to get people off of nicotine; and they said, it is my strong feeling that the progress that has been claimed, we are in the process of digging our own grave, and they rejected dr. abood's attempt to come up with antagonists to nicotine that would help people quit. and they referred to themselves as people digging our own grave. well, whose graves were being dug, if not their own? if they were opposing efforts to let people stop smoking, they were promoting and pushing them to continue to smoke, after the '80s, which brings us back to that question of reliance that we -- that we ask you to answer "yes," after '82, all the way through '94, even after the fellow was dead, after poor mr. skolnick was dead, and the seven ceos were still saying it -- mr. horrigan was saying it; on nightline they were saying it to ted koppel, they were saying it; and anne browder was saying, we did not pay for those product placements for superman, and they were doing all of this. and so the next question would be the same, was it justifiable -- did leo skolnick justifiably rely to his detriment on any statement of material fact made by defendants after 1982, in furtherance of the agreement to intentionally omit information concerning the health effects and addictive nature of cigarette smoking; and, if so, was the reliance a legal cause of his lung cancer and death? and, of course, it was, and you can infer it from the overwhelming amount of energy and effort they put into all of their prevention of cessation and their promotion of smoking and their reassurance of smokers. folks, thanks. i'll have another chance to address you, and then the defendants will, too, and the case will be over. i'll let mr. hammer offer some thoughts. thank you. mr. hammer: thank you. mr. schlesinger talked to you about conduct of the tobacco companies, talked to you about the evidence in the case that you heard, talked to you about dr. mcgregor and why you should disbelieve her. i'm not going to cover all that stuff. what i want to talk about is beatrice skolnick. they got married; they fell in love. and when they did that, she expected to live the rest of his life -- of her life with him. and if it were not for these companies' products, she would have been able to do that, but leo skolnick was ripped from her at age 75; way too young. people live a lot longer these days. beatrice is 86. she is 86 years old. and look at her, she is healthy as can be. hopefully she is going to live another five, ten, 15 years. who knows in this -- your honor, objection, it is not evidence. the court: overruled. it is argument. mr. hammer: but we are asking you to award money in this case to compensate her for her loss. and how do you come up with a figure? how do you say, your husband's life was worth something? well, the tobacco companies said that dr. mcgregor's time was worth $450 an hour. they paid her $4,500 to be here two days in a row to testify to you. they paid her $9,000 to be here. $4,500 a day. page 2. you all have the verdict form and you are going to be asked -- you would have checked off these boxes already, and you are going to be asked to figure out what is the total amount of damages sustained by beatrice skolnick for the loss of her husband's companionship and protection and for her pain and suffering as a result of his death. how do you put a number on that? leo died in 19 -- it was 1993. it is been 20 years. twenty years that she is been without him. would he have lived every single one of those days? who knows? who knows? but if the man did not start smoking cigarettes and did not get addicted to their product and did not die because of their product, odds are he would have been here. and he would have been able to see his granddaughters grow up and graduate. he would have been able to do all the things he wanted to do. he would have been the one taking beatrice on the cruises, instead of barbara. he would have been doing those things. that is what she is been deprived of, and that is why we are here today. well, they figured dr. mcgregor's time was worth $450 an hour. think about this: every single day, every single minute -- you heard from beatrice -- she told you, i think about leo, i think about him. it eats away at her. she has not been with another man. she still loves him. she still considers herself married to him. she still has pictures in her house, all over the place. she thinks about him every day, talks to him, still goes to the grave site. what is that worth? well, it is been 20 years, 365 days a year. every minute of the day she thinks about him. if you put -- give her a thousand dollars a day, a thousand dollars a day for the past 20 years, that is less than a dollar a minute. less than a dollar a minute of her thinking about him. every minute of the day she thinks about him. if you do that, at $365 (sic) a day -- a thousand dollars a day, 365 days a year, times 20 years, for the past, that is $7.3 million. i know that sounds like a lot. it sounds like a ton of money; but in the scheme of things, think about this. they paid an expert to come in here -- objection, your honor, it is not proper evidence. the court: overruled. i'm going to allow it. it is argument. mr. hammer: -- and tell you that leo skolnick was exposed to radiation that did not even exist. that is what they paid to try to persuade you not to award beatrice any money in this case. is that fair? i'll tell you what. $7.3 million is fair, in light of what they were willing to do. and then, say, leo -- beatrice, for the next -- hopefully -- who knows how long she is going to live -- but, say, five, ten, 15 years. i do not know. she is 86 years old right now. say for another five years, that would come out to $1.8 million. say for another ten years, that would come out to $3.6 million. that is up to you. hopefully she is around for another ten years. i would suggest -- say only five. put in $1.8 million dollars right there. i think that is fair to compensate a woman who is lost the love of her life, her soulmate, the person that she planned on spending the rest of her life with at less than a dollar a minute, compared to what these companies have done, 50 years, throughout the course of leo skolnick's life. you know, we are going to talk about -- mr. schlesinger talked to you about punitive damages and whether or not they are warranted in this case. and they most certainly are. danny, what i want to do is go through some photos. and just start from the beginning. this is -- go to 2 and then just -- this is beatrice skolnick's life and leo skolnick's life together. pictures of them with their kids, as they grow up. this was his life. this was her life with him. it was special, something that should be valued, something that should be treasured, something that should be looked upon as something that is really special. people looked at them and said, wow, what a couple. they are like -- they are like one. and you heard sylvia gross talk about how people looked upon leo and beatrice like, what a special relationship. and they had a great life together. but it should not have been cut short at 75. there is something wrong with that. and it is only because of what these companies did that he is gone. yeah, you know what? leo smoked and he should be held accountable for that. and he should be held, to some point, to blame for some of that, and beatrice recognizes that. let us go to the verdict form, page 1. percentages of fault. you are going to be asked to determine, philip morris, r.j. reynolds, are they at fault in this case? come on. of course, they are. are they totally blameless? for what you got to see, that very few people get to see, you know now, yeah, they are on legacy and you can go up there and look and there is books written by dr. proctor and other -- other people that talk about the internal documents; but unless you specifically look for that, nobody gets to see it. you guys got to see something that very few people ever get to see. you saw what makes this company tick. and what makes this company tick is money, at the cost of human life and at the cost of leo skolnick. so are they responsible? yeah. i would say that leo may be responsible for his inability to quit, for his continued smoking, maybe he did not try hard enough if you all think that, but in comparison to them, i would suggest leo maybe twenty percent, and these companies, these companies, forty percent each for a total of a hundred percent. beatrice accepts some fault; but a man who starts smoking as a kid, somewhere between ten and 17, according to dr. burns, who continues to smoke their product for years and years and years, and is fooled by them, by their advertising, by what they are saying to the public, our product, do not worry about it -- picture this. 1954, when the science started coming out, imagine the difference if they would have taken out this frank statement and it would have said: a frank statement to smokers -- instead of saying we take the responsibility for our smokers and we are going to hire scientists, think about if they took out a full-page ad that said this: a frank statement to smokers: quit, because it will kill you. imagine if they did that, what impact that would have had over the next 50 years on smokers, what impact that would have had on a man like leo skolnick. in 1954, when the science started coming out, and the tobacco companies took out an ad, instead of saying we are going to hire the best scientists, we are going to care about our smokers, we are going to care about our customers, we are going to do the right thing, imagine if they said and spent $450,000 on an ad in every major newspaper across the states, and said, we are going to take out a frank statement, quit, because it will kill you. what impact would that have had? we would not have had all the deaths we have had over the years. and leo skolnick would have quit. because that is what the companies that made the product told their own customers. if they really would have cared -- that is what a responsible company does. that is what a company that cares about their customers does. and in the -- in america -- in america -- corporations, yeah, they are here to make money; but if you are going to make money, do it the right way, do not kill people. do not kill people for a product. that is what they have done. and they continue to do it, which is why we ask you to hold them to be responsible, which is why we think the amount of money we are asking for, 7.3 million for past pain and suffering, 1.8 million for future pain and suffering, that is reasonable under the circumstances. and that is why we are asking you to check off that box that these companies should be punished. they should be, because they have not changed. nothing's changed. they still do it. still do it. beatrice skolnick misses leo tremendously. go to number 8. beatrice does not want to be here. she would rather have spent the last 20-plus years beside leo, not in a courtroom. do you think that is how she wants to spend her life at 86 years old, in a courtroom? i think you all know better than that. she is here for justice for leo. you all -- as mr. schlesinger said, you all have great power, great power. you have the opportunity today, in your deliberations, to turn to these companies, some of the most powerful companies in the world, and say, what you all have done for the past 50 years, and continue to do today, is just wrong. we -- we, as citizens of this great country, are not going to tolerate it, we are not going to put up with it. objection, your honor, "send a message" argument. the court: excuse me? "send a message," you have ruled out. the court: sustained. mr. hammer: that is -- the court: go ahead. mr. hammer: we are not going to tolerate it. we think what you did was wrong, and we think what you did -- your honor, you just sustained that. the court: sustained. what you told him he cannot do -- the court: we have got two people arguing the same thing. let us move on. mr. hammer: as far as a punishment, check off that box so that we can proceed to the next phase. as far as damages in this case, what these companies did damaged beatrice skolnick's life. and it is not going to bring leo back. you cannot do that in a courtroom. all we can do is say to these companies, you took somebody that beatrice skolnick loved away from her. seventy-five years old, the man should not have died at that age. you see pictures of him. the guy's looking good; he is looking healthy. you saw pictures with his shirt off. the guy was in good shape, in good shape until the cancerous stuff that he ingested day in and day out developed a tumor in his lung and killed him. and it was only because of this company's product, the nicotine-delivery device, that they highly engineered, that they perfected into this little product, that if you use it as intended, you use it like they marketed it, it is ultimately going to kill you. and they knew that for 50 years, and hid it from the american public, hid it from leo. that is why we are here, to seek justice. mr. schlesinger will have a chance to speak to you after defense counsel talks to you. i ask you to pay careful attention to what defense counsel says, and then i ask you to pay careful attention to mr. schlesinger's final argument, too. we have proven our case by a greater weight of the evidence and then some. give beatrice the justice she seeks. that is what we ask you. thank you very much. mr. schlesinger: if you can fill the unforgiving minute with 60 seconds worth of distance run, then yours is the world and all that is in it. what is more, you will be a man my son. so i have a little bit of time left to justify our position in the case, and i'm going to jump in and try to rip through a bunch of the stuff. and to the extent i feel something needs to be unmasked, that is what i'm going to do. i'm going to start right now with the issue of addiction. i did not think i would have to address it as much as i did. but right out of the box, i want to see number 60, please. all right. now, the surgeon general '10s report. i'll tell you right now, if you are still taking notes, write down page 16 and page 17. in page 16 and page 17 of this book is everything you need to know about a filter fraud that went on for decades from 1966 until the year 2008, at which time the ftc rescinded its guidance. it permitted, because it had been misled by the tobacco companies that said we will give them a double, a triple, a quadruple filter. we will give them the psychological crutch to keep smoking. the illusion of filtration is just as important as the fact of filtration. and we saw a historian, we saw a witness to history, dr. burns, he was in essence the -- the man of the surgeon general for decades when he was being fooled. you saw, if you look at the demeanor of the witness, the regret, the lives lost, the disappointment in that man's attitude because he was misled. they had a filter. the machine smoked the cigarette. it had ventilation holes in it. the machine misread the fact that the smoker compensated, covered the holes, drew in deeper inhalations and got the nicotine, which is all that smoking is, that they needed to sustain their addiction. without nicotine, our business would collapse. without nicotine, there would be no smoking. and finally, after the revelation in 2000 of the internal documents and the analysis by scientists, the ftc, the federal trade commission said: we are rescinding our guidance. you cannot advertise that filters are better. you cannot use that health reassurance. it is to create the controversy without actually denying it. all of the ftc reports are also in evidence talk about the advertising. it always shows youthful, healthy people. it never addresses the health issues. we had to give the smokers a psychological crutch. in 2008, you will see in page 16 and 17, in this book here. they had to rescind their guidance and no longer finally could you say that filters are safer. a half -- 450,000 people a year are still dying. there is been no reduction in death. they are trying to say that filters are safer. is that like saying if you fall off a 50-story building, that is safer than falling off a 75-story building? finally, from 1966 to 2008, 42 years, they figured it out. and in 16 and 17, we read it to you during trial. it is really long language. but it says the industry was so far ahead of us on this, they knew so much more, it took decades for the public health authorities to figure it out. and they make my point. they proved my case for me. they showed that my client relied because they say: the public health authorities say, yeah, try to quit if you can. but if you cannot, smoke these filters, they are better for you. of course he saw it. and mr. belasic -- these are good lawyers. mr. belasic is picking and choosing. he is decided my long-dead client, what he did see and did not see. my client saw the reader's digest, but he did not see all of the repetitive, forceful rebuttals of the reader's digest, and that is a document in evidence too, where they said we are going to forcefully refute what the reader's digest is saying. the makers of the reader's digest would be spinning in their graves, because they were anti-tobacco, they were smart. but they were drowned out. this document talks about advertising. in one day, the tobacco companies spend more money in advertising than the entire public health authority on smoking and health spends in a year. they drowned out the message. and they, in the engle findings say, they misled, they concealed, they were guilty of conspiracy and fraud. and they did it with the intent that their customers would rely. my client, mr. skolnick, was their ideal customer. he did what they wanted to do. they did not want him to quit. they wanted him to keep smoking. what makes you smoke, nicotine. that is the only thing that makes you smoke. it is deceptively put in a package to make it look normal. but the fact of the matter is, nicotine addiction is what causes disease. nicotine addiction is the fundamental reason that individuals persist in using tobacco products, and this persistent tobacco use contributes to many diseases described in this report. see, nicotine addiction is the fundamental reason that individuals persist in using tobacco products, and this persistent tobacco use contributes to the many diseases in this report. without the compound nicotine, there would be no smoking. if nicotine were taken out of our product, the entire market would collapse and we would lose our businesses overnight. and they did not want to do it, and they made a decision. it was a grisly, gruesome decision that is cost the lives of 12 million americans. now that is reprehensible. that calls for a day of reckoning. mr. skolnick was a generic smoker, one of the many who relied on the public health's reassurance, and what chance did mr. skolnick have of figuring this out if they had dr. burns fooled. by the way, they are quoting from my experts. dr. burns said my man, mr. skolnick, was highly addicted. dr. proctor said they put together the greatest -- the greatest conspiracy, the greatest distraction campaign in the history of the world and that it cost millions of lives. so ... in 1989, two factors refute the argument smoking is a matter of free choice. most smokers start smoking as teenagers and then become addicted. and this is from the memo that says -- this is from an internal memo: cigarette smoking -- september 9, 1980, cigarette smoking is more addictive than using heroin. this is what they knew. remember, they denied it. they lambasted it. they said the surgeon general was intentionally misleading the public. and that is the things that mr. skolnick was hearing. i do not think the questions i now raise are academic. the lawyers remind us i'm told that the entire matter of addiction is the most potent weapon a prosecuting attorney can have in a lung cancer cigarette case. i'm in a lung cancer cigarette case. i am a prosecuting attorney, and i am telling you 30 years later, they are still able to use this defense before you -- mr. lombardi: objection, your honor. the court: sustained. mr. lombardi: your honor. the court: disregard the last statement of counsel, please. mr. schlesinger: the language i heard from mr. belasic is a tautology. in the same voice that he says: we now agree it is addictive, he then denies it is addictive. because if you say, oh, well, he was not addictive, because he could have quit. that is got nothing to do with addiction. when he says if he was addicted, he could have chosen to quit and therefore he caused his own disease, that is a tautology. that is a denial of addiction. that is saying addiction does not exist. it is just a habit. it is one of the most powerful addictions known to man. it is the greatest addictive substance in this country. 44 million people are smoking cigarettes regularly. 440,000 a year are dying, and they are going to continue to die because they are continuing to addict children. because there is no smoking. there is no business without replacement smokers under 18 years of age. little adolescent brains. that is what is reprehensible. and it is not mr. skolnick, who obviously was a smoker at a very young age, who fit into the category of smokers that dr. burns talked about, who met his wife in 1947 smoking camels, an rjr product, and i apologize that the arc of the moral universe is long, but it bends towards justice that i am not able to produce a 95-year-old man in this courtroom for you to testify i was one of the street toughs, i guarded those hoodlums' cars, we bought lucy cigarettes with the pennies we made. i'm sorry i cannot produce that. they want to be rewarded for that? not one time did these gentlemen -- and i will say they are fine gentlemen, and they did a great job. they gave a good closing argument. very convincing, they stitched things together. but not once did they address the documents. and you know what the road to redemption is, recognizing and apologizing something when something has been wrong -- mr. lombardi: your honor. mr. belasic: objection. the court: sustained. counsel. mr. schlesinger: okay. we take our fair share of responsibility. our fair share of responsibility. we want to be candid. we want to be transparent. we want to say mr. skolnick did not have the sufficient internal motivation that met the external support. remember what dr. burns said, to allow him to quit before he died like so many other dependent smokers like him. we wish he did, and he wants to say, okay, we will take some responsibility. they are not taking any. there was not an admission that maybe what we did over those -- mr. belasic: objection, your honor, sustained. the court: overruled. i'm going to allow that argument. mr. schlesinger: there was not -- they may admit, they may -- on that board, we put 40, 40 and 20. they said even if you agree he was a class member, even if you get through all that and class membership is only -- was he dependent on cigarettes, the nicotine in the cigarettes, yes, he was. did that drive that disease? yes, it did. and did that result in a disease process? it absolutely did. where is dr. rosenthal's -- mr. gdanski: 50. mr. schlesinger: i had it here. mr. gdanski: it is up. mr. schlesinger: okay. did you want me to bring more witnesses? i could have brought everyone. i could have brought every doctor. when would it have been that you would have come out of the box? i do not know. but i got a distinct impression that you would heard enough. so we put on experts and independent treatings and we put on the records from dr. rosenthal that says history of colon cancer without recurrence. he was cured of the disease. did i finish with the shook hardy? mr. gdanski: yes. mr. schlesinger: can we show horrigan? mr. belasic: objection, your honor, violates your order -- may we approach? the court: sure. [#deleted sidebar#] the court: go ahead, sir. i'm sorry. mr. schlesinger: what i was saying -- and we are going to pull up another video before we talk about post-'82 matters. but again, the nicotine stains the smoking. the doubt campaign, the controversy campaign sustains the psychological crutch that permits people to continue smoking. mr. skolnick, through his loving wife, has said i want to accept some responsibility. i said, we did not have to do that. volunteered to say maybe our human weaknesses were not enough. maybe we could have tried harder. whether or not she quit and he did not quit just means she was able to quit, he was unable to quit because he was addicted. if his sister died of a disease and he kept smoking, all the more reason to show that is that dependence on nicotine. but we want to accept a fair share of blame. you may think -- and i love ham -- steve hammer, we grew up since 12 years old. mr. belasic: objection, your honor. the court: sustained, counsel. mr. schlesinger: i think he gave too much percentage to the skolnicks. my view of the evidence i would argue to you would be that the vast majority of smokers in those ages of innocence with the doctors and everything else and those kids that started that were never told that the tobacco companies never leveled with, never came clean with do not really deserve any meaningful measure. i want you to know. you do not have to give twenty percent. you could give less. and in all candor, you can give more. you can say, you know what? it is 25. you could say it is 50/50. you can do any number combination you want because you have the power. all we are doing is making suggestions. if $9 million in compensatory damages is too much and mr. skolnick may not have been here to see us in this courtroom because it is been so many years, he would be in his late 90s, so be it. adjust accordingly. whatever the simultaneous ages they live with together, you consider that. whatever you think is fair. we are obligated on behalf of our client to give you some help in that regard. okay. go. (the video clip was played and taken down to the best of the reporter's ability as follows:) voice: earlier this week the r.j. reynolds tobacco company took out this ad in a number of newspapers and magazines calling for an open debate about smoking. in brief, the ad contends that medical studies which show that cigarette smoking causes disease are ignoring significant evidence to the contrary. voice: cigarette smoking does not cause cancer, yes or no? voice: it is not known whether cigarettes cause cancer. has not been causally established. voice: cigarette smoking, no causal relationship between cigarette smoking and emphysema? voice: despite all the research today, there has been no causal link established. voice: no causal relationship between cigarette smoking and heart disease? voice: no. as a matter of fact, there are studies that while we are accused of being associated with heart disease, there have been studies conducted over ten years that would say again that science is still puzzled over these forces. (video clip concluded.) mr. schlesinger: now that is 1984. this is after 1982. we want to get to punishment damages, you find reliance after that period of time, and certainly that is just one of many. i will tell you this. let us talk about dr. mcgregor again. more than i want to have to talk about dr. mcgregor. the atsdr that i cross-examined with, the governmental agency that deals with toxic substances, does not classify natural or uranium as a cancer-causing agent. and we went into a challenge over if something has radiation, how dangerous is it? it depends on how radioactive it is, and there were not any nuclear bombs or enriched uranium on that site. she could not cite any amount -- mr. lombardi: objection, your honor, contrary to the evidence. the court: overruled. ladies and gentlemen, you are the finders of the fact. you recall what the testimony was. this is argument of counsel. mr. schlesinger: she thought she said there might have been 100 pounds of enriched uranium that went through there. but the fact of the matter is that over a 20-year period of time, 10 million pounds of natural uranium, and this is -- uranium did not stay there, it got passed through, and counsel for defendant told you that mrs. skolnick did not know what they were doing in that plant back then. she did not find out until 10, 20 years after she moved there. but uranium decays slowly. 4.5 billion years. not a million years. if you are going to know anything there is to know about an elemental substance such as uranium, a natural-occurring uranium, you must know the half-life in order to know the radioactivity. let us go to the sworn testimony of dr. mcgregor. number 77, please. is not it true no studies which has been performed support the conclusion that the people who lived in the skolnicks' neighborhood, including the skolnicks, were at increased risk of development of lung cancer. is not that true? that is true. do you remember those questions and did you give those answers to those questions when you were deposed? yes. is not it true you cannot specifically demonstrate the presence of any enhanced levels of radioactivity on the properties of plaintiff surrounding the facility? true. you do not have a numerical amount or specific amount of radiation exposure that mr. skolnick had during his lifetime, do you? no, i do not. but you do know he had an ongoing continuous exposure to cancer-causing chemicals in cigarettes, including the radioactive and radiation cancer-causing chemical polonium? po210 on the elemental, the periodic table that we learn about in high school. before he moved to hicksville in the late '50s, right? right. and all the way through until the day he died. polonium is the radioactive substance in cigarettes that is known to cause cancer. we put it up on the board. it is in the book. if you do not believe me, look it up. page 100 on is a whole chapter on nicotine addiction. it is not free choice. it constrains free choice. without nicotine, there would be no smoking. now,let me show you something. let us go to 009. remember they talked about mr.-- lombardi. sorry, sir -- talked about there was a release. a release, by the way, that occurred before the skolnicks moved to the neighborhood, a release into the air, from some stack, and maybe there was some uranium that burned and it got in the stack. talking about fullerenes, west -- buckyballs, westminster (sic) fullerenes. the case is about smoking and cancer. we are not here to talk about nuclear power plants. they have injected themselves as a distraction. see what it says here, on one time, one episode, concentration of 1100 disintegrations per minute per meter cubed was found once in june 1957 before my clients moved there. now, this is an example of the skill of the witness that never did a lung cancer case, never did a radiation case. the only atomic workers she had anything to do with was a paper study where they would send a file on workers' comp claims about whether they got cataracts. and she admitted this is the first time she is ever done it. and the amount of money she earned was less than what she admitted to. until we added it up, and it seemed extraordinary. you will consider whether or not it was. now, 1100 dpms per minute. she said by the way, as an example of her great knowledge of this technical subject, which out of thousands of pages, she pulled a couple of pages out, that it was dissipations a minute. it is not dissipations a minute. it is disintegrations per minute. it is when little atoms are jumping out of a radioactive substance. let us talk about 15. now, let us go to the first page -- you see what this says? transmitted herewith is the following inspection report involving noncompliance. sylvania corning nuclear corporation. they showed you that. you see what this says? bayside, new york. mr. lombardi: your honor -- mr. schlesinger: over in queens, in a whole 'nother part in town. mr. lombardi: your honor -- mr. schlesinger: this is not hicksville. the court: excuse me, counsel. there is an objection, please. [#deleted sidebar#] mr. schlesinger: here we go. can i start my time again, mr. clerk? the clerk: 21 minutes left. mr. schlesinger: so, moving on. now, this is the document that was in evidence. it is pmup 025088004. i will show you several parts of it. but here's what it says here: sylvania corning nuclear corporation, and there is an address, bayside, new york. now, remember, that is not the same address as hicksville. counsel, when he had the witness on the stand, was very careful, often referred to sylvania, sylvania, sylvania. however, i want to show you where this document refers to with regard to this release, even though it occurred before my clients ever moved there. so that alone rules it out as having relevance to my clients. anything that puffed in the air could not have bothered my clients when they were not there. but, here is the address. bayside, new york. that is queens. that is full on the other side of town, 12 miles away. it is nowhere near hicksville. nowhere near westbury. next entry. now, there are dates here on the compliance inspection report. this is from the same document. you will have it in evidence. look at it yourself, and you make the determination. it also shows the same address, bayside, new york. name and address of licensee, sylvania corning. here is bayside. report. it is a compliance inspection report. next, please. now, remember there was paragraph 15, 1100 dissipations per minute or 1100 disintegrations per minute in excess. look here. the inspection report herein was confined to an examination of uses of licensed byproduct and source material and only the bayside facility was visited. so, it is a mistake, we submit, that was made by dr. mcgregor in trying to tell you that something happened near the family's house that could have let something go into the air. it was at a facility that was over 12 miles away. is there anything else on that? all right. thank you. let us go on to the next thing. that is paragraph 10. the inspection was bayside. they discussed it and addressed it as if it is hicksville. it was an error. that is it out of 5,000 pages. it was not the same place. now, let me put up 30, please. the -- there is a -- there is an old story about the man who had a field, and one day a goat got loose from a neighboring farm and came into the man's field and ate all his cabbages. and in the fuss that ensued, the defense was, i do not have a goat. and if i did have a goat, he did not eat your cabbages. and if he did eat your cabbages -- mr. lombardi: your honor -- the court: sustained. this is improper argument, counsel. approach. mr. schlesinger: it is improper? [#deleted sidebar#] the court: again, let me just remind you, ladies and gentlemen, what counsel says is not evidence. that goes for both sides and all three counsel. what these documents say or do not say is what you have to decide as a part of your deliberations in this case. so if counsel says something, inadvertently or otherwise -- any of them -- that you find different from the evidence, you go by what the evidence is in this case, by what the document actually says, rather than what counsel, either for the defendant or the plaintiff says it says. go ahead. mr. schlesinger: may it please the court. okay. and -- the court: without the homilies. mr. schlesinger: can i talk about the cabbage? the court: no, sir. you cannot -- we are not going to talk about the stories. mr. schlesinger: i was not sure what objection we were on. i'm sorry. so anyway, we are going to talk about some of the defenses in the case. and i will tell you that a lot of material, if you take one thing from me at face value, i will not intentionally misrepresent anything to you. i know you guys have all the evidence, you have taken extensive notes, paid attention, you are taking this seriously. you will get this right. that is what we trust the jury system to do, trust you independent folks to get it right. the defendants suggest a multiplicity of defenses, and i suggest that by suggesting so many of them, it dilutes the overall message of their defenses. they say he was not addicted. they say he did not have lung cancer. what was interesting was mr. belasic in his arguments to you when he was talking about the radiation and the claims that mrs. skolnick made was drawing a distinction and said he did not die from colon cancer. he did not die from colon cancer, in making the argument with regard to the radiation claim and the words "lung cancer" and "colon cancer" on her handwritten stipulation. he said it must have been because it is wrongful death, as if she knew what that legal term meant when she testified that she did not understand it at the time. she filled out a form. but he said she must have known what it meant, because he did not die of colon cancer. at what point does that belie? what does that undermine from one of his defenses? he wants you to think that he did die of colon cancer. did not he say to you he did not die of lung cancer. you have a reason to believe he died of colon cancer that spread to his lungs, and that when he went down to the university of miami for experimental chemotherapy, they used drugs that were usually used for colon cancer, as if to suggest that he had colon cancer. so there is inconsistent shifting justification. but he did not have lung cancer or he had colon cancer that all the doctors missed, despite all the colonoscopies and the doctor's record that said he was cured. and another doctor that testified here that said he was cured of colon cancer more than ten years out. and then they said the chemotherapy was for colon cancer, even though dr. davis said it was not. he worked with dr. sridhar on the complicated cases of the non-operative tumors, those nasty adenocarcinomas get deep into the lungs from filter cancer. from sucking harder and deeper to get that all-needed nicotine into the lungs to hit the brain. if he had lung cancer, it was from radiation. that was another defense. it is all his responsibility anyway. and, again, as his honor said, you decide who bears a relevant proportion of fault. we are willing to take our fair share of the blame. we ask you to assign to them the fair share of the blame they are not willing to take. that is not unreasonable. that is the job you can perform when you look at what is been done in this case. then it is all his responsibility anyway. he should have known better. he never should have trusted us. why did not they know, if everybody knew in the '60s, in the '70s, in the '80s, if everybody knew, why did not the tobacco executives in new york city and winston-salem and raleigh-durham, why did not they know that this was the problem, and why did not they come out and embrace the findings instead of reject the findings and embrace what -- the harms were? they said: we are going to get that doubt controversy to reassure people. we are going to lie. and the engle findings that are so important say the cigarette is a dangerous and defective product. it is defective. this is defective because it is unreasonably dangerous. when used for the purpose for which it is intended, it kills fifty percent of the people that use it. no other consumer product on earth meets that bill. it is an institutionalized form of irrational madness in our society that such a deadly product exists. if some red bull drink sends a teenager to the er, it gets banned and there is congressional hearings. but when you have a tobacco epidemic like we do, it is hard to get past it. here is the position. he was not addicted, but they did not call a witness to say he was not addicted. they could have had an addiction psychiatrist, a neurologist, a doctor, anybody they wanted. they have no limit, they have the ability to bring in experts. they have no witness. i was accused a little bit of i'm making a lawyer argument. i was talking about uranium-238. well, it is only lawyer argument here that dispels the notion that my man was addicted and depended on nicotine. there is no scientific evidence. the uniform proof from lay people and doctors is he was addicted. he did not have lung cancer? all the doctors said he had lung cancer. and they all said it was from smoking, and nobody said it was not from smoking, and their one expert said it was a substantial contributing cause of smoking. mr. lombardi says i cannot meet my standard of proof because maybe there was some radiation. i showed you my cool concurring cause pictogram to show you that in order to be a legal cause of disease, smoking need not be the only cause. it can act in combination with a nuke. so nuke 'em. nuke 'em. but it does not stop him from having been -- caused to have lung cancer. the clerk: ten minutes left. mr. schlesinger: thank you. if he had lung cancer from radiation. she did not say that. she said it is a risk factor. can you say it was a contributing cause? she did not say that. she specifically could not say it, did not testify to it. the only thing she testified that meets the legal evidentiary burden under the law -- the instruction the court will give you is that their own expert admitted a contributing cause of mr. skolnick's lung cancer was smoking. so it is uniform. the business about it is all his responsibility anyway. they said they accepted smoker's health as the paramount responsibility and promised to stop making it if it was ever proven to be harmful. that was a dodge. that was to give people reassurance. they have not stopped making it. they have not slowed down making it. they have not made a safer cigarette. if you take the nicotine out, there will not be any smoking. he should have known better? they spend billions of dollars. dr. proctor testified about the beautiful health reassurance strategy. he talked about that. and he never should have trusted us. and one of the things i really -- hey, you messed up. you trusted us. it is on you. he was the perfect customer. they put up -- they put up to convince you that our client does not deserve to be one of the people -- and it is not just him, but all the others that were hurt. you will look -- mr. belasic: objection, your honor. mr. schlesinger: you will look at the instruction. the court: counsel, just talk about this case. mr. schlesinger: you will look at the instruction on the reckless disregard and the degree of reprehensible conduct that gives punitive damages, and it says to the smoker and others. one of the millions. it says it is -- you are looking at wrongful conduct, not just about mr. skolnick. ultimately, punitive damages will be about mr. skolnick. but if you decide that they need a day of reckoning, they should be penalized, they should be fined. they should be punished. because when you speak to them -- you are going to speak to them in the only language they understand. money. that is their lifeblood. that is all they understand. so when you see that -- i cannot believe they put up a statistic, and i admire mr. belasic for doing it, because you know, he takes some risks and you see how they work, and i admire that he did it. but it was amazing to me. he put up a standard, we did a lot of polls, public opinion polls, only 2 percent of people trusted the tobacco companies. that is a defense in the case. you should not have trusted us because people did not trust us. we were not worthy of being trusted, and therefore, that is the defense in the case. next slide. we already did the doctor, right? (the video clip was played and taken down to the best of the reporter's ability as follows:) voice: it really poses the question of whether one is responsible for the other. and to this question it must be answered insofar as the correlation between lung cancer and cigarette smoking are concerned. no one knows. it may, it may not. how can cigarette smoking be the cause of lung cancer if the cause of lung cancer is, as yet, unknown? voice: it is not known whether cigarettes cause cancer, it has not been causally established. there have been studies conducted over ten years. and i would say again -- mr. lombardi: your honor, this is a repeat. the court: overruled. voice: -- that science is still puzzled over these forces. voice: i certainly would not be in the business if i thought cigarettes were harmful to people. voice: are you saying cigarettes are harmless? voice: i do not know that. i do not know that they are harmful or harmless. what i'm saying is someone should find out. voice: i think if the company as a whole believed that cigarettes were really harmful, we would not be in the business. we are a very moralistic company. i think there is a great deal of doubt as to whether or not cigarettes are harmful. you will discover there is a great deal of doubt with regard to whether or not smoking causes all these diseases which are alleged to be caused by smoking. voice: but i do not think there is a causal relationship established between cigarette smoking and any disease. if there were, diane, i do not think there would be a cause or the effect without a cause, and we all know that happens. voice: we do not know what causes cancer in general right now, so i think that we may find out what causes cancer, and we may find out some relationship which has yet to be proven. (video clip concluded.) mr. schlesinger: now put up the -- this is one of the internal documents. the top men in these corporations, the ceos, the top attorneys, the top scientists were involved in all of these documents, millions of them. who ain't for more money? i would be more cautious in using the pharmic-medical model -- do we really want to tout cigarette smoke as a drug? it is, of course, but there are dangerous fda implications to having such conceptualizations go beyond these walls. the pt47368, please. addiction goes in a lot of different ways, and tobacco companies are addicted to money. that is the dependence they have, on money. but there are considerations that must be balanced with obligation to do the right thing by your customers, by the public, to the public, to the human health. and that has to be taken into consideration. here is -- (the video clip was played and taken down to the best of the reporter's ability as follows:) voice: something wonderful happens. when you change to philip morris, you will feel better. voice: did you say i'll feel better smoking philip morris? voice: yes, you will feel better, and here are the reasons why. in case after case, coughs due to smoking disappear. parched throat clears up. that stale smoked out feeling vanishes. voice: that is wonderful. voice: when you change to philip morris, you really taste your cigarette once again. the clear, clean taste of fine mellow tobacco, and your food will taste better too. voice: but why do these wonderful things happen when i change to philip morris? voice: because you will be smoking the one cigarette with a difference in manufacture, an important difference that avoids a common cause of cigarette irritation. day after day, you will be smoking these cigarettes recommended by eminent nose and throat specialists ... (video clip concluded.) mr. schlesinger: something wonderful happens when you smoke philip morris. you get emphysema and buerger's disease and bladder cancer and lung cancer and you die a gruesome death, and illness. the man that we represent grew up in a time where now, voyager was such a romantic thing. a man lighting a cigarette for a woman was a beautiful thing. he was addicted for 30 years or more before anyone even began to put what they call a warning, which was nothing more than the 1966 word: caution, cigarette smoking may be hazardous to your health. and when they pumped it up in the '70s, to some things like it contains carbon monoxide, low birth weight and emphysema and cancer. those are the rotating warnings. they did not even say the tobacco companies say it. they said the surgeon general says it. and i said that -- (the video clip was played and taken down to the best of the reporter's ability as follows:) voice: i would like you to rise, and that will be testifying as well with you to rise. raise your right hand. do you swear that the testimony you are about to give is the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth? voices: i do. voice: please consider yourself to be under oath. voice: let me begin my questioning on the matter of whether or not nicotine is addictive. let me ask you first, and i would like to just go down the row, whether each of you believes that nicotine is not addictive. i heard virtually all of you touch on it. just yes or no. do you believe nicotine is not addictive? voice: i believe nicotine is not addictive, yes. voice: mr. johnson? voice: congressman, cigarettes and nicotine clearly do not meet the classic definitions of addiction. there is no intoxication -- voice: we will take that as a "no." again, time is short. if you could just -- i think each of you believe nicotine is not addictive. we would like to have this for the record. voice: i do not believe that nicotine or our products are addictive. voice: i believe nicotine is not addictive. voice: i believe that nicotine is not addictive. voice: i believe that nicotine is not addictive. voice: and i, too, believe that nicotine is not addictive. (video clip concluded.) mr. schlesinger: that is in april of 1994, a year after -- (the video clip was played and taken down to the best of the reporter's ability as follows:) voice: do you agree with the surgeon general estimate of over 400,000 smokers die -- voice: i do not agree. voice: do you know how many die each year? voice: i do not know. voice: okay. they agree that smoking causes lung cancer. do you agree? voice: it may. voice: do you know whether it does? voice: i do not. voice: the medical experts agree that smoking causes emphysema. do you agree? voice: it may. voice: they agree this smoking causes bladder cancer, stroke, and low birth weight. do you agree? voice: it may. voice: mr. campbell, you were also deposed and you said, quote, "to my knowledge it has not been proven that cigarette smoking causes cancer." this is a rather passive and puzzling approach, especially in light of the consensus, not by some, but all of the scientific community. will you ever be convinced? and what evidence are you waiting for? let us have the microphone passed over. voice: yes, i may be convinced. we do not know what causes cancer in general right now, so i think that we may find out what causes cancer, and we may find out some relationship, which has yet to be proven. (video clip concluded.) mr. schlesinger: character, they say is how you behave when you think nobody is looking. the clerk: you have used all your time, mr. schlesinger. the court: wrap it up, please. mr. schlesinger: yes. i've said and i'll say this book to you again. america is this industry's ashtray. they stub out 400 -- mr. belasic: objection, your honor. the court: sustained, counsel. mr. schlesinger: last thing. they tell you that it is a legal product. and it is a common refrain. and it is a legal product. but it is not legal to sell it to children. it is not legal to sell it to 12-year-olds, 13-year-olds, 14-year-olds, 15-year olds, 16-year-olds, and to hook them when they are most vulnerable, to replace the smokers that are dying off because of their deadly product. all we ask you to do is consider what you have seen, deliver justice, and i wish you good luck at accomplishing that task. and thank you so much.