ms. parker: thank you. may it please the court and reverend smith and mrs. smith and counsel. ladies and gentlemen, good afternoon. i want to start by thanking you-all for your service as jurors here. it is been — this is starting our fourth week together since you-all first came in for jury selection, and nobody has missed a single day. you-all have all been here paying attention, and listening to all the evidence. and we very much appreciate it. it is been such an honor and a privilege to present reynolds' case here, not just on behalf of me, but our whole team, john walker over there and then our other lawyers who are sitting, who are seated over there. so thank you so much for what you-all have done to make our judicial system work. when i get to this part of the case, i always think the same thing. and that is, i wish that this were not a speech. i wish i could have a conversation with you-all. you know, it would be great if we could go in the jury room and, you know, have a cup coffee or a coke or whatever and we could talk, and you could tell me what you had questions about and i could tell you what i thought was important. but that is not how this works. so i worked really hard over the weekend to pull everything together from my presentation to you. and i hope that i cover everything that you have been thinking about and hit on -- i hope that i will hit on all the evidence that we have here. so thank you again very much for your attention. i want to start by talking about two really very, very fundamental principles here that are really important. one is mrs. smith has had a fair trial. you know, she is been represented by a great team of lawyers. she is got six or seven lawyers representing her. she is put on, i think the count is 10 witnesses and she is had all this time to be able to have the opportunity to come to court and present her case. and that is what justice is about. justice is about the ability to come to court and to present your case in front of a group just like yourselves. and she has had that. but she still has to prove her case. she has to meet her burden of proof. she has to prove her case. and the problem that she has is there is some hard facts here that she just cannot get around. for example, reverend smith successfully quit smoking either or 20 or 30 years ago, depending on when he quit. he has not had a relapse. he has not smoked since. he said he put them down. he said he had no withdrawal symptoms. he successfully quit. he is not like these other people that you keep hearing mr. diaz talk about. and the other hard fact here is that cancer back in 1992 -- and that is the only question on the verdict form, it only goes to this one cancer. it does not have anything to do with the other ones. it is cured. everybody in this case agreed, it was cured 20 years ago. and that is the cancer we are here about. we are not here about his current medical condition and whether he can currently, you know, go for a walk or whatever. we are about this cancer. and he is cured of it. i want to pull up lady justice and talk with you for a minute about this. you-all have probably seen this before. this is the scales of justice. well, i want you to look rather carefully. lady justice has a blindfold on. the reason why lady justice has a blindfold on is because -- you are lady justice. that is you. that is your role now. you are only supposed to decide the case, and you will only decide the case based on the evidence, based on what are actually on the scales based on the facts. she wears a blindfold because it does not matter if you are out of town. it does not matter if you are a man or if you are a woman. it does not matter what personal feelings that you may have about the case. it does not matter what color you are. none of that matters. the only thing that matters in this case is what the facts are. and so i'd just like to ask respectfully, as you go forward in this role, in this very sacred role that you have, look at it with this same blindfold that she has on. look at it according to what the facts are. and if you do that, i think you are going to agree at the end of the case that the facts just do not support a verdict in favor of mrs. smith. now, do you remember, jury selection, remember, it went on for several days, and you-all came in different groups and we went through all this questioning and all. and you are the ones that we all agreed upon. you are the ones that we all said, you know, you are the ones who can be fair jurors. so all we ask is that you follow those commitments that you made during jury selection. okay? so let me start now and go over what the evidence was in the case. and we have been here a long time, but i spent time over the weekend trying to boil everything down. and i think there are eight very simple truths in this case for you to evaluate all the evidence. and when you evaluate those eight simple truths, you are going to see that the verdict in this case should be for reynolds. the first one of those truths is this case is only about one smoker. it is only about reverend smith. the verdict form asks very specific questions, and these questions are only about him. you know, it seems like from the evidence that we have heard that reverend smith is a fine gentleman. but that does not mean that you get money damages. you still have to prove your case. and here, the only issue that you are going to be asked to decide on the verdict form relates to reverend smith. you are not here to decide whether or not cigarettes should be banned. you are not here to decide to cast a vote on whether you think cigarettes should be legal. you are not here to decide whether we should go out of business. you are not here to decide any of those questions, because our society — we leave all that up to our society. and our society has already decided all of that. our society has seen all those documents. they know all that information. they know all about the number of people who pass away every year from smoking. and our society has made that decision that cigarettes should be legal. those are not issues you are going to have to decide here. you will only have to answer those very, very specific questions on the verdict form about reverend smith. now, there are some people out there, there are some smokers out there who would have no problem at all coming into court and proving that they had lung cancer caused by smoking. but that is not reverend smith. you know, there are people out there who have only had one cancer, and that was in their lung. there are people who have the test to be able to prove their case. there are people who have not had these other exposures that reverend smith has had. they have had --there are people who have had the biopsies and all and come to court and bring all of that. but that is just not reverend smith. even though we have had this three weeks of trial, there are still very, very substantial questions out there about his cancer. he had four cancers. and everybody, plaintiffs all agree, three of them were not caused by smoking. okay. that is a stipulation that judge fishel read to you, and it was in the instructions from the court. three of them they are not even claiming are caused by smoking. well, something caused that. something caused those other cancers. it was genetics or it was his exposure to pesticides or it was his exposure to chemicals at work, or it was something. okay? and now they are trying to act like you should look at this 1992 cancer just in a vacuum and forget all of that. but that is not right. that is not -- that is not reverend smith. and this case is about reverend smith. and then there are smokers who can come to court, and they can easily prove that they were addicted, and that that is what caused their cancer. there are people who have not been able to quit. there are people who have tried all sorts of things, you know, gone to the doctor and tried the gum and tried the patch and tried chantix and they cannot quit. or there are people who quit and then they relapse. and then they quit and they relapse again. there are people who really want to quit, but they just cannot. that is not reverend smith. and this case only asks about reverend smith. you know, he kept talking about dr. burns. okay. dr. burns said three percent -- remember that? three percent of people, only three percent of people are able to successfully quit. reverend smith was one of those three percent. dr. burns said that when i cross-examined him. reverend smith is one of those people who was able to quit successfully, put them down and never go back to them and never have any problems with that. and there are some people out there who really do not know or did not know growing up about the health risk of smoking. or people who did not go to school in florida, who went to school in some other state that did not have a law that required the health risk of smoking to be taught, or who did not travel around and just stayed in their little place out in the country their whole lives. but that is not reverend smith. reverend smith in his deposition we played, he was 78 years old when we took that deposition. it was taken two years ago back at a time before he had a guardian and back when he did not have the memory problems like he does today. reverend smith told it in such vivid detail, it is a life lesson he took with him from when he was a child all the way up to when he was 78 years old, when he told all of us that his parents told him that smoking was dangerous. and he remembers that today. he remembers that he hid behind the barn because he did not want his mom to find out. that is how we learn life lessons. that is -- we learn them from our parents, but for some of us, our grandparents. and everything else he learned about then just built on that knowledge that he had as a child growing up with a family that was telling him that smoking was dangerous. and he remembered that. and, remember, reverend smith spent about eight years out of jackson county when he was in the army. he traveled. he went to georgia, he went to alaska, he went to guam. he went to junior college. he went to junior college first here in jackson county, and then he went to junior college in tallahassee later on. this is a man who -- he told us -- he told us that he watched the cbs evening news. he told us that he read the local newspaper here. so this general -- these general statements about people who do not know and some smokers do not know, that just does not apply to reverend smith. this case is only about reverend smith. now, you may not agree with smoking, and you may wish that smoking was banned and that you never hear anything else about it. but, again, that is just not the questions on the verdict form. but what was the plaintiff's case about? the plaintiff's case was not about reverend smith. they brought you witness after witness after witness who did not know about reverend smith. let me start with dr. proctor. remember him? dr. proctor is from san francisco. he is the gentleman who has testified over 25 times. he goes around testifying. he has this set of documents, he pulls out these little snippets on these documents, and he has a power point slide, and he goes from trial to trial and he shows them. and dr. proctor is the one -- he is the one who have has been paid over a million dollars to do all that. and he bragged -- he bragged about not knowing anything about reverend smith or about marianna. he had not done anything here. remember, he said this is the first time he had been, when he came to court to testify. he had not even looked at the local newspaper. he did not know anything about reverend smith. and this case is about reverend smith. he said you should rely on the new york times. remember that? does anybody here really believe that reverend smith read the new york times ? and then dr. burns. dr. burns is another person who goes around from place to place and testifies, one place to another. you heard him saying this is his sixth -- sixth -- trial just this year where he is testified. he made $48,000 in about a 10-day period when he was -- ended up here in marianna. and you know what he said? he had not even examined reverend smith. reverend smith is here. he is available. he had not examined him. he had not talked to him. he had not talked to mrs. smith. and yet he is the person they are bringing to court to talk about whether he was addicted and what caused his cancer. again, this case is not in general about whether smoking could cause lung cancer. it can in some people. the issue is reverend smith. and he did not know anything about reverend smith other than what he had read. and remember, he is testified over a hundred times, and every single time he has found the person to be addicted. we already talked about the three percent number he said. but he also said he had a test to determine whether somebody is addicted. this is what he said. he said, a nonaddicted smoker can put cigarettes down and walk away. that is definition of not being addicted. that is reverend smith. under dr. burns' own definition, that is reverend smith. he put his cigarettes down and he walked away. so that is the first truth in this case. you are only going to be asked to decide questions about reverend smith. and this is the second truth, is that reverend smith knew the risk from a young age. you know, it sounded like from the evidence we heard that reverend smith led a pretty extraordinary life, did not he? you know, he was a leader in the army. he led nine people. he was a supervisor at florida state. he had a great job there and worked there 30 years. he was very dedicated to the church. he was dedicated to his preaching. he was a good athlete. remember, he talked about all the different sports he played. he was intelligent. he went to junior college. and remember what he said? he said i was young and crazy. that is what he said. he said he was young and crazy when i got married in the army. and then he called himself the lone ranger. remember that? he said i'm a lone ranger now, because he is the only one left. all his brothers and sisters have passed away. but what they are trying to do to get money damages here is to reinvent him and to make him something that he is not. he is an intelligent man. he is a man who learned about the dangers of smoking from his parents. he told us that. how can anybody dispute that? that was from him. he told us that very vivid story. and everything else he learned in his life built on that. i want to go over what the evidence has been on that issue. he started -- let us see. if we could pull that up about his parents. i already talked about that. and remember, he hid the smoking from his parents. again, that showed he knew that it was bad for him. he should not do it. and then he told us where he went to school. remember, he filled out those questions that we showed to you and then he testified? he told us where he went to school. and we know what the law in florida was then -- we showed you that -- that every school, every school during that period of time required the risk of smoking to be taught as part of the health class. there is absolutely no evidence that that did not apply to him. and then he said -- remember this? remember his testimony about his first cigarette? remember what he said? he said it made me drunk as whiskey. remember that? he said, it gave me the worst headache i had ever had. he remembers all that today -- or two years ago when we took his deposition at age 78. he knew from his first cigarette his body was telling him, you know what? this is not good for you. and then you heard him saying -- we all heard him say on his video he did not smoke while he was playing, when was growing up and playing on the cottondale community baseball team. he said that smoking was not allowed on his high school campus at gilmore academy. that is not somewhere he worked. mr. diaz said he worked there. that is not where he worked. that is where he went to high school after the army. remember, he went to 11th grade and then he left and went into the army, and then he came back to get his high school diploma. he said he did not smoke -- and again, this is his words. this is what he said. he said he did not smoke at the jackson junior college campus, because it was on the same campus as the high school, and he did not want to smoke -- or they were not supposed to smoke around the high schoolers. that is what he said. he said that when he was working as a house parent at a boys school, he was not allowed to smoke around the boys, because the boys were not allowed to smoke. again, that is more information building on what he knew growing up in cottondale with his parents. we know, because he told us, he did not smoke in the home of mary speights. remember, she is the lady who was the mother of five of his nine children. he said he did not smoke in her home. and then when he was working at florida state hospital, he told us that he could not smoke around the patients unless they were outside; that he had to go smoke in a particular place; he could not smoke in their residence halls. and then he said he never smoked in church. you remember that question? there was a question that was asked of him by the lawyer. the lawyer said: well, did you smoke in church? and he said: i do not think i heard you right. that was such a crazy idea to him to think that somebody would smoke in church, he said, i do not think i heard that right. he said, no, he did not smoke in church. he was surprised anybody would ask such a thing. and then you heard him say that when he was called into the ministry, he did not smoke because he thought it was displeasing to god. and that is a word he used. he told us that. he told us that he was an ame pastor. that information comes from him. and we know that the ame church sent out church magazines to its pastors. now, do we know for sure that reverend smith actually got a particular issue? no. but we know that he received those. and we showed you a lot of different articles in there about the dangers of smoking. and then this is some of the most important evidence that shows about his awareness and that he used to preach about. i mean, can you imagine? he preached in his sermons. he told us that. that is information we got from him. here is what he said. he said, when i was preaching, i used to talk about it, how they are dangerous and hazardous to your health. and by the way, i could not hear everything mr. diaz said, but i think mr. diaz said that he had to quit preaching because he had a lung taken out. well, that is not right. reverend smith, the evidence is reverend smith kept on preaching until a few years ago when it was the time for mandatory retirement. and then reverend smith told us that he had a cough. he told us that he had a cough -- which is really a smoker's cough -- he told us that was a problem for him when he was preaching. and mrs. smith also told us, when i asked her questions, that he had a cough. now remember, reverend smith said that one of his doctors told him he should quit smoking. remember he was kind of mimicking the doctor. he said -- he was mimicking the doctor -- i will not ever do this the way he did it, but remember he said, you still smoking? and then he said the doctor said, you got to stop completely. remember that? that is the information he told us about his life, that a doctor told him. again, just building, building, building, building on this awareness that he had at a fundamental level as a child growing up in cottondale. and then remember, he told us, again, he told us that when he worked at florida state hospital, he got to run up and down the stairs, and that he would get out of breath when was doing that sometimes, and he thought that him getting out of breath up and down the stairs, that that was caused by his smoking. then reverend smith was exposed to the warning labels on the packages starting in 1966, on every package he smoked from 1966 forward. then remember reverend smith said he remembered that song, smoke, smoke, smoke that cigarette? he is the one who told us. he got that song out of the blue. we asked him in his deposition: do you remember any songs? and he said he remembered that song. that is why we brought it to you. that is the song that talks about dying from smoking. and remember he told us -- we showed you where he filled out those questions that he was asked in the litigation? he also told us in his deposition that he read jet and he read ebony. and we showed you the kind of articles that are in those magazines with the health risk of smoking. and then he told us that he subscribed to the jackson county -- you know, i keep hearing it pronounced both ways. it is either the floridian or the floridan. but whatever it is, he told us that he subscribed to it. he got a subscription to it, the same newspaper that everybody else in the jackson county was reading. and then he told us he watched the cbs news. he told us that he liked walter cronkite. again, that is the same cbs news, whether it was playing in the dirt road in cottondale or whether it was playing in new york city. it is the same information from walter cronkite there on the cbs news . and then remember, he worked for 30 years in health care. he started out as an aide, and then he became a supervisor working with the patients at florida state hospital. that was his job. the plaintiff here, all that builds up to tell you all the evidence we have about what reverend smith knew, starting as a child, about the health risk of smoking. but the plaintiffs want to have it both ways. okay? they want to say, oh, he did not know anything about the dangers of smoking because he lived in a rural community. he lived down the dirt road and, you know, he did not know anything about it. but at the same time, they want to say oh, but he saw all these ads. okay. those ads are in that same jet and ebony. those ads are in the same newspapers that had the articles about the health risk of smoking you cannot have it both ways. you cannot say he only saw the ads and forget about the rest of this . what did reverend smith say? reverend smith said, i did not think it would happen to me. that is what he told us. he said, i did not think it would happen to me. just think how many people think that same thing. it is not that they do not know. they know but they just do not think it would happen to them and you have got to think, there is absolutely no evidence here that reverend smith was going around telling anybody that he did not know that cigarettes were dangerous. there is no evidence here that he was waiting to hear what a cigarette company said or that he, when his doctor told him to quit, he said, no, no, they are not bad for me. or all these places that had restrictions on his smoking? he did not disagree with any of that. there is absolutely not a shred of evidence that he was not aware personally in his own life about the health risks of smoking. so what does all this mean, all this chart, all this information? what does all of it mean? well, it means that he did not smoke because somebody failed to tell him something. you know, it is like we talked about in jury selection. i asked everybody the same question: how did you start smoking? or how did you decide you were not going to smoke? and everybody said, you know, you come to this kind of fork in the road. some people smoke and some people do not. reverend smith decided to smoke. but it was not because he did not know that it was bad for him. in fact, the evidence is just the opposite. when he started -- when he came to that fork in the road and he had his first cigarette, he hid it behind the barn because he knew it was bad, because that was his life lesson that he learned from his mother and father. it also shows that reverend smith was a willing smoker and that the plaintiff cannot prove legal cause. i will talk about that in more detail later. that is something they are required to prove here. and it also shows that reverend smith should have full responsibility for the choices that he made in his life. now, mr. diaz has made it sound like that there was a big dividing line in the world when the cigarette labels came on, and that until those warning labels came on, nobody knew anything and everybody was waiting to find out about those warning labels. well, that is just not the case for reverend smith. i mean, we already know from his own life way before 1966, he knew personally that cigarettes were bad for him. but then let us look at what other people were saying. the evidence was, even back in the fifties when reverend smith first had his first regular, like ready-made cigarette from reynolds, all these different organizations said that the risks were already known. it was not reynolds out there, we were not out there by ourselves saying that. all these other organizations said the same thing. and you have got to remember and judge reynolds from the period back then, not what we know today. but back then, there were no warnings on any consumer products like today. cigarette labels were the very first ones. and remember that chart that mr. diaz showed you twice in his closing with the two lines going up, you know, the two lines about cigarette consumption and number of deaths? that is not reverend smith. he is not a point on a line like that. you cannot -- you should not decide this case based on some statistics like that. you need to look at him and his life. and the questions on the verdict form only ask about him. mr. diaz has made it sound like, well, he was waiting to find out more information. i'm sorry. let me move. pardon me. he was waiting to find out more information. he did not know everything that is known today. well, let me give you an example and ask you to think about this. today, we all know, everybody knows that if you have a glass of wine or have a beer or have a mixed drink, that it can cause you to get drunk. right? and if you drink too much, it can cause you to have cirrhosis of the liver. and if you drink too much and you drive, you could have a tragic accident. is there a person in the world who says --something like that has happened -- you know what, i was waiting to find out what chemicals were in that beer? i did not know what chemicals were in that beer. so therefore, i'm not responsible for what i just did. that is crazy. nobody -- you do not need to know the chemicals in smoke. you do not need to know details about technically how cigarettes are made. all you need to know is what reverend smith knew from when he was a child. and that is, cigarettes are bad for your health and they are dangerous. he knew that. the same thing, again, the same thing with alcohol today. you do not -- we do not know that information about alcohol. but everybody knows it is bad for you and nobody would ever say, well, i should not be held responsible because i did not know, you know, however many chemicals are in beer. that just does not make sense. and then -- and we talked about this some at jury selection. even today there are no warning labels on mcdonald's or burger king. but does that mean we do not know that eating a high fat diet may be bad for us? no. education and knowledge about health risks does not mean that we make the best choices for our health. every day people make decisions to take risks with their health for reasons like pleasure or relaxation or because that is just their choice that they want to do. and remember what mrs. smith testified? she said that reverend smith just was not going to quit until he was ready to quit. that is what she said. he was not going to quit until he was ready to quit. and an earlier warning would not have made a bit of difference to him. the 1966 warning came out. he did not go out and try to quit smoking as a result. the 1969 warning came out. he did not run out and try to quit smoking as a result. when the warnings went on the advertisements in 1972, he did not run out and try to quit smoking as a result. and when the warnings changed again in 1985, he did not go out and try to quit smoking. four times we have had warnings in his life and it did not affect him at all, because he already knew. there was nothing in those warnings that he did not already know. so why would you think that if we had put a warning on earlier it would have made a difference to him? there is just no evidence of that in this case. and remember, reverend smith by his own testimony -- you-all heard him saying he tried that first roll-your-own cigarettes at age 13. that is what he told us, so we can rely on that. that was years before that mouse skin painting study ever came out. that mouse skin painting study and anything that had to do with it, that did not have anything to do with reverend smith. he had already started smoking roll-your-owns, and he had already switched over to ready-made cigarettes too. remember, mrs. smith said she did not know if there was anything that anybody could have done to have gotten him to quit any sooner than when he did quit. which brings us to truth no. 3. and that is that reverend smith quit smoking with no problems. now, i'm going to pull up the first -- this relates to the first question on the verdict form. if we could just pull that out. i know that is teeny tiny print here. but this relates, this addiction issue relates to the first question. so what does it mean? what does that mean? what it means is, did nicotine addiction control reverend smith's life? did it leave him no choice -- if we could pull that up, please. did it leave him no choice, no matter how hard he tried but to continue smoking? or did he have the ability to quit but he just chose to continue smoking? remember, this is not our burden of proof. reynolds has no burden of proof on these issues relating to addiction. none. it can be hard for some people to quit, but between 50 and 60 million people in the united states have quit smoking. here, the 55 million. all of those people have those same nicotine receptors that you heard about at trial, just like people have coffee receptors or sugar receptors as well. fifty-five million people have quit smoking. this case, though, is not about the general issue about whether cigarettes can be addictive, because they can be. it is only about reverend smith and the facts around reverend smith's smoking. and remember, you heard at trial, it is an individual-by-individual issue. some people may smoke, and under their circumstances they may be addicted. somebody else, under their circumstances, may not be. so you need to look at the specific facts of reverend smith. and reverend smith just does not fit the profile that you heard about, even from the plaintiff's own experts, about somebody who is addicted. he is not somebody who hated smoking. you heard him testify. it is videotaped, and then the part that we read that was not videotaped that we had the two lawyers read. he never said he hated smoking. he said he enjoyed it. he said he liked the taste of tobacco. he is not somebody who has sincerely tried a lot of different things to quit, but he could not. that just does not describe him. he is not somebody who was an addict. he is not somebody who lost all of his free will to quit. he is not somebody tormented by his smoking. you never heard any evidence about that. he was not a robot controlled by nicotine. now, some people cannot quit. some people find it very difficult to quit. but that is not reverend smith. the best evidence in this case about reverend smith's situation is the fact that he did quit smoking with no difficulty, and he stayed quit for 20 to 30 years. nobody, not a single witness disputed that he quit smoking. no one. now, remember, we heard from reverend smith on his own video. who could ever forget that? he in his own words told us that he was -- that god came to him and called him to preach. and you-all heard him say when god came to him, he prayed for help, and that that is when he quit smoking. he had this very vivid recollection that he told us about. you-all all heard it, heard it from him in his video. and that was 30 years ago. but yet now mrs. smith said -- you heard her say on friday that he did not quit smoking until after they found his lung cancer. well, what do those medical records say? there are actually nine medical records that are in evidence here that i want to bring to your attention. here is one of them in his own handwriting where he says he quit in the late eighties. here is another record he quit in 1991. there is another one, he quit in 1990. another one, 1991, 1987, 1990, 1990. it is nine records there. this is one, 1991. nine records before there was any lawsuit where either he said himself or his doctors or nurses put in their records that he had quit smoking before he was ever diagnosed with cancer in 1992. and you heard reverend smith say -- again, without any prompting -- i mean, it was not even somebody asking him a question that said, did you have withdrawal? he said the word himself on the video. he said, i had no withdrawal. he said it twice. he said, i had no withdrawal, no nothing. he said, i lost the taste for cigarettes. he said, i never had a taste for cigarettes again. he said he put them down. he said he did not have trouble sleeping. he said he did not feel anxious or worried or depressed. he said he did not have any problems carrying on the normal functions of his life. you know, some smokers cannot do that. some smokers make up their mind that they want to quit. they have their willpower. and then he had the faith in his prayer, and he put them down without any problems. and he is never relapsed. he is never fallen off the wagon like an alcoholic. you know, that is what you heard dr. burns talk about. that is not him. he stayed quit. and he was always able to control where he smoked. there is no evidence in this case that he was smoking somewhere he should not or he could not obey the rules at work because he was addicted. he did not smoke in church and he did not smoke at work except in the places where it was approved. he could control it. and then what did reverend smith say, again, from him? from him? what did reverend smith say about his efforts to quit before that time when he finally did quit? he said -- you-all heard him on the video -- he said it was half-hearted. he said i did not give it my best shot. he did not throw away his cigarettes. he did not throw out his ashtrays. he told us it was only half-hearted, and i did not give it my best shot. he stopped on a dime with no problems, no symptoms. he just stopped. what is important is you have to make the decision for yourself. you have to decide you want to quit. and until reverend smith made that decision for himself, that he really did want to quit, he did not. and once he did make that decision, he quit. he put them down with no problems. even mrs. smith said that. mrs. smith said -- remember, she was a smoker, and she quit. she did not quit smoking until several years after he had the surgery in 1992. but even mrs. smith said, each individual has to make the decision for themselves. and then reverend smith said, no one held a gun to my head. nobody forced him to smoke. he said that. that is how he viewed his own smoking. that is not how somebody later on who is trying to get money damages describes it. that is what he said. he said nobody forced me to smoke. nobody held a gun to my head. when i tried to quit previously, it was only half-hearted. and you heard at trial about some chemicals -- pardon me -- in the brain. remember that? here is what the evidence showed about that. nicotine does not take over your brain. nicotine does not prevent smokers from understanding the risk of smoking. nicotine does not prevent smokers from quitting. and then what did reverend smith say? well -- about his own addiction? now, this is curious. when we took his deposition two years ago when he was 78 years old, before he had a guardian, he was asked that question: do you consider yourself addicted? do you feel like you are addicted? and he said no. and then we also read to you his sworn testimony from november of last year, that is part of what the two lawyers read. november of last year. again, before he had a guardian. and he was asked that same question: were you addicted? he said, no. he said, i thought it was a habit. that is what the evidence is here. but what did he say in trial? do you-all remember this? the day he testified? it was a week ago this past friday. now, remember, mr. diaz called him, and he got on the stand, he was asked some questions. and he did not ask him about addiction. and then i stood up and i said to the court, i said, i have no questions. i'm going to wait and present his testimony in my case. remember that? and what did he do? mr. diaz told him to turn around and get back on the stand. remember that? told him to turn around and get back on the stand. reverend smith had gotten about right here. and when he got back on the stand, he said, sir, were you addicted? he said, oh, yes, i was. so i just ask when you consider that, that mr. diaz has asked you to consider this afternoon, put it in context with what he said under oath two years ago and what he said under oath back in november when he said it was a habit, which is how he viewed himself. that is the truth. that is how he viewed his smoking. he viewed it as a habit, not as addiction. and then dr. burns' test. again, a nonaddicted smoker can -- pardon me -- can put them down and walk away. that is the definition of not being addicted. that is reverend smith to a tee. he fits that tee from dr. burns. and then dr. burns said, only three percent of people are able to successfully quit and stay off cigarettes. he also agreed reverend smith is one of those three percent. and then we brought you dr. watson. and dr. watson -- mr. diaz said today that he had only had experience for two months in a smoking cessation clinic. that is not right. you-all heard him saying he is evaluated thousands of patients for their smoking, just like he did with reverend smith. he came here to marianna and he met with reverend smith for two and a half hours, and as a doctor, applied the medical test to determine that he was not addicted. again, we do not have -- reynolds does not have any burden of proof on this issue relating to addiction. none. that brings us up to the next truth about this case. and that is that mrs. smith cannot establish legal cause. every one of the plaintiff's claims in this case, every one of them requires legal cause. and when mr. diaz had the verdict form and was checking off his answers here and putting it on the little machine, he skipped right over legal cause in every one of the questions. but that is a requirement that the plaintiff has to prove. every one of these. this is not no-fault. this is not no-fault. reynolds cannot be held liable simply because we manufacture cigarettes. the plaintiff has more that she has to prove. and those are the questions on the verdict form and the instructions that you got from the court. remember the example that dr. watson gave? it really describes legal cause, so let me tell it to you again. so when you are thinking about legal cause in your deliberations, remember this example from dr. watson. he said it is like a train going down the railroad track. but the way that the plaintiff has made it sound is if you start smoking and you are that train going down the railroad tracks, they make it sound like it is a scary movie and they lock it into place, you know, the train, it just has to keep on going. that is not right. you are the train, if you are the smoker. you are the conductor. you are the one who decides when to stop it, when to get off. that is up to you. that is legal cause. legal cause is just like that train, it is up to the person. it is up to the person to make those decisions and those choices to do whatever it takes to stop. and for reverend smith, that was for him to pray and have the willpower just to put them down. reverend smith is the one. his actions are the ones who are the legal cause here, because he knew smoking was dangerous. he did. he knew that from a child, but he continued to smoke. he had the ability to quit earlier. there is no reason why he could not have quit earlier. and he had the ability to quit at a time that would have prevented him from getting any kind of disease down the road. so the legal cause here is his own actions. now, i want to move now to the next -- this is no. 5, and that is the medical case. and, of course, it is always unfortunate when someone has had cancer. of course. and we are very sorry that reverend smith has been ill. but at the beginning of this case we asked all of you these questions, and you have heard the instructions from the court. you cannot make up your mind here based on sympathy. we have to get beyond that and make up your decision based purely on the facts here. it is not enough for mrs. smith to say he smoked and he got cancer in his lung. because that is their case. that is not enough. they have to prove that there was a connection. they have to prove that the smoking caused his cancer back in 1992. and some of you may be thinking, well, you know, he smoked for a long period of time, and they found cancer in his lungs. surely, that must have been it. but that is just not the facts here. there is more evidence here. they did not bring you the proof. and i want to go over that with you. and again, we have no burden of proof here. mr. diaz said two or three times, well, i did not bring a witness. i do not have to bring a witness. i have no burden of proof. none. and i asked you-all in jury selection, some of my questioning had to do with doctors who they called in their case, and with the exceptions of dr. chin -- you know, dr. chintandilok -- that evidence came in in their case. remember, he had four cancers. 1992, 1994, 2003, and 2012. now i want to talk for a minute about that 2012. you know, he has not had a biopsy. we do not know for sure that it is cancer. would not it be a blessing if it were just an infection or an inflammatory process, like his own doctor said here that they could not rule out? we do not know that because they have not done that testing. they are only seeking damages here, and the only question on the verdict form is for the 1992 cancer. and that is the one that was cured. you should not ignore the fact that he had these four episodes of cancer. you should not just look at this one by itself. you would not be looking at the whole picture. you should not ignore the fact that he had a family history and that he had cancer and that he had all these other exposures. and what they are really doing is relying on statistics. and that is what dr. schwarting said. dr. schwarting said 90 something percent. he thought ninety percent of people who had this type of cancer was caused by smoking. okay? well, what else did he say? dr. schwarting even agreed, statistics cannot prove cause in an individual. okay? that is what they have not brought you. they have only brought you statistics. but statistics cannot prove a particular individual. otherwise, statistically, reverend smith would be in that 97 percent of people dr. burns talked about who could not quit. instead, he is in the three percent. so you cannot use statistics. and if you want to talk about statistics, here is the statistic that trumps them all. and that is every witness in this case agreed, no one disagreed, no one disagreed, that the majority of cancers that are found in the lung started somewhere else and spread to the lung. so if you are looking at statistics, statistically, this cancer did not start in his lung. and you heard the evidence at trial. and that is because the way that cancers spread -- and remember, there was a question of dr. burns, too, about this. cancer breaks off and gets in the bloodstream, and all the blood goes to the lung because it has to get oxygen. and dr. burns also said, well, sometimes it can metastasize or spread through the lymph system. but he said, even then the lymph system dumps into the bloodstream and goes to the lung. and that is why, see, everybody agrees here -- most cancers that are found in the lung started somewhere else and spread there. so if they want to base their case on statistics, that is the statistic that means that we win. but what is missing in mrs. smith's case? i want to go through this. these are all the different things that she has failed to prove with respect to this medical case. there was no investigation of other possible causes. i asked witness after witness, were you asked to investigate the causes? no. and then having four cancers is rare. dr. chin said that he had seen a hundred or so cancer patients, and he had only seen two or three that had multiple cancers like reverend smith. what is behind those other cancers? something was causing those other cancers. they had no genetic testing here. they did no testing of his exposure to farm chemicals or pesticides. they did no testing of his workplace exposures, like cancer-causing wood dust he was exposed to. they have no pathology tissue from 2012. they have no pathology tissue from 2003. they have no pathology tissue from 1994. they did not bring you any of that. they did not bring you any of that to court. and there was none. they did not take any from 2012 or 2003. and then for the 1992 cancer, they did not bring the pathology. it is over in tallahassee memorial hospital, according to the medical records. they only brought you the photographs of some dots. remember, dr. schwarting said these are only little dots. they did not bring you the pathology. and they did no comparison of the pathology tissue for these different cancers. they did not compare them and say, are these similar or are these different? they did not do that. they had no biopsy here, which is what dr. chin recommended. that is what reverend smith's doctor recommended. and it is absolutely up to mrs. smith to decide whether to do that or not. we are not second-guessing her and we are not criticizing her for that. but that does not mean that she does not have to prove her case. his own doctor said, i recommend this biopsy do you think his own doctor would recommend something he should not have? he had no pet scan. a pet scan is something that is not invasive. dr. chin recommended it. they did not have it. dr. chin recommended that they have a consultation with an oncologist, who is a cancer doctor. they did not do that. dr. chin recommended that he go back and consult with dr. tan, who was his doctor for his prostate cancer. they did not do that. he also recommended that they get new psa testing to see where reverend smith's psa level i currently. that is a blood test. they did not do that. they did not bring you the local pathologist here, the one who signed the pathology reports. and his treating doctors here in marianna told us that they did not have the complete picture. they said they did not know about his family history of cancer. they said they did not know about his exposure to farm chemicals. they said they did not know about his workplace exposures. they said all of that. they said, we do not know this. we have not been asked to investigate what caused his cancer. no one ran any test on any of the pathology. and his treating doctors now -- you heard it from his radiologist, his prostate cancer doctor, and dr. chin -- all of them said they could not rule out that what reverend smith has right now in 2012 in his lung is not something that is a noncancer. they said, we do not have a biopsy. we cannot rule it out. dr. clark said -- remember, he is the radiologist -- he said he did not have an opinion on the 2012 issue because there was no pathology. dr. chin said he thought it was a metastasis from his prostate to his lung, but he said he did not have the pathology. dr. tan said the same thing. he thought it was a metastasis to the lung, but he said, i do not have an opinion on where the 2012 cancer originated, because i do not have the pathology. then they brought you dr. price. dr. price is the surgeon. and that is one of the ones that they read, a deposition that they read. and dr. proctor said he did not remember reverend smith. he said, i do not remember him. i do not remember treating him. i do not remember anything about him. and then dr. schwarting admitted that he had not considered the other three cancers. dr. schwarting did not examine reverend smith. dr. burns did not examine reverend smith. dr. burns did not look at the pathology. none of it. dr. burns did not review the radiology. none of it. so, ladies and gentlemen, that is 28 items of things that they did not do here. and that is not enough when they have the burden of proof in this case. and they are asking for money. they are asking for money damages. and then what did reverend smith's own doctor here say? and this is the testimony that we read -- it was not on videotape -- that we read on friday. his own doctor said about his 1992 cancer, that in his opinion, as to whether this was caused by smoking or not, he said he could only say maybe. maybe is not enough. maybe is not enough under the standard. so what does all this mean? what all this means is that mrs. smith cannot meet her burden of proof to prove to you that the cancer in 1992 started in his lung instead of spreading there from somewhere else. he is had three other cancers that are not caused by smoking. there is one more issue about the medical case i want to talk about, and that is a statute of limitations that you heard mr. diaz mention. you heard from the judge. the critical date there is may 5th of 1990. and that is going to be in the question on the verdict form. if we could pull that up. it is going to say, may 5th, 1990. mr. diaz made it sound like that, well, reverend smith did not know in 1990 he had cancer. that is not the issue. that is not the question that you are going to be asked. the question you are going to be asked is, did he know or by the exercise of due diligence should he have known before may 5th, 1990, that he had been injured and that there was a reasonable possibility that it was caused by smoking cigarettes? well, let us go over what reverend smith knew prior to may 5th, 1990. what is the evidence there? he said he had a cough. mrs. smith described it as a hacky cough. he said he had that cough while he was preaching. you heard him say, i had that cough, and it was bothering me with my preaching. he said -- he said he knew. he thought his cough was caused by his smoking. we heard that from him. that is not anybody asking you to guess or asking you to speculate. he said he knew his cough was caused by smoking. and then he talked about having shortness of breath at work. remember, running up and down the steps? he said, i had shortness of breath at work when i was working at florida state hospital, and i knew that that meant that i should stop smoking. he also said he had -- he said, when you preach, you need all the air and energy you can get. that is the way he put it. he said, you need all the air and energy you can get. and he said he had trouble preaching because he did not have all the air and energy he needed. he said he thought that was caused by smoking. and then what did dr. schwarting say about his 1992 cancer? he said it was huge. that is what dr. schwarting said. he said it was huge. and he said, because it was so big, he thought it had been there at least two years earlier. which gets us back to 1990. so why is it that the court puts this question on the verdict form? why is that fair? because when you are sued like reynolds is sued here, you need -- you need for that lawsuit to be brought within the deadline that is established by law so that you can get medical records and witnesses and all of that, so all that is fresh and people can remember what happened. that is why the law sets this deadline. just like you have a deadline to file your taxes or a deadline to do this. the law establishes deadlines. and the law established a deadline here. and the evidence is that reverend smith knew he was having -- that he had these injuries. he knew he had a cough. he knew he had shortness of breath. so i'm going to move now to the next topic, which is truth no. 6. and that is, reverend smith chose to smoke. he said, nobody forced me to smoke. nobody held a gun to my head. now, the choices he made in his own life about smoking may not have been the choices you would have made in your life. that is -- our society allows every adult to make that choice for themselves. and reverend smith chose that he was going to smoke. you heard at trial this freedom of choice is a bedrock part of our american values. and that is why our society has said cigarettes are a legal product. so why did reverend smith choose to smoke? remember his testimony? we heard him say, he said -- remember? he was leaning back in his chair and he said, i wanted to be grown. remember that? that is what he said. i wanted to be grown. his older brother smoked. he said he enjoyed smoking. he said he liked the taste of tobacco. when somebody asks him a question about whether or not he is -- about some of the cigarettes he smoked, he said, about the taste, he said, is not that the purpose of smoking? he said that smoking settled his stomach at work. remember, he talked about all those bad things that he saw at florida state hospital. it was his way to deal with stress. and that testimony he gave -- i want you-all to go back and think real hard about this. check your notes about it. because what he said about the craving, he only said that he had a craving for a cigarette when he needed to settle his stomach at florida state hospital because of some of the things he saw there. he did not think he woke in the middle of the night and craved a cigarette. he did not say anything like that. he only said that when he was under this very stressful job dealing with dangerous patients at the hospital, that is when he said he would crave a cigarette to settle his stomach. even dr. burns, their witness, agreed the smoker had control of his own behavior. addiction is not an excuse for not quitting, and addiction does not relieve smokers of responsibility. and it is reynolds' position that when a person could quit, like reverend smith, but he just chose not to, he is a hundred percent responsible for his actions. that brings us to truth no. 7. and that is there is no reliance here. and that is a question on your verdict form. mr. diaz showed you all these documents during the trial, and you saw documents here. but the question is, what does any of this have to do with reverend smith? and i want to suggest to you that the motive may be just to rile you up and get you so mad about reynolds that you will disregard the facts of reverend smith's life, or to divert your attention away from reverend smith. because these documents did not have anything to do with him. you have heard at trial about statements that reverend smith never saw or heard -- how many times have we seen the frank statement? how many times have we seen it? reverend smith himself told us he never had seen it. it never ran in the newspaper here in marianna. what does that have to do with reverend smith? you-all saw ads for cigarettes he did not buy, like winstons. he never bought winstons. you you-all saw ads for the cigarettes that he did not -- that reynolds did not make, like all those philip morris ads and lorillard ads. that is not reynolds. you-all saw documents and ads for products he did not smoke, like filtered cigarettes. that did not have anything to do with him. anything that reverend smith actually saw or he actually read or actually heard about is fair game. but all the rest of this is not fair game, because he did not even see it. it does not have anything to do with him. any company in america, any company can be made to look bad. if you have somebody go through millions of old, ancient documents and pull out a few and pull out some snippets and then prepare a little power point slide and go around -- it could have nothing to do with reverend smith -- anybody can be made to look bad. but his own testimony, reverend smith's own testimony, what he told us, proves that these documents have nothing to do with him. he says he never saw or heard any kind of company statement from a cigarette company. we know he never read the new york times. he never said a tobacco company caused him to start smoking or to continue smoking. he never said a tobacco company withheld information from him. we have not heard that from him. he never said a tobacco company fooled him in any way. he said he never heard of tirc. he said he never heard of the tobacco institute. he never heard of the council for tobacco research. and he never had any communication with reynolds. let me talk to you for a moment about the ads that mr. diaz keeps talking about. he showed you-all those ads from a long time ago. first of all, all of those ads are legal. it is legal and it always has been. the whole time reverend smith smoked, it is legal to advertise cigarettes. there is no claim in this case for fraudulent advertising. or there is no claim, nothing like that in this case, because those ads are not fraudulent. there is no question on the verdict form that asks you about ads. those ads, you know, when you think about it, when you are honest with yourself and you look at these ads, they are no different than ads today that you see at the super bowel for beer ads, right? when you see athletes or movie stars advertising today. and reverend smith did not start smoking -- should we take a break? a juror: it will not take but one minute. the court: let us go ahead and take a break. (a pause was had in the proceedings.) mr. harris: i thought we might take a break. the court: we will try -- we will try to avoid that. do you have any idea, ms. parker? ms. parker: i probably have about another 3 0 minutes maybe, something like that. the court: all right. mr. diaz: may mr. harris step out for a moment ? the court: sure. ladies and gentlemen, does anybody else want to take a break, or do you want to continue? (the juror returned to the courtroom.) a juror: i'm sorry. thank you. the court: that is all right. let us try to move on. ms. parker: may i proceed? the court: yes. ms. parker: he did not start smoking because of ads. zero evidence of that. remember, he said he started smoking because he wanted to be grown, and his older brother smoked. he did not see an ad and run out and say, hey, i want to smoke that cigarette. let us go over the ads he did talk about. remember, he sang the little song, call for philip morris. that was on i love lucy. that is not reynolds. that is not a reynolds ad. then he said winston tastes good like a cigarette should. he did not smoke winstons. and that ad, that has to do with taste. winston tastes, tastes good. there is nothing fraudulent about that. there is nothing wrong with it. how many of you remember cigarette slogans but did not smoke that brand of cigarettes? the fact that he saw advertisements does not affect this life lesson that he learned as a boy from his parents that smoking was dangerous. he did not disregard that because he saw ads. he remembered it. he embraced it. he told us about that two years ago in his deposition. and then remember -- this is some of the most powerful evidence -- is the fact that he preached about it. he preached about it. he did not say, oh, you know what? i saw some ads, and so i no longer think that cigarettes are dangerous. no. he preached about it. and then the meeting in new york in 1953 that we have heard so much about. that had nothing to do with reverend smith. reverend smith had been a regular smoker for about three years by then. remember, that is when he joined the army. he had been smoking roll-your-owns before that. that meeting did not cause him to start smoking. he did not even know anything about it. and as dr. proctor even admitted, the cigarette companies told the government about the meeting, invited the government to the meeting. and the meeting was written up in the new york times. there is nothing about that meeting that has anything to do with reverend smith. there is just zero evidence here that any statements from reynolds had any impact on reverend smith. and then the last truth i want to go over with you is that cigarettes are legal. there is nothing that you-all have heard today or through the whole trial that is not already known by the state of florida, by the surgeon general, by the federal government. all those documents are known to them. but nevertheless, society has said cigarettes should be a legal product. and then the number of people who die every year from smoking, that number that mr. diaz keeps going back to. those are government statistics. the government also keeps numbers on automobile deaths and alcohol-related deaths and obesity-related deaths. there is no secret to any of that. but our government has said, notwithstanding that, notwithstanding that cigarettes have health hazards, our society has decided that they should be, and they are, a legal product so that people can decide for themselves whether or not to smoke. again, when you go back that your deliberations, if somebody says, well, they made the cigarettes, remind them, reynolds cannot be held liable merely for selling cigarettes because that is something that our society has decided is legal for us to do. the real complaint by those witnesses and by mr. diaz's presentation and by mrs. smith's presentation is that they disagree with society. they disagree with the decision that our society has made that they should be legal. they just do not want cigarettes to be sold. they do not want a product that has health risks to be sold. cigarettes are both dangerous and legal. and reynolds is not alone. reynolds is not the only company or person involved in the sale of cigarettes. you-all heard at trial about the farmers who grow tobacco. they know it is going in cigarettes. and then the stores where they are sold or the magazines and newspapers that run the ads or the people who work in those places. they do not do that because they think cigarettes are safe. they know cigarettes are not safe. but they do it because they believe that adults in the united states should have a choice. reynolds' responsibility was to do everything it could to make cigarettes safer. you heard dr. gentry go over all those different things that reynolds has done over the years to try to improve cigarettes and to reduce the health risks. there is no such thing as a safe cigarette. there is no such thing as a safe knife. there is no such thing as a safe bottle of liquor. there is no such thing as healthy fast food. and there is no healthy sugar drink like coke or pepsi. but those are all legal products that our society has said should be available. so ladies and gentlemen, that brings us to the verdict form. and i want to go over it with you. i want to start by talking about the burden of proof. two parts to that. burden and proof. mrs. smith has the burden on all of her claims, and she has to prove her case. she has to prove her case. and these engle findings -- i call them the engle findings like mr. diaz did. they are the findings from the other jury. they do not decide the issues that are for you to decide in this case. otherwise, you would not be getting a verdict form. you would not have anything to do. the issues relating to reverend smith are for you to decide. that other jury did not hear about reverend smith's illness. they did not hear about his smoking. they did not hear about his life. you are the one, you are the jury asked to answer the questions about reverend smith. and those findings do not establish liability. you have heard that already. they do not establish liability. and they do not even apply at all, you do not get to them unless they first meet their burden of proof on an initial question that you are going to see on the verdict form. i have got this in three different colors, because it is three different parts to it. it is one question, but it is three parts. they have the burden to prove it. now, the three different parts are, was he addicted? and if so, was addiction a legal cause -- we talked about that; remember the railroad -- was addiction the legal cause or could he stop that train? and then that the cigarettes have to be a cause of his 1992 cancer. so there are three different issues to it. and they have to prove all three of those parts. and if they do not prove any one of them, that is the end of it. it is a verdict for reynolds. and you do not have to agree, all of you do not have to agree on what they did not meet. some of you may say, you know what? they did not bring in enough evidence about the medical case, and so i do not think that they have proved that the cancer was caused by smoking. and some others of you may say, you know what? he was able to put those cigarettes down and walk away without any problems. i do not think he was addicted. and maybe some others say, well, you know what? he smoked for the period of time he smoked, so i think he might have been addicted. but he was the conductor of that train, he was able to stop, he was able to stop all of this, and so i do not think there was legal cause. so you may have different reasons to say they have not met their burden of proof. and they have to -- they have to prove all three parts of it. so your answer to that question should be no. reynolds respectfully submits your answer to that first question should be no, and you should stop right there. the next -- i have to go over the whole form with you, though. the next question is about the statute of limitations. and that is the only question that you should answer yes to, which is that reverend smith did know that he had an injury prior to that date. he knew he had shortness of breath. he told us that. he knew it was caused by smoking. he told us that. he knew he had a cough caused by smoking. he told us that. and then the next four questions all -- if we could go through those -- each one of them asks about legal cause, legal cause, legal cause, legal cause. and that is the part that mr. diaz left out when he was going through and saying how you should answer. the plaintiff has to prove the legal cause in every one of those four questions, as well as in that first question. and, remember, it is like a railroad track. like a railroad track. so remember, who was driving that train on the legal cause issue? and it was reverend smith. all four of those -- here are the claims; here are the question numbers -- each one asks about legal cause. for each one of them, we respectfully submit your answer should be no. and remember, when you are looking at those questions, there is a difference between cigarettes and a cigarette company. so even if you — pardon me. sorry. even if you think, well, cigarettes caused his cancer, even if you decide you think that, these four questions are not asking about the cigarettes, they are asking about the cigarette companies. okay? they are asking about the cigarette companies. because, again, we cannot be liable merely for selling cigarettes, even if the cigarettes caused cancer. just a couple of points i want to address with respect to those four questions. one is mrs. smith did not bring any expert on cigarette design, about how cigarettes are designed. she did not bring anybody to talk about that. the only evidence you heard was from dr. gentry, who was the top scientist at reynolds. and he came in and told you all those different things that reynolds has done over the years in the area of cigarette design. mrs. smith has not proved that any design feature of any cigarette is what caused the legal cause of his injury. again, it is not cigarettes. it is not just did cigarettes cause it. that is not the question on the verdict form. these were just regular cigarettes that he smoked. there was no evidence that the cigarettes he smoked were broken or contaminated or that there was anything at all wrong with them. they were just plain old cigarettes like you buy at the store. they are a dangerous but legal product. now, the last two questions there have to do with concealment. you know, mr. diaz has spent a lot of time talking about that, so i want to briefly address it. s what does that mean? it means they have to prove that this was something that reverend smith did not already know. and we know from what he told us that he knew throughout his life, starting as a child, that cigarettes were dangerous. and then they also have to prove that if --whatever it is they claim was concealed, that if he had known it, it would have made a difference to him. well, remember, the '66 warning label did not make a difference to him. the '69 did not make a difference to him. in 1972, when they put labels on the ads, it did not make any difference to him. in 1985 when they changed the labels, it did not make any difference to him. why would you think that something else would have made a difference to him? i want to talk a moment about the video of the congressional testimony. i think we have seen it three or four times now. it was two years after reverend smith quit smoking, even under the version mrs. smith said. it was two years after he had cancer in 1992. that congressional testimony was in 1994. there is no way it had anything to do with reverend smith smoking. no way. he had already quit. and the discussion going on at that congressional hearing is the same type of discussion that you heard about from dr. gentry. over the years, the surgeon general changed definitions. they changed the definition of addiction, whether cigarettes were addictive. they changed the definition of cause. and reynolds scientists and other outside scientists, it was not just reynolds and the tobacco companies, they were changing as well. they were all debating what is the label for cigarettes? is it habit or is it addiction? and what is enough to prove cause? is it just statistics, or do you need to know cause and in the classical sense? that same debate is what was going on and what you heard in that video. remember, the part he even played for you today, the ceo at reynolds said, cigarettes do not meet the classic definition of addiction. even the surgeon general would agree to that. and reynolds never said in that video or anywhere else that cigarettes were hard -- were not hard to quit smoking. and then what was going on in reverend smith's life about this. well, was reverend smith debating this? no. he knew cigarettes were bad for him. he was not going around telling people, hey, you know, the cigarette company is saying this and i'm waiting to find out if a cigarette companies says that. there is absolutely no evidence of anything like that. and there is not a single document in this case from reynolds, not from, you know, today with all these documents that mr. diaz showed you --i'm talking about the documents from reynolds --there is not a single document in evidence in this case from reynolds where reynolds said the company has come to a consensus view that smoking causes lung cancer. there were discussions back and forth, and the scientists were going back and forth, and the scientists were saying, here is what is being reported in the literature. but nobody said, okay, look, we have all decided smoking causes cancer, and we are going to cover it up. the best document that he has been able to show you is one that says that the evidence was inconclusive. and he did not show you that part of it. and, again, reynolds is not the only scientist or company out there who was saying that cause was not proven during that period of time. that was a debate going on involving the public health community, the surgeon general, and others. the bottom line about these questions is, did mrs. smith prove to you that if reverend smith had any of that information that he keeps showing you, would he have acted on it? would he have stopped smoking? would he have avoided getting cancer? and there is no evidence of that. none. he was not sitting there waiting to find out what reynolds said about his cigarettes. and so for all of those reasons, we respectfully ask you to check no on the verdict form for those liability questions. and the next question on the verdict form asks about comparative fault. and that is the percentage. again, our position is you should not even get there. but it is part of my job. i have got to talk about that also. now, i heard mr. diaz say in his opening statement, i heard him say in jury selection, and i heard him say again today that reverend smith accepts some responsibility. now, that is not right. we have not heard that from reverend smith at all. you have not heard a word from reverend smith at any point in time saying that he accepted responsibility. that is something that is a litigation tactic by his lawyer. there is no evidence --mr. diaz: judge --the court: i will sustain that. ms. parker: there is no evidence from reverend smith about that point. every choice that reverend smith made about smoking was one hundred percent his own choice. whether to smoke. who made that choice? he did. when t smoke. who made that choice? he did. where to smoke, how much to smoke, whether to try to stop, when to try to stop, what brand to smoke. who made those decisions? a hundred percent was reverend smith. now, we are not criticizing reverend smith when we say responsibility should be assigned to him. it was his right to smoke, and we respect that. but we do not think we should have to pay money damages. and that is what we are here about. we do not think we should have to pay money damage for his choices. now, again, as part — you should answer no and not even get to these questions about damages but again, it is part of my job. i have got to talk about that also. any damages that you award here do not go to reverend smith. they go to mrs. smith. mr. diaz: objection to the relevance of that. the court: i will sustain that. ms. parker: the purpose of compensatory damages is not to punish, it is not to penalize. and our position is you should not even get to that. and this $20,000,000 is just pulled out of thin air. this is just simply not a case where damages should be awarded. and then -- pardon me -- the final thing i want to talk to you about is punitive damages. they are trying to get you to say yes to punitive damages so we can have this next part of the trial where there will be more witnesses and more issues. and so they are asking you to say that reynolds should be punished. now, the engle findings, those findings from that other jury, they cannot be used in evaluating punitive damages. let us go over what the evidence is. it was not evidence, it is not conduct that should be punished, it is reprehensible for us to conduct the research that you heard about. reynolds did that. remember? remember this book that you saw? we published about it. that is not reprehensible conduct. to go in and to try to reduce the suspect constituents in smoke. reynolds did that. that is not reprehensible. remember all that? having a product stewardship program that dr. gentry told you about. that is not reprehensible. lowering tar and nicotine. remember this chart? that is not reprehensible. that should not be punished. following the suggestions of the public health community. reynolds did that. we should not be punished for that. publishing research, again, in all these different journals and all that you heard about at trial. that is not reprehensible. funding research, including here in florida. that is not reprehensible. including research by nobel prize winners. that is not reprehensible. and then investing all of this money that you heard dr. gentry talk about to develop a brand new type of cigarette that heats instead of burns tobacco. remember premier? that is not reprehensible. now, dr. gentry came to court. he was very candid and forthright. he is a good scientist at a company that is making a dangerous but legal product. he did not tell you that they have never made any mistakes. no person can say that. no company can say that. but what reynolds did was to try hard to reduce the health risks of smoking. and they should be judged back on what they knew at that time, not today with 20/20 hindsight. punitive damages are the very, very highest standard in a civil case. this clear and convincing evidence is a very high standard that they have to -- that is part of their burden that they have to prove to you. but in this case, summarize what the evidence is. and overall, this is a case where mrs. smith just has not proved the medical case. she just has not proved that in 1992 reverend smith had cancer that started in his lung. and she has not proved it was caused by smoking instead of all these other things. and remember, three other cancers out there, and something caused those, and it was not smoking. and his cancer was cured. that 1992 cancer was cured. reverend smith was aware of the health risks of smoking from a young age, that life lesson he learned from his parents. and he successfully quit smoking, either 20 or 30 years ago. put them down with no problem. so in summary, for all of those reasons, we respectfully ask that you return a verdict in favor of reynolds here. our society has decided this issue. our society has decided that cigarettes should be a legal product. as you are going back and deliberating, you should all try to agree as part of your deliberations, but also i want to ask that you not give up your honestly held beliefs just because other people may think differently. hold on to your honestly held beliefs. respect your individual judgment and your individual values on this issue. and, please, i would like to respectfully ask on behalf of reynolds and our whole team, do not just give in and award money in a case where mrs. smith has had a fair trial. she has a great team of lawyers, ten witnesses, but she just has not met her burden of proof. some people choose to do things that have health risks. some people choose to drink alcoholic beverages or to drive a convertible or to ride a motorcycle or not to eat healthy or sit on the couch instead of exercising or to smoke cigarettes. our society allows people to make those choices. and the same situation here. reverend smith had those choices as well. so that is what this case is all about. and these two, if i can leave you with two final points: his 1992 cancer was cured, and he successfully quit smoking 20 or 30 years ago. thank you so much for your time. and i appreciate your attention listening to me this afternoon. i want to thank you again for your service as jurors. and we very much appreciate the opportunity to present our case to you. it really has been an honor and privilege for all of us. so thank you very much. your honor, that concludes my closing statement.