ms. barnett: good morning. yes, your honor. in a little while, you are going to go back into the deliberation room and you will have three jobs to do. the first job is going to be to answer the questions on the verdict form that the judge is going to give you. the second job you are going to have is to make sure that everybody on the jury follows the law as the judge instructs you. and the third job before you answer any questions on the verdict form is going to be to explain to each other why you feel the way you feel about the answers. 57 and so what i'd like to do is spend a little time this morning trying to talk through and give you some ideas of ways to do that. and i wish this could be a question and answer, but that is just not the way it works. been told to slow down, so i'm going to try to speak a little bit more slowly. and i have remember, we sued reynolds for five reasons. the reynolds chose to violate the first reason was negligence. safety rule that a manufacturer can never hide and lie about a danger it knows about in its product. and reynolds knew, there is no question about it -- by the early '50s, long before wanette smith ever picked up a cigarette, reynolds knew its cigarettes were deadly. choice to lie about that and to hide it. never allowed to pretend something is safe when they know it is not. and reynolds made the a manufacturer is a manufacturer can never trick people into doing and we know not just that they something that is deadly. hide the dangers about cigarettes, but they hid the dangers about filtered cigarettes and about low -tar, low-nicotine cigarettes like those doral cigarettes and the vantage cigarettes that you saw those ads for. the proof that this happened comes straight from reynolds' own documents. truth. reynolds should have told the 58 and the other part of negligence is that reynolds violated the safety rule that a manufacturer can never make its product more addictive, more dangerous, just to increase sales. again, we know, you saw from the documents, you heard from the witnesses, reynolds knew it had to keep the exit doors closed. addicted, stayed addicted and kept buying their products for as long as possible. it had to make sure that people got and we know -- we heard a lot of testimony about how reynolds went to great pains to study and understand addiction and to rig cigarettes to make sure they delivered just enough nicotine, at least enough to sustain -- create addiction and sustain addiction. comes right out of reynolds' own records. here and told you it was not true. this, again, the proof nobody came in reynolds should never have rigged their cigarettes for addiction. the second reason we are suing is because reynolds sold a defective and unreasonably dangerous cigarettes that killed wanette smith and they should not have. and the third reason we are suing is because reynolds omitted and concealed the information about the health risks, the hazards and the addictiveness of their and, again, there is a question, was it just cigarettes. 59 negligence or did they intend and know exactly what they were doing? that is this third reason: the fraud. reynolds lied about the dangers, lied about the they have not come in here and filters and the low tar. shown you anything to demonstrate that is not true, and we know it from reynolds' own records and reynolds should never have lied and hidden the truth. the fourth reason is reynolds conspired with the the question is whether they do other cigarette companies. it on their own. cigarette manufacturers, because they knew they had to be hand-in-hand, lockstep with the same message out there to be the most effective. they worked with all the other no. and that is the fourth reason. not one person from reynolds showed up in this courtroom to tell you that did not happen or that is not true. ms. parker: objection, your honor. objection. commenting on the party. the court: say is not evidence. ladies and gentlemen, what the lawyers ms. barnett: again, we know this all from reynolds' own documents. now, finally, the fifth reason that we are suing is because reynolds has refused to accept any responsibility at all for what they did. now, i want to talk about the instructions the 60 court is going to give you. instructions when you go back. from over at that elmo. and you will get a copy of the i'm going to try to do this you will get something that looks like this. and i want to point out to you page 5, which is very important. we have the burden -- for most of the things you are going to decide, we have the burden, the court will tell you, of proving the claims by a preponderance of the evidence. and here's... a preponderance of the evidence simply means an amount of evidence that is enough to persuade you that mr. smith's claim is more likely true than not true. and you can have doubts on both sides. i'm going to come back over here so i can talk to what that means is what we have been talking is it more likely right than wrong that we you can but if at the end of the day, you about that. about all along: are right? have all the doubts you want. when you weigh out all the doubts and the evidence, if you find that you think we are more likely right than wrong, even by a little bit, then the law is you must decide that issue in our favor. and so if during deliberations someone says, i'm just not sure, i have some doubts, remind them they can have doubts. consider all the doubts and all the evidence, are we more do you decide -- when you the question is: 61 likely right than wrong? slight amount. and you can -- just even by a that is the law. it is right there on page 5 of the instructions. do, now you know where it is. and you may need to remind anybody. if you so i want to look at the verdict form. and i'm going to go back over there. question no. 1: do you find from a preponderance of the evidence that wanette smith's lung disease -- death -- sorry -- was caused by a non-bac form of lung cancer? and i do not want you to let that non-bac part trip what that simply means is, did she have you up. adenocarcinoma, and is that what caused her death? and we know that she did. wanette smith's doctors who treated her, every last one of them, said what? said she had adenocarcinoma. they can you put up that exhibit 1362. this is that discharge summary. go through all the medical records at all. i'm not going to what was her discharge diagnosis when she had that surgery to have her lung taken out? right upper lobe of the lung. adenocarcinoma of the and not only did her doctors tell us through their medical records that wanette smith had adenocarcinoma of the 62 lung and not this bac, dr. burns came to you; he explained to you the difference; he showed you the medical records; he explained to you how it is that smoking causes adenocarcinoma, which is what caused her death. and we know he said she had adenocarcinoma and not this rare bac, because we know the cancer in her chest grew. it grew and it killed her, and bac does not do that. he showed us the slides. dr. figlar came here. mr. wilner: ms. barnett: dr. feingold came in here, and he showed us the not figlar. dr. feingold -- apologies. actual cells. wanette smith's cancer grew, it invaded, it killed her. does not do that. and he explained it, too -- he showed you -- bac that is how we know she had this non-bac, this and the adenocarcinoma, and that that is what is killed her. only suggestion different from the medical records came from reynolds' witness barsky, who said he would call this cancer something called bac, because the invasive carcinoma, adenocarcinoma, had around its edges some bac. i want to show you a couple of slides over here. did dr. barsky admit that there was some non-bac? he did. remember -- this was from his deposition, where he marked, here's the cancer that grew and invaded and killed her. that is a solid non-bac. that is what killed her. out 63 here is the bac. and i thought a better diagram was the one dr. feingold showed us -- i -- at least it is more colorful. mr. wilner: ms. barnett: it is upside down. all right. here it is. bull's-eye. carcinoma that killed her. this is the carcinoma that grew. this is the this is the dr. barsky admitted this is adenocarcinoma. and, sure, he says out here on these edges, there is some things you do not have to he would like to call bac. decide that. she could have both, and that if you want to call it bac, you can. it was this, which even barsky admits is an invasive adenocarcinoma, something bac does not do. that is not what killed wanette smith. that is fine. that is not what killed her. and the progression -- one more of these -- is people can get and it is also from dr. feingold. 4 percent of them do not go those are the bacs up here. this. these early precancerous things. on to get lung cancer and die. you continued to smoke, like dr. burns explained, the continued exposure over and over and over and over and over again to the carcinogens in cigarette smoke drives somebody down here to invasive adenocarcinoma. and that is what kills someone. and dr. barsky, by the way -- you probably 64 remember this chart, and i will not go through all of those. but dr. barsky, in saying, well, we will just call this what the outside edges were and not the part that killed her, dr. barsky stands alone. there is no accepted published literature that has dr. barsky's definition. there is no group or organization that has accepted dr. barsky's definition. heard about it from dr. barsky. and if there was, you certainly would have that is what killed her. so, again, wanette smith's doctors were clear. that is she had adenocarcinoma. been the testimony you heard from dr. burns and from it was invasive adenocarcinoma; that is what dr. feingold. killed her. if you want to accept barsky's definition that some of these outlying things were a bac, that is not modern science, that is not the accepted -- "nomenclature" is the word he used, but if you want to accept that, it does not change the fact it was the invasive adenocarcinoma, that is what killed wanette smith. and so when you look at that question on the verdict form, whether it is more likely right than wrong that wanette smith's death was caused by a non-bac form of lung cancer, the answer is yes. and, remember, dr. barsky was very careful not to he kept talk about whether cigarette smoking caused what? way out of that. 65 now, question 2: do you find from a preponderance of the evidence that wanette smith had a non-asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease? that is question 2. we know she did. her doctors said she had copd. dr. burns explained that wanette smith had copd. dr. feingold came in here and showed the slides that demonstrated that she had copd. and let me just show you exhibit 1362 again. if you have any questions, 1362 will be back there with you. that is what the doctor said: obstructive pulmonary disease." the way. smith also had asthma. what is not an issue here is whether or not wanette and there is no issue, by "asthma with chronic you can take that down. yes, she had asthma. we have never disputed that. and dr. burns, dr. feingold, and dr. farber all agreed you can have both. they are separate diseases. you can have asthma; you can have copd. and, in fact, having asthma does not mean that you and if you remember, dr. farber was cannot get copd. familiar with that study i asked him about where 43 percent of the people with asthma also had copd. so the question is whether it is more likely right than wrong that wanette smith had copd in addition to her asthma. the answer to that on question no. 2 is yes. 66 now, question no. 3: do you find from a preponderance of the evidence that mrs. smith was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine? again, dr. burns and dr. cummings both concluded for you that she was addicted. decades, researching and publishing in this field, working with the surgeon general's office, working with addicted smokers trying to help them quit. they have spent years, they showed you the accepted definitions for they showed you how they applied them to what addiction. they learned about wanette smith, and they explained their conclusions why she was addicted. she started as a child when she was especially she smoked compulsively vulnerable to addiction. one-and-a-half or more packs of cigarettes a day, 30 cigarettes a day, 10 puffs a cigarette, more than 3 million exposures of nicotine to her brain. she smoked first thing in the morning. when she and ultimately, to be tried to quit, she had withdrawal. able to finally conquer her addiction after she had surgery to take out part of her lung, she had to have two or three patches at a time and gum to be able to stop smoking. that is the picture of addiction. that is not somebody smoking just because they like it. and, remember, reynolds has not brought you any witness in here to tell you 67 otherwise. if there was somebody out there who would come and say she was not addicted, you would have heard that; but you did not. likely right than wrong that wanette smith was addicted to cigarettes, the answer is yes. so when you consider the evidence, is it more question no. 4: do you find -- i -- let me do it. oh, okay. do you find from a preponderance of the evidence that mrs. smith's addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine was a legal cause of her injuries? and there is a lot there. but what i want to talk about is this legal cause, because that is very, very important, what that means. page 7 of your jury instructions. and you will find that over on in order to prove that addiction to smoking cigarettes containing nicotine was a legal cause of mrs. smith's copd or lung cancer, mr. smith must prove that such addiction directly and in natural and continuous sequence produced or contributed substantially to producing a copd or lung cancer, so that it can reasonably be said that but for the addiction, copd or lung cancer would not have occurred. here's the important part: in order to be regarded as a legal cause of her death, addiction need not 68 be the only cause. addiction may be a legal cause of copd or lung cancer even though it operates in combination with the act of another, some natural cause or some other cause, if the addiction contributes substantially to producing such copd or lung cancer. and what is important is the law says, the judge will instruct you, addiction does not have to be the only cause of her injuries. it just needs to be a cause. so legally, if you find that wanette smith's addiction was the only cause of her injuries, or if you find it was a cause and that it was one of a number of things that caused her injuries, if that is what you find, then you must find for us, yes, addiction was a legal cause of her injuries. you are allowed to think multiple things may have contributed; but if at the end of the day more likely right than wrong, you believe addiction was a cause, one of the causes, then the answer is yes, her addiction was a legal cause of her injuries. so if, in deliberation, someone says, well, i think someone else may be at fault here, too, not just reynolds, for this, remind them the question here, the question no. 4 is, addiction, a legal cause, not was addiction the only cause. and we will talk in a minute about what to do 69 about other possible causes. did it contribute substantially to her injuries? cause? but the question is simply: was it a and dr. burns and dr. cummings came in here and explained to us that addiction led to wanette smith's continued and compulsive smoking. dr. burns explained how people who -- if people are addicted, their brains become wired for nicotine and they crave nicotine; they have withdrawals for nicotine; they seek it out. it is that addiction causes the smoking. and dr. burns also explained to you how but it is not just dr. burns and dr. cummings. it is the showed you the surgeon general -- exhibit 237. 2010 surgeon general's report. we let me show you one finding. if we can switch over. here's what the surgeon general says: "nicotine addiction is the fundamental reason that individuals persist in using tobacco products, and this persistent tobacco use contributes to many diseases described in this report." and if you remember that video from last week of gentry, the guy from reynolds who came in here by videotape, he even admitted -- he said, nicotine is a fundamental reason. fundamental reason. but even gentry, mr. gentry, admitted in his testimony here that nicotine is a fundamental reason he would not go so far as to say it was the 70 that individuals persist in using tobacco. and let me show you one more thing from exhibit 572, which is the 1989 surgeon general's report. "two additional factors make smoking among young people a preeminent public health concern: initiation of smoking and nicotine addiction. factors refute the argument that smoking is a matter of free choice." the age of these two so -- you can take those down. did reynolds bring you any witness to come and say, not true, in this case, or in any case, addiction did not cause her injuries? no, they did not. no. when you weigh the evidence you have heard in this case, yes, is it more likely right than wrong that wanette smith's addiction was a cause of her injuries? it was. now, there is a question 5. let me go back over here. this is back on copd. did mrs. smith know, or should she have known in the exercise of reasonable care, on or before may 5th, 1990, that she had copd and that there was a reasonable possibility her copd was caused by cigarette smoking? dr. burns explained -- well, we know -- we know she was diagnosed in '95 and she was never diagnosed with copd before she had that pulmonary function test. explained there was no way for her doctors to know she had dr. burns 71 and he furthermore said, copd until they did that test. there is certainly no way for wanette smith to know -- there is no question. or should have known that she had copd. cough; not asthma. those are not copd. is: did she know before may 1990 if she had it. the question for you is when she knew not a smoker's the question for you and the answer is no. no, she did not know until they diagnosed her. diagnosed her. she had no way to know until they and, remember, reynolds certainly had not tried to prove anything about this. and this is one of the questions where they have the burden, they have to convince you, that, yes -- but the answer is no. their expert says he still cannot tell whether or not she had copd. the answer is -- here, no, there is no evidence for her to know she had copd before may 9th -- may 5th, 1990. so she is certainly not on notice. so once you get past those questions -- once you get past those first questions, then you move to the next part of the verdict form. and then you pull out the engle these are in the preliminary instructions which findings. will go back with you to the jury room. they are on page 9. and these are the rules that have been determined as a matter of law in this case, must be applied by you, cannot be questioned by you. 72 so you want to have these out from this point on. and the next question on the verdict form... i'm going to try to quit running around on you. all right. do you find from a preponderance of the evidence that negligence on the part of reynolds, or the defendant, was a legal cause of mrs. smith's injuries? now, at this point, here's what you do not have to was reynolds negligent? because that has already all engle that is engle finding no. 7. decide: been determined. defendants were negligent. that includes reynolds. and you will see it in your jury instructions right on page 13, where you have this question. one of the engle findings was that reynolds was negligent with respect to its manufacture and sale of cigarettes, and you must accept that determination. so if in deliberations someone says they are not sure, they do not know if reynolds was really negligent here, remind them that is already been determined; it cannot be questioned by you; yes, reynolds was negligent. the only question is whether reynolds' negligence was a legal cause of mrs. smith's injuries. and i want to go back -- the legal cause question is the second time in your verdict form -- here -- in your jury instructions. critically important. page 13, and this is critically, sorry. 73 if i can get it all. it is just like the legal legal cause cause thing we just talked about for addiction. of damages resulting -- sorry -- well, you -- wrongful conduct is the legal cause of someone's injury or damages, including the legal cause of damages resulting from someone's injury if it directly and naturally and in continuous sequence produces or contributes substantially to producing such injury or damages so that it can reasonably be said but for the wrongful act, the injury or damage would not have occurred. in order to be regarded as a legal cause of injury or damage, wrongful conduct need not -- need not be the only cause. again, you can decide that you think there were other causes and it was not just always reynolds' negligence. the only question for you is more likely right that is fine. than wrong. do you believe that reynolds was a -- one of the causes of her injuries? and we will talk about how to deal -- if you think there is other possible causes, later, in a few minutes. dr. burns and dr. cummings explained to you reynolds knew the truth. exactly how reynolds' negligence caused wanette smith's reynolds lied about it injuries. for years and years before wanette smith ever picked up her first cigarette. reynolds made the choice to go and promise people, if we ever find anything, we will take it out. 74 they are not hazardous. do not worry. one reason, to get americans smoking. wanette smith was one of the millions who did. and they did it for and it worked. and, worse, reynolds knew that americans were and so what did they do? worried about cancer. they made the choice to sell filter, low-tar, low-nicotine cigarettes like those doral you saw, the vantage you saw, and the belairs, and sell them as safer, even though reynolds knew they were not any safer. reason only, to keep people smoking. they did it for one reason and one and that is exactly what wanette smith did. she and we know -- not just dr. cummings and fell for the lies, and she smoked those filtered and low-tar cigarettes. dr. burns gave you their conclusions based on their understanding -- their broad understanding and their review of her history, but we also heard from esther stone, wanette's own sister, who told us about the conversations they had about the controversy that reynolds was creating and the conversations they had about smoking light -- or not light, but filtered cigarettes, the low-tar cigarettes, because they believed reynolds' lies and they thought they were safer, but it was more to negligence than the lies about the hazards. we also know from reynolds' own documents they studied addiction and they studied children and addiction, 75 and they rigged their cigarettes for addiction for one reason, to get people hooked and keep them hooked, to make it as hard as possible to quit. and we know for wanette smith it worked. she it got her addicted. started as a teenage replacement smoker when her brain was especially vulnerable to addiction. and the cigarette did just what it was supposed to do. and when she tried to quit, her brain had been wired for addiction, just like reynolds designed the cigarettes to do and made it very hard for her to quit. and because it was hard for her to quit, it took a long time and many tries to quit. customer as long as they possibly could, long enough to cause her injuries. and during that whole time, reynolds kept her as a and, remember, again, nobody from reynolds came in nobody came in here and said, aha, here and disputed this. here's this document that shows this is not true. witness. not one so the question is, is it more likely right than wrong that reynolds' negligence, its violation of these safety rules -- is it more likely right than wrong that that is a cause, one of the causes of wanette smith's injuries? the answer to that question is yes. question no. 7 on the verdict form -- can you put that up, 7? 76 "do you find from a preponderance of the evidence that the defendant's," meaning reynolds', "placement of cigarettes on the market that were defective and unreasonably dangerous was a legal cause of mrs. smith's injuries?" if anybody back in the deliberations has any question about what the legal cause means, i've shown you where it is. it is on page 13 of those jury instructions. it applies to all of these. you can pull them back out. here's what you do not have to decide. you do not have to decide whether reynolds' cigarettes were defective and unreasonably dangerous. that has already been decided, and it is the law in this case, and you cannot question it. it is engle finding no. 3, that engle defendants, including r.j. reynolds tobacco company, placed cigarettes on the market that were defective and unreasonably dangerous. so if in deliberation someone says, cigarettes are legal; i just -- i do not know; i'm not sure they could be defective or unreasonably dangerous, remind them that is already been decided. in this case, and you cannot question it. that is determined as a matter of law the only question for you, again, is whether the unreasonably dangerous cigarettes were a legal cause of her injuries. now, remember, all that means is that they were -- 77 they substantially contributed to her injuries or were a cause -- could be multiple causes. and dr. burns explained to you, yes, cigarettes yes, cigarettes caused her lung cancer and reynolds brought you not one witness caused her copd. that killed her. to say otherwise. dr. burns explained how these injuries -- how but i want to show these cigarettes caused these injuries. you something out of the surgeon general's 2010 report that goes right along with what he said. surgeon general's report from 2010. this is the whole "moreover, whereas squamous cell carcinomas had been the predominant form of lung cancer by the late 20th century, adenocarcinoma of the lung was becoming increasingly common, presumably reflecting deeper inhalation of smoke that was facilitated by ventilated filters, as well as other factors, such as changes in agricultural practices, tobacco curing, and the cigarette manufacturing process that could lead to increased concentrations of tobacco-specific" -- i cannot say that word -- "nitrosamines." it says right there you do not have to just rely on what dr. burns had to say and what the other witnesses said. it is right there in the surgeon general's report. and, again, you did not hear any witness come tell 78 the question is, is it -- well, you that is not the fact. that is for her lung cancer, and the same for the copd. nobody came and said that that was not caused by smoking. it is exactly -- in fact, dr. farber, their expert, admitted that copd is caused by smoking, and that is the hugest cause of copd. so you do not have to decide whether they are it is already established. you do not even have that is engle finding no. 1. defective. to decide if copd and her lung cancer were caused by smoking cigarettes smoking. causes chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, lung cancer, and other diseases. determined. so that is binding and already been there is really no question here. the answer is yes. it is more likely right than wrong that the defective cigarettes were a cause of linda denton's [sic] injuries. the next question is question 8. "do you find from a preponderance of the evidence that mrs. smith relied to her detriment on the defendant's," meaning reynolds', "concealment or omission of material information concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes? a legal cause of her injury?" and, if so, was that reliance now, there is -- there is a lot in that question. but here's what you do not have to decide. 79 go back and look at the engle findings. let me show you. engle finding no. 4, "engle defendants" -- that includes reynolds -- "concealed or omitted material information not otherwise known or available, knowing that the material was false or misleading or failed to disclose a material fact concerning the health effects of the addictive nature of smoking." really, that is what this so if -- and here's how this is different from we have already talked about the concealment. negligence. but this question here is about whether just being negligent or did reynolds mean to do it? comes down to. and if somebody in deliberations says, well, you know, the information that reynolds kept was already out there in the public, and i just do not think they really should be held liable for that, remind them the engle finding is specific. material, meaning it made a difference, and not otherwise known or available. already been determined. the information they withheld was you cannot question that. that is dr. burns showed us what reynolds knew long before he showed it from reynolds' own documents, wanette started. and he showed us the choices they made. from reynolds' own documents. coming in and interpreting what happened. this was not a historian these were he showed us that 80 documents that reynolds wrote from inside their own company. and by the way, if somebody at deliberations says, well, we did not see everything; they only showed us snippets or pages here and there, remind them. beginning we did not have time to show you every single document there was, but we said we were relying on reynolds -- if there is some other document that says something else or some other part, we are relying on them to show it to you, and they never showed you anything that was different than what dr. burns said. we told you at the we know not only did they hide the truth about the dangers, but reynolds spent millions and millions to deny and lie about that, to create a fake debate and to make market gimmicks. and they did so -- these gimmicks of the filters and the low tar and the lights, they did it for one purpose, to get people like, and including, wanette smith smoking, and to have them continue smoking. dr. burns explained how the cigarette company messages, including reynolds', were intentionally designed for addicted smokers to keep the exit door closed. were incredibly effective at intercepting addicted smokers, making sure it took as long as possible to quit. dr. burns showed us that figure 22, where we saw for girls who started smoking when wanette smith did. very effective. they and 81 they did not have that drop-off you see in the those people got hooked and stayed general population. there. dr. burns explained why he has concluded, more likely right than wrong, that these lies and gimmicks were a legal cause of wanette smith's injury. does not have to be the only cause. cause, if you decide it is one of many causes, that is fine. the answer is more likely right than wrong. it just is if it is a and, again, it yes. yes. and has reynolds presented you anyone -- anyone to tell you that, no, they have concluded she did not rely on anything they said? they have not. but they did -- the only thing they presented to and she showed you was that historian, professor hoffman. you those messages about the risks. no kidding. dr. burns had already shown you all of that. we already knew about -- you already knew before dr. burns told you, about the information in the public about the risk. dr. burns explained that that information coming out starting in the '50s and throughout wanette smith's lifetime was exactly the reason why reynolds had to work so hard to try to keep people smoking. and that historian did not tell you anything different. she does not know anything about what reynolds did and what was in the internal documents of reynolds and 82 even whether or not reynolds thought they were being successful. so more likely right than wrong on this question. whether she relied to her detriment on the admission, the answer is yes. question 9, that should be easy. will you just put it up? this is just a timing question. did she rely on concealments before 1982? concealments after 1982? both before and after? did wanette smith rely on or did she rely on concealments and this is one of the ones where the defendants but there is been nothing have the burden to prove to you. to say, oh, in 1982 it all stopped and we made no more concealments; we made no more admissions; we told the truth; we stopped lying. know, and you saw documents. we that is why it took so long. from the '60s, '70s, '80s and '90s of reynolds' that is simply not the proof here. continued lies and concealment and hiding of the truth, starting with the fake controversy, moving into the filters and finally into those doral and vantage and belair cigarettes that were supposed to be lighter and healthier, reynolds never admitted anything, anything, in the years and decades before wanette smith got lung cancer and copd. and even then, as dr. burns told you, they did not do so 83 voluntarily. so the answer here is c, yes, both before and after may of 1982. question no. 10 is: "do you find that wanette smith relied to her detriment on an act taken in furtherance of the defendant's agreement to conceal or omit material information regarding the health risks or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes and, if so, whether such reliance was a legal cause of her injuries?" i hate to keep belaboring the point, but if you a legal have any question about this, go back and look. cause means if you decide that her reliance and their conspiracy was one of many factors in causing her injury, then the answer is yes. it is more likely right than wrong that their conspiracy and her reliance on it was a cause of her injuries. and we know -- and, by the way, that is engle we will walk over there and show it to you again. finding no. 5 on the preliminary instructions you will have, and it is also right there in your jury instructions you will have. already been determined they conspired. that. had a conspiracy. they knew for their message to be as powerful as possible, they had to be lockstep in their message: cigarettes are not harmful; we do not know; if we it is you have to accept we know that. they agreed to work together. they 84 ever find anything, we will let you know, and we will be sure to take it out. they made that promise. they did not fulfill it. and they also sold the filters, and they sold the lights, the low tars, the low-nicotine cigarettes. they all knew they were not any safer, but they never told the public. there is no dispute about that. and it just -- the it worked. wanette smith, just like millions of conspiracy just made the lies and the deception more powerful. americans, did just what reynolds and the other cigarette companies wanted. millions of other americans, never knew, never knew the whole truth, never had the chance to make a decision with their eyes wide open, never knew all the things that reynolds had known for decades. just like wanette smith, just like dr. burns explained this to us. he showed it to he explained to you how he concluded that, yes, it is us. more likely right than wrong. cause -- not the only cause -- a cause of her injuries. no witness said anything different. this conspiracy was a and so the question -- or this question, is it more likely right than wrong that mrs. smith relied to her detriment on an act taken in furtherance of the agreement to conceal or omit information concerning health effects and addictive nature of cigarettes; if so, was it a legal 85 cause -- long question -- the answer is yes. yes. and we heard it not just from dr. burns, who has had a career in trying to warn americans, and not just from dr. cummings, who has had a career in trying to help with addicted smokers, who understands it, we heard it from wanette smith's family, too. safer. her addiction. she thought the filters were she heard the controversy, you know, that fed into when you answer that question yes -- the next it is the question is 11 -- it is going to be easy to answer. same as the question about timing i just asked. question 11 is whether it happened before may of '82, after may of '82, or both. and there is no evidence the conspiracy stopped. it went right on through, and there is no evidence at all that reynolds pulled out of this conspiracy. we know it started -- it started in the '50s, when the first information started coming out about cancer, and it kept right on well past when wanette smith had her lung cancer and her copd. before and after may '82? stopped. so here the answer is -- did it happen yes. yes, it did. they never now, the next question on your verdict form you will see is the place to write the percent of fault, if any, that wanette smith has for her injuries and death. and it is important for you to know here the defendants, reynolds -- 86 reynolds has the burden of proof on this. prove to you what amount you should put down there for wanette smith. so they have to here's the thing. in every case a person needs to and if they do not, use reasonable care to avoid harm. they are responsible for the harms they could have avoided. but this case is different, because the very things that reynolds did took away -- took away her ability to make a knowing, fully-informed step to protect herself from harm. and we have seen -- you can take that down. here's what we have seen on this question. reynolds had one hundred percent of the knowledge, one hundred percent of knowledge about its cigarettes, that they cause cancer, one hundred percent of knowledge years before wanette smith started to smoke. they had one hundred percent knowledge. there was no scientific debate, and there was no doubt cigarettes caused cancer. they knew they were deadly. they also had one hundred percent knowledge that their gimmicks, these filters and low-tar/-nicotine cigarettes and you have were not any safer. they did everything in their seen -- what did reynolds do? power to keep wanette smith and others from finding out, to take away her right to make a free, knowing, eyes wide open choice to -- they did everything they could to keep her and millions of americans -- their knowledge, as close down to zero as they possibly could. 87 and they lied, promising that they would take out they lied, saying smoke these filtered anything bad. cigarettes. everything to keep her knowledge as low as possible. they had one hundred percent knowledge, and they did let us talk about power and control. you have also reynolds was not helpless. seen reynolds had one hundred percent power and control over the choices it made. not tormented by these decisions. business decision to do everything it could to use all of its power and resources to keep people smoking as long as possible. and that meant rigging cigarettes to make sure they were addictive. reynolds was it made a calculated and you -- you heard gentry, the guy from reynolds would they go out of business if who came by videotape. they did not do this? we might have a smaller business, but we would not go out of business if we stopped selling addictive cigarettes. he said no. they did everything they could to make sure people smoked as long as possible and they got new replacement smokers every year. smith's control and her power over her decisions. and they did that to suppress wanette they did everything they could to make her choice, as dr. cummings explained, a constrained choice, to make it hard for her to inflate the power of addiction and the influence of addiction over her, to set her up for 88 failure after failure when she tried to quit, to keep the exit doors shut. reynolds had one hundred percent power over its control and choices, and reynolds used that power to chip away at wanette smith's ability to take control over her addiction, to push her power and control as close down to zero as they possibly could. and if in deliberations somebody says, well, on that is why she used filters, and she used this fault thing, wanette smith knew the risks, remind them, yes, she was worried about cancer. that is why she tried so hard to quit. low-tar and low-nicotine cigarettes. knowledge, this information about cancer, that is exactly why reynolds did everything it did. they knew if they did not do something and do something big, most of their customers would quit. and they needed to keep the exit door shut. they made it as hard as possible to quit and kept their customers as long as possible. and remind them this so the evidence, i think, would allow maybe as much but you are the ones as ten percent fault on wanette smith. to decide, and you can make that higher or lower based on what you believe reynolds has proved to you should be the number on her versus the number on reynolds. now, question 13 is how much money the verdict should be. to figure this out, you take only one thing into 89 account, the level of harms and losses the cigarette nothing else. companies caused. this being about money damages. justice means a verdict measured in dollars. there was statements about healing requires justice. page 20 of your jury instruction says you should assess the amount that you find to be full, just, and reasonable compensation. i'm not going to run back over there and put it up, but it is page 22 -- 22 of your jury instructions. and i want to talk about that. what does compensation mean? it means balancing it means match the amount of money with the the scales. i said at the beginning harms amount of harms and losses. and losses are the only things that can be considered, and everything else is outside the box. for example, sympathy. of course you can feel sympathy for this family and what they went through, but you are not allowed to raise your verdict because of your sympathy. that is an outside reason, just like you cannot lower the verdict because you are worried a verdict might encourage lawsuits. harms and losses only. that are outside, and juries have to avoid them all. that is an outside reason. that is the rule. and there are other reasons let me explain it this way. somebody works a 40-hour week. work a little more, the scale goes this way. their work tips the scale this way. if they if they work a 90 the boss pays for the work done. little less, the scale goes this way. them. underpays, the scales are not even. the scales go this way. boss comes in to pay if the boss if the boss overpays, you need to find the balance of the hours and work the boss cannot say, here's the outside part: "compensation" means a perfect and money and equalize it. balance. well, you know, john has -- does not really have a high cost of living. you know, he seems to be doing just fine, so i'm going to pay him a little bit less money. any good. cannot pay him less money because of it. reason. the boss cannot -- the boss can think that, but he it will not do him it is an outside it makes no difference. just like juries: if a juror during deliberations was to say, lowell smith and brian smith, they seem to be doing just fine, they do not need all that money; so we should allow less money, that is an outside reason. not allowed. it is another example is the boss cannot say, pay the full amount or raise prices on the things we have to buy, so i think i'll just pay john a little bit less. outside reason. keep reminding yourselves of this, and you can look back at page 22 which says, "fair, just, and reasonable compensation." that is an so you might have to and if a juror uses an outside reason, such just like juries. 91 as money cannot bring wanette smith back, remind that juror that is an outside reason. if the juror insists, show them what is in verdict -- in that jury instruction. someone still resists following the judge's instructions, you need to let the deputies know that somebody is not following the law, because you know your most important job here, your sworn duty, is to follow the law, and no one has the right to make anyone serve on a jury that did not follow the law. and if so if during deliberations a juror uses an outside reason, like they are worried what people will think if your verdict is for a full and fair amount, remind them that is an outside reason. and remind them, too, you will be able to tell people it was a complicated and long trial, and over the course of the trial, i became an expert. and if you would heard what i heard, you would have made the same decision. so if anyone says it is more money than they need or wanette smith made a choice to smoke, should not be much money, remind them, no outside reasons. question 13 is the total it would take to make up for the harms and losses. 13 -- can you put these up quickly. i think he has -- okay. we can do it this way. lost earnings to the estate. that is fine. just put it back. 92 lost earnings and accumulations and medical we heard that from dr. raffa. expenses. and explained to you how he calculated that up as an economist and that amount was $79,530. raffa came in here the second part -- i want the slide. james smith's loss -- james lowell smith, his loss of his wife's companionship, his loss of her protection, his pain and suffering for the six years while they struggled to fight cancer and copd, and then his pain and suffering for the 30 years -- 30 more years that he -- she would have had if she had lived 30 more years of a happy marriage. the second part of this is his loss of support and and those are what are called the loss of services. calculating an economic money amount on a economic damages. person in a relationship is complicated and difficult to do. but it has to be done. the court asks jurors to do it, and the evidence we presented was intended to help. that is why we brought in raffa, to explain to you. and he showed us how to calculate it -- i will not do the math, but he showed us that the amount of loss of services was $555,000, the loss of support was $502,000. and now the defense may tell you it is wrong for mr. smith to want reynolds to make up for the loss of his loving wife -- they will say it differently -- that he is wrong to benefit from his lost wife's income and services when he 93 but no one, folks, no one is a remarriage certainly gives an when a wife dies, life is indeed still very married a year later. replaceable. different, and everyone in this room knows the slates do not just get wiped clean. opportunity for -- for hope, for healing, for comfort, but every anniversary is fraught it does not take away the loss. with difficulty and struggle to deal with the past memories and the desire to move on. so taking into consideration how much each of taking into consideration the loss that he is us -- sorry. had, your thoughtful, deliberate discussions and decisions is all that we ask for here. question 13: are brian smith's -- the total it will take to make up for the harms and losses to brian smith. can you put up the slide? and there are four things -- five things here to the loss of his mother's companionship, the loss consider: of his mother's instruction, the loss of her guidance, the pain and suffering that he went through with his mom for those six years while they struggled, and the pain and suffering for the 30 years of his mother's life that he lost. brian was just 24 years old when his mother died. she had 30 more years. he lost more of her life with him 94 than he had. make up for the harms and losses to wanette smith? and question 14 is: how much it will take to the medical bills related to her lung cancer -- will you put that up? oh, sorry. the medical bills related to wanette smith, you heard that proof. the other part's the we are not trying to say her copd caused her her pain and suffering for her six years with $165,000. harder part: her copd. death. years of struggling with that, her disability for six years, her mental anguish for six years, her loss of enjoyment for life for six years. it did not. but her pain and suffering for her six when you value these losses and harms -- you can take that down -- you need to look at how bad the harm was and how long the pain was. example. and let me give you this if it caused you to lose the companionship of your wife for a few days, maybe she was in the hospital and you had to do more dishes and take care of the kids and the laundry, you know, that would be a loss, but it would not be a very big loss. that would be the kind of case where i'd ask -- have to ask for a verdict that was not very much, maybe in the thousands. a few days in -- out of a 30- or 50-year marriage is just not that serious. 95 but let us move up the scale. if the injury is worse and you lose the companionship of your wife for several years -- maybe she is in a coma or something -- well, that would be more harm, more like a midlevel harm, and it would take more money to make up for that loss. that would make it the kind of case where i'd have to ask for a verdict in the hundreds of thousands of dollars. and now let us move the scale up to the highest what happens when your wife of 30 years is taken away that is the worst kind of damage that someone can and that is the kind of case where i have to ask for a step. forever? do. verdict in the millions. case. it is the highest level type of reynolds -- what reynolds did was cost wanette and that same kind of scale can be used to smith her life. figure out how much to allow for wanette's son brian, who did not lose his mother for a few days, for a few years, but for the rest of his life. and the same kind of scale can be also used to figure out how much to allow for wanette for her pain and suffering. a few days would be something, maybe $1,000. having shortness of breath and some coughing for being unable to breathe, having to get oxygen and a scooter because you could not get around, but only having that for a few months, that might be a higher level harm, 96 but still not a very serious harm. slowly getting worse over the months, over the years as dr. burns explained, breathing like out of an ever smaller and smaller straw for six years, it is not the worst kind of harm. it is not -- it is not an up-here kind of harm, but it is a very high level of harm for what she went through. wanette smith and lowell smith struggled for six long years fighting the cancer and the copd, and never once did wanette give up. fine." and she would always say, "i'm just and when she was diagnosed with lung cancer on her 40th birthday, she went in and had surgery to cut out part of her lung, the cancer did not stay away. it came back in '99. they went through treatment after the treatment after treatment, trying everything the doctors could think of, even when the doctors said the treatment's worse than the benefit, hand in hand, they fought hard. but in 2001, when she was just 46, with nearly half her life ahead of her, wanette smith died at home in lowell's arms. and if she had not, she would be 57 today. the family might be getting together this afternoon for a walk on the beach to collect sharks teeth and make turtles in the sand with her grandchildren, or she could be teaching her grandchildren how to bake and cook, 97 just like she did her sons. she would be picking up things at the flea market and decorating them and painting them to surprise lowell for she and lowell would be looking decorations for the house. forward to their retirement in what should have been their golden years together. i told you, based on the significant loss, i would and when you consider the ask for a significant verdict. loss of this family, the loss of the sanctity of family, the sanctity of life, it requires an accounting for the wrongdoing. than wrong, we believe the verdict should be $10 million. but it is up for you to decide, and you can put either a higher amount or a lower amount depending on what you feel the evidence is. and it makes it a case where, more likely right but when you consider the value took place and the harm to this family -- how much it will take to make up for their loss, consider what reynolds valued -- and that gets to the last question on the verdict form, question 15. do you find by clear and convincing evidence that punitive damages awarded -- this is a higher level. not more likely right than wrong. and the questions are -- the -- you will get instructed about this -- can you put up the instruction? it is it is something higher. i'll tell you this: you will hear the instruction. 98 these are the words to listen for: intentional, reckless or grossly negligent? were reynolds' acts it is all right. we know absolutely -- we know it from their own words and their own documents, yes, they were intentional. just do not worry about it. no witness has disputed that at all. it was explained to you in great detail by dr. cummings and dr. burns, but not just by them, shown to you from their very own documents, the actions were taken intentionally, knowingly, for profit. it was premeditated. it needed replacements. reynolds knew it had to design cigarettes to hook it knew and keep people hooked or its sales would go down. it had to get kids started. reynolds knew it had to intercept smokers who were worried about those messages, people who were trying to quit. and so they created this doubt out of nowhere, this controversy that did not exist, promised people, if we find something we will take it out, and put out these phony filters and these low-tar cigarettes. reynolds knew also -- sure as i'm standing here today, and you heard mr. gentry admit it -- that their actions would kill 400,000 americans every year, year after year after year, and that as it happened reynolds would go right along with business as usual, finding more replacement smokers. 99 reynolds made this choice with its eyes wide open. it intended everything it did, and millions upon millions of people have died all in the name of growing market share. and punitive damages are important -- and this is they are more than to my last point -- because not just -- punitive damages are not just -- they are not to compensate. compensate. they are to punish and, most importantly, they are to deter other companies, to tell other companies and other manufacturers, whether they sell baby food or pharmaceutical prescription drugs or fire alarms for schools, you cannot lie about and hide dangers you know you cannot trick people into doing about in your product. something deadly. you cannot say it is safe when you know it is not safe, and you cannot rig something for addiction, especially, and go after children. punitive damages tell all companies this, and other companies are watching to see what this jury says. need you here on this question to be plain and clear. americans need you to be plain and clear. lie, you cannot hide, you cannot trick people, you cannot rig a product to make it more dangerous. it is not okay. you just cannot do it. no, you cannot we all thank you. ms. barnett: now i'm between you and your break. i'll be quick. let me just say this. it is fine to defend yourself when you have done nothing wrong. but when you are wrong, you are supposed to stand up, step up and accept responsibility, not sidestep responsibility at the expense of the very people you hurt. that is fine. and reynolds failed to take responsibility in the they '50s when they learned their cigarettes caused cancer. failed to take responsibility and kept lying to customers 146 during the years that wanette smith smoked. they refused to accept responsibility for the almost 15 years since she died. and today -- or the last six days, you have heard them in here doing nothing else but being in front of you, trying to avoid responsibility permanently. usual. in their office. what you guys did with their verdict. and tomorrow, reynolds will be in business as and wherever their representatives are, they will be maybe they will read a little note about but ms. parker said over and over again this case is only about wanette smith, only about one smoker, only about her. do not be distracted by anything that we did. the case is also about reynolds and this family -- we have it is not true. and the choices it made. acknowledged -- we have said, yes, consider -- consider wanette smith. responsibility. consider her fault. you heard mr. smith say it. we have accepted some reynolds has done everything but that. did they bring you a single witness to explain what they did? in fact, ms. parker just talked to you for over an hour, and nothing -- she said nothing about what reynolds did except at the end to say, well, we worked with the surgeon general's office; we followed their recommendations. but you remember. the surgeon general was recommending filters because the surgeon general did not know 147 what reynolds knew, which were those -- they did not work. and once the surgeon general -- other authorities, the national cancer institute and all those things we talked about -- once they found out the truth, they changed their position. because they did not just fool the americans who were smokers; they withheld information and got the surgeon general itself to make those recommendations. how much harm was there to people? so reynolds does not want you to think about the it did not bring you anybody from the but it did bring you this choices it has made. company in here to talk to you. hoffman, this historian, this paid expert witness created by her, who has never done any research or publications in the area. she is one of a staple of witnesses like her that come and show these movies. and they never look at what reynolds did in response. they define the question narrowly so they do not have to deal with what reynolds did or answer any questions about what reynolds did, just like barsky. he comes in with this strained definition of what bac is. that question. i have not ever had that happen. and i'll answer why did not we do that testing? clear she had adenocarcinoma. killed her, and you saw that. non-bac in her chest. because it was it was caused by smoking. their expert agrees she had that is what invaded and killed her. it 148 and if reynolds was so sure this testing would have shown something different, you know they would have done it with all the resources that they have. but they also brought you in dr. farber, who says, well, there is just not enough evidence just exactly -- barsky has different definitions. like, reynolds argued to congress and to the american public that, well, they are not addictive because we want to use the classical -- old definition of addiction, or cigarettes do not cause cancer, because we have this definition of what "cause" means, and it is not linked, and we have not proven it exactly. definition that we want to use. and now we have a new it is called bac. and farber says, we just do not know. we just never mind what the doctor they are just wrong, just like the surgeon general is do not know if she had copd. said. wrong, just like the health authorities are wrong, the doctors are wrong. and dr. farber had the same message reynolds has we just do not know; there is not enough had for decades. evidence to prove it. here. want you to think about anything -- anything else except for what reynolds did. that is who they chose to have you listen to. that is who they chose to bring you in they ms. parker said she smoked because she wanted it, 149 it was not there. and she made some she told you bac kills. where was a witness to tell where was a witness to not because she was addicted. you that? tell you that? statements, by the way, about what the law is. kind of slide -- she put a slide up and said the question for you was: did addiction cause her disease or could she quit? verdict form. instructions the court will give you. that is not a question that you will see on your that is not a question that is in the she said -- i showed you exactly where the instructions are. and the question is simply whether addiction was a cause, one of causes, not this -- this -- this question. and she told you, too, that clear and convincing evidence -- the evidence for punitive damages is the highest standard there is. folks, the clear and convincing evidence so i just ask you -- reynolds cannot prove its language -- it is in the verdict form -- the instructions, and the judge will tell you what that is, but the highest level would be beyond a reasonable doubt. and that is not the standard. case by making arguments to you. they need the law. pointed out to you. not sure ms. parker said this, while you are in jury deliberations, see if it is in the verdict form. so pay attention to those places i and if someone starts to say, well, i'm they need witnesses, and see if it is 150 on the instructions. she said addiction does not relieve people of what relieves reynolds of responsibility responsibility. and how do they come in here and blame for its choices? people for not quitting earlier, when reynolds made the cigarettes to make it as hard as possible? a couple more things here. ms. parker stood in here and said -- she said it in opening and she said it again today, that wanette smith only tried to quit two times in the '90s and never before. barbara selph came here. you heard her testimony. and particularly, you heard the evidence she talked about in the '70s and the '80s wanette smith trying to quit. from dr. hoffman yesterday about wanette struggling to quit, crying, feeling like she was less of a woman and not understanding why she could not beat her addiction. what evidence was in here, not that there were only two quits. and also, esther stone told you her sister tried repeatedly to quit. that is and there was that comment about mr. smith in his deposition saying that -- that wanette did not smoke low-tar, low-nicotine cigarettes. i'm going to show you something on the elmo. ms. parker: ms. barnett: objection. it is a demonstrative, your honor. not in evidence. 151 evidence. it is not in no, your honor. ms. parker: we need to approach on this one. the court: (sidebar conference.) the court: ms. barnett: okay. what is this? it is the fact sheet where he says she smoked doral, vantage, belair, and raleigh. ms. parker: the court: ms. barnett: the court: this is interrogatories in the case. that is not a demonstrative aid. i'm using it to demonstrate -- no, no, no, no. that is not a demonstrative. should have offered into in evidence. if you wanted to offer it in evidence, you ms. barnett: well, i had no idea they would make this a misleading argument, judge. that is not a demonstrative aid. the court: ms. barnett: (the following proceedings occurred in open court, all right. in the presence of the jury:) ms. barnett: apparently, i'm not going to show you this. reynolds knew from the deposition of james smith. he said very clearly, with no question, she smoked doral. remember those cigarettes you saw? remember the ad you saw? she smoked vantage. she smoked belair. 152 now, if he did not call them low-tar or low-nicotine cigarettes, that does not change. they were. in fact, i'll wrap up here. that is what and they talked about -- well, let me say this. reynolds has not stopped the lies and deceptions you heard how they attacked the surgeon and the attacks. general going back to '54 and -- i've got to get water. they -- they have not -- they have not stopped this plan that they have. they came in the courtroom, attacked mr. wilner, who cannot take the stand here and testify to defend himself; attacked dr. feingold. how long did ms. parker cross-examine him to try what did she ask him about to prove he was a bad person? the actual substance of his opinions? about his conclusions or his methods that were wrong? nothing. what did she show you she spent the whole time attacking him. attacked wanette smith herself for not trying hard enough to quit, ignoring evidence that she did -- of the many times she tried to quit, and bringing out -- to talk about how wanette smith -- this is the documents. them to show you anything wrong. again, we had to count on out of wanette smith's entire life, they pull out did they prove to you anything one life insurance document. 153 about that, what it meant, what she understood, what discussions were had, whether it made any difference, whether that form was ever submitted anywhere to everyone -- to anyone? they did not. and then perhaps most remarkable of all -- well, they said he lied because he they also attacked mr. smith. said he did not know about the copd and he lied because -- no evidence your honor, objection. ms. parker: of that. the court: ladies and gentlemen. stand. what the lawyers say is not evidence, it is what you heard from the witness you may proceed. ms. barnett: well, you have seen what happened in they attacked mr. smith, who lost his wife, this trial. attacked her son for bringing a lawsuit. to try to hold someone responsible when you believe that what they did caused your loved one's death. it is legal, too, but most remarkable of all is reynolds came in here -- they did it in the opening and again today -- and they accused us of repackaging. repackaging wanette smith and trying to tell you something different, when reynolds -- reynolds is the greatest repackager of our time. this set of lawyers of that is quite astonishing. for them to accuse this family and they accused us of 154 they took cigarettes they knew were deadly. what did they do when people got worried about cancer? stuck a filter on the end. they they made it a super fancy triple, quadruple, quintuple, dumafajamad [phonetic], fancy filter. and they repackaged it and sold it as safer, knowing it was not any safer. and that was not enough. then they made those cigarettes, low-tar, low-nicotine cigarettes and sold them as safer, when they knew that they were not any safer. reynolds made these choices. and i want to end with a little clip of some of the ads that you saw of how reynolds did its own repackaging. (video played.) ms. barnett: thank you for your attention, and you have you have listened with -- you have put up and i we have all noticed how much attention you have paid. taken good notes. with all of our lengthy sidebars and carrying on. really appreciate the attention that you have paid. i will say this -- ms. parker pointed out -- if you answer yes -- yes, we think it is appropriate to consider whether to deter others, and reynolds, from continuing, there may be another day of proof. the kind of jurors who would just write "no" so that you but we know you are not 155 could be able to go home sooner. thank you very much.