closing statement ms. baker: thank you, your honor. may it please the court, counsel, and mrs. smith, good morning, ladies and gentlemen. now, when mr. wichmann stood up, he started his presentation by quoting my words from opening statement, that this was a case about one smoker and one smoker only, julius smith. and for a minute, i actually thought he was going to talk about mr. smith. but what did he do next? he pulled up a document from a conference that was held in england in the 1980s. and you had to ask yourself: did that 3248 have anything to do with mr. smith's choices? that document did not make a difference to mr. smith, like lots of the documents that you saw flash up on the screen during the trial. and mr. wichmann did not try to argue that it did. reynolds did not stand up; i did not stand up; and mr. gordon did not stand up and defend against documents like that. we agree that it was wrong-headed. and so we spent our time throughout trial trying to be efficient and trying to use time wisely, and i will try to do the same here this morning with my closing. and we tried to talk about what mattered in this case, and that was mr. smith and the choices that he made. now, i told you that plaintiff's counsel -- i told you in opening that plaintiff's counsel would make it seem like mr. smith lived in a bubble where he was unaware of the health risks and addictive nature of smoking. and they did. but you heard the evidence. mr. smith was told not to smoke before he ever picked up that first cigarette. and he saw, read, and understood the 3249 warnings on every pack of cigarettes he smoked from 1966 forward. that is undisputed. he chose to keep smoking in the face of those warnings, so you know -- you know that is not the case, that he grew up and lived in a bubble. he knew the health risks. he knew smoking was addictive. mr. wichmann said that he was misled. he knew the risks. he was not misled. he was not confused. and i told you that they would try to convince you that something a tobacco company said or did not say made a difference to mr. smith, and they did. they spent a lot of time on that in this trial. they spent days showing you documents and videos that no one -- no one could tell you that mr. smith saw or relied on. and you saw that no warning about the health risks -- not from mr. smith's parents, not from his wife, not from his children, and not from every pack of cigarettes that he smoked after 1966. none of those warnings made any difference to him. mr. smith was smart. he was hard-working. he was his own man, and he made his own 3250 decisions. if the warnings that were literally all around him, in his house, in the palm of his hand every time he picked up a pack, if those warnings made no difference, you know that nothing a tobacco company said or did would have. now, on behalf of myself and mr. gordon and mr. hansen, i want to thank you, like others have this morning, for your jury service. our legal system depends on citizens like you responding to the call of civic duty. i know you had to give up your time over the last two weeks. i know that this has been an inconvenience, but we very much appreciate your time and your attention and your patience, especially this morning. now, let us talk about what this case is really about. mr. praglin told you just a few moments ago to keep your eye on the ball. and i agree. i think that sports analogy is particularly important in this case. because no matter what sport you like, one of the first things that we teach kids when they start playing sports is to stay focused and keep your eye on the ball. 3251 and that is especially true here. i told you in opening statement -- and it remains true today -- that that class action that judge craig told you about, told you about at the beginning of the trial and he mentioned it again today, that class action is over. and despite what dr. cummings tried to tell you, this is not a case about smokers in general. it is not a case about tobacco company conduct in general, even though mr. wichmann would have you believe that. and he spent most of his time this morning talking that, and i expect when he stands up after i sit down, he will do that again. he wants your focus on tobacco company conduct and not on mr. smith. and we know that conduct did not make a difference to mr. smith. now, i told you in opening -- and it bears repeating -- that if you look back over the millions of pages of documents authored by employees of reynolds and other tobacco companies over the last 50 or 60 years, you will find statements -- and we saw some of them in this courtroom -- you will see statements made and ideas expressed that today no one 3252 would say or think. i told you that for too long reynolds held on to the notion that it had not been proven that smoking could cause disease; that it had not been proven that smoking was addictive, long after -- long after mr. smith already knew those things. and i told you, just like i told you when i got started this morning, that many of those ideas that you would see expressed, that you saw when mr. wichmann got up, many were just plain wrong-headed. but y'all know that we are not here to debate those issues. and we are not here to defend those documents, because i think we can all agree that those things could not and would not be said today. that is why i asked you in opening, and that is why i ask you now: every time you see a document or an ad flash up on the screen, ask yourself: what does this have to do -- what does this have to do with mr. smith's choices. keep your eye on that ball. now, this case is about mr. smith. this is his case. his wife brought this lawsuit. 3253 and so his choices and his decisions have to be examined: what he knew, when he knew it, and what he did with the information that he had. that is why we have tried to focus on that in presenting the evidence in this case, and that is what i hope to focus on in my time with you this morning. now, mr. praglin, he got up and said there was unrebutted testimony from their witnesses. it was not unrebutted. it was not unrebutted. we had the opportunity to get up and ask questions on cross-examination. and that is the evidence from reynolds that you can consider in this case. now, you will soon get a verdict form from judge craig. and you will see that the questions on that verdict form -- and you have already seen it a little bit this morning. the questions on that verdict form ask you about mr. smith, not other smokers. and so before we get to the four key facts -- we talked about those key facts, those key issues at the outset. before we get back to that now and the evidence that you saw as to each of those, let me just quickly address 3254 something that both mr. wichmann and mr. praglin mentioned. they talked about the fact that we did not bring any witnesses. and we did not. we all know that. but this case is not about who brought more witnesses. it is about the evidence you find to be most convincing, most persuasive and most compelling. and just like i told you during opening statements when i told you that most of our evidence would likely come in through the cross-examination of plaintiff's witnesses, you heard everything you needed to know from mr. gordon and mr. hansen and me through the questions we asked when plaintiff's witnesses took the stand. we did not think you needed to spend more time -- any more time here before you decided the issues in this case. we did not need to call a paid expert to certify that mr. smith's death was not caused by copd or related to smoking. we did not need to call a witness to tell you that mr. smith knew about the health hazards of smoking, and he knew about them for 3255 decades. you heard that from his sister, sue pigue, the one who grew up with him and lived in the same house as him and was around him when he started smoking. and yesterday you heard that again when mrs. smith took the stand. now, mrs. smith's lawyers brought two experts, dr. hurt, their first witness, and dr. cummings, each of whom has been testifying against reynolds you now know for decades. dr. hurt actually started this year, started 2016 testifying in a case right here in this courtroom. he brought those same slides that he used in that trial to talk to you about the exact same things in this case. he did not even change the name on those slides. and he has made hundreds of thousands of dollars over the last two years alone. dr. cummings, that is the one -- that is the witness who came and told you right at the beginning of his testimony that he was not here to talk about mr. smith. he did not know the first thing about mr. smith. he said the facts -- that facts are facts. well, the facts are this. he has made 3256 over a million dollars testifying against tobacco companies. and he, too, came in here and showed you the same documents and videos that he has shown in nearly 100 other trials that he has testified in. you saw some of those again this morning when mr. wichmann threw many of them back up on the screen. but not a single person, not one, who knew mr. smith -- we know dr. cummings did not know mr. smith -- but not one witness who knew mr. smith walked into this courtroom and testified that he did not know smoking was dangerous. not one. not a single person told you that he was somehow confused about the health risks of smoking. he was not. we know that now. and that, ladies and gentlemen, is a fact. so ask yourself why mr. wichmann spent his time this morning trying to persuade you that mr. smith was misled, that he was tricked into smoking and continuing to smoke. that is not the evidence you heard in this case. now, you are going to hear -- you have already heard this morning again about those findings from an earlier class action. judge 3257 craig read you those instructions. and there is no dispute about that, ladies and gentlemen. those findings that you will see or that you heard this morning in the instruction, they do not tell you how to answer any of the questions on the verdict form. that is because, by your answers to specific questions on the verdict form, you will get to decide whether those findings even apply in this case and ultimately to the choices mr. smith made. now, you just heard mr. praglin. he has now asked you to award millions of dollars and damages for mr.~smith's choice to smoke cigarettes, something you all know that he did in the face of warnings for years. so in many respects, this case presents a very simple question: are you going to hold reynolds legally responsible for mr. smith's choice to smoke cigarettes and award ms. smith millions of dollars in damages, when the evidence clearly demonstrates that he knew the risks, but simply made no motivated effort to quit smoking until his final and successful quit in 2002? 3258 now, in a moment we are going to go through those four key facts, those four key issues, and i am going to walk you through the evidence on those points. before i do, i want to spend just a moment on the sources of evidence in this case, where the evidence came from. now, in opening, i asked you to pay close attention to these sources and i told you that everything that you would see would either come from a source that predates this lawsuit, meaning before this lawsuit was filed and before anyone had an interest in remembering things in a way that might be favorable to the outcome. things like that claim form that mr. smith signed under penalty of prosecution for the 16 years of exposure to mold and chemicals that he said -- that he said -- not me, not mr. gordon -- that he said caused his respiratory symptoms, prostate cancer and other problems. the rest of the evidence came from testimony from mrs. smith and her children and what they told us about mr. smith, and that all came -- all of that testimony came after this 3259 lawsuit was filed. and now you know why i asked you to pay close attention to the sources of evidence. many of the things that mrs. smith and her children told us here in this courtroom were constricted by the prior -- contradicted by the prior testimony under oath and they do not fit the facts of mr.~smith's life. you are the sole judges of the facts and you get to decide what testimony you believe. judge craig will give you this instruction. you have already seen it. i think mr. praglin showed it to you. he will give you this instruction on the believability of witnesses. you can see that. one of the things, one of the factors is any interest the witness may have in the outcome of the case. that is a factor you can consider in determining the credibility of a witness. and by "interest," we mean a financial interest in the outcome of a case. i encourage you, i ask you to use your common sense when you evaluate the evidence in the case. you can accept or reject any testimony in part or in whole, and that is your 3260 job and your job alone. let me give you an example of when ms. smith told us one thing here in the courtroom that was controverted by other evidence. you heard her tell us on direct evidence yesterday, you heard her tell us that she did not know that smoking had health risks until her husband was diagnosed with copd in the 1990s. you recall that testimony. but what was the other evidence you heard on cross-examination? you heard that she and mr. smith talked about nicotine being addictive in 1964. in 1964, they had that conversation. he was not confused about whether nicotine was addictive. he was not confused about whether smoking could be difficult to quit. he knew that in 1964, and he told ms. smith that. in 1965, she notices that he has a smoker's cough. he is coughing already because of his smoking, and she talks to him about it and she tells him he has a terrible cough. in 1966, that is the first time the warnings go on the pack of cigarettes, and the smiths take notice. they both take notice. mr. smith sees it, he understands it. 3261 in 1970, the warning label changes. and you heard about this. in 1970, the smiths actually have a conversation about the change in the language. mr. smith starts that conversation. he shows mrs. smith the warning label and he reads it to her. he reads it to her. he was not confused. it was not a controversy in his mind. in the 1980s, mrs. smith is reading articles about the health risks of smoking in the palatka daily news and she is talking to mr. smith about it. she telling him what he already knows. she is reminding him that smoking can be dangerous and it has health risks. and in 1985, the warning labels change again to four rotating warning labels. and once again, the smiths take notice. mr. smith sees it. he understands it. he knows there is no controversy. he is not being misled. there is no confusion in his mind. now, remember too that when i asked mrs. smith, she told us on direct examination that she never read about the health risks of smoking in the newspapers. did not see it, www.phippsreporting.com 888-811-3408 did not read it. but on cross-examination, i pointed out to her her prior testimony where she told us under oath that she did, in fact, see those articles, she read about them in the palatka daily news, and that she was a regular evening news watcher. now, judge craig will tell you that you do not have to check your common sense at the door. you do not have to check that down at the metal detector. when deciding whether or not to believe the testimony you heard in this courtroom, you can use your common sense and good judgment. that, again, is your job and your job alone. now, we are going to take you to the four key facts in order and i want to talk about the evidence, and we will go through the verdict form questions in order. but as we do that, i ask you to ask yourself the following series of questions. who was in control of mr. smith's choices and his decision to smoke cigarettes? who was in control of that? who was in control of his efforts to quit smoking? who controlled his motivation to quit? 3263 was he addicted? and if so, was he someone whose addiction was so strong, so substantial -- and that is from the court's instruction -- so strong, so substantial, that he was unable to make the choice to quit? and, finally, did mr. smith rely on anything that reynolds said or failed to say about the health risks of smoking? now, after hearing the evidence in this case, you know that mr. smith was not paying attention to what tobacco companies were saying. he was not waiting for reynolds to tell him something he did not already know. he knew the dangers, and he was the only person making smoking decisions in his life. the truth is, and the evidence has shown, that mr. smith smoked because he wanted to. he did not want to throw away his cigarettes. smoking gave him a social outlet. it helped him relax. he enjoyed smoking with a cup of coffee. nothing wrong with that. i told you in opening, and it is worth repeating here again this morning, we all have the right in this country to make decisions for ourselves. 3264 mr. smith understood that. his family told you he respected the flag and what it stood for. and what it stands for is free will and choice and personal responsibility. mr. smith made the choice to smoke and keep smoking, and he had that right. we are not here to criticize that right. we are not here to second-guess his choices or decisions, but they were his choices and his decisions. with the right to make choices for yourself, the right to forge your own path in life comes personal responsibility. you cannot have one without the other. you can make those choices, but at the end of the day, you must accept the consequences for those choices. nicotine did not rob mr. smith of the ability to make choices. you have heard no evidence of the sort. no evidence. he was smart and hard working and able to accomplish things he set his mind to. he made his own decisions. all we need to know -- all we need to do to know that is look at his life and what he was able to accomplish. so with that in mind, let us get to the four facts. these are the facts we discussed in 3265 opening. plaintiff failed to prove that mr.~smith was addicted rather than someone who chose to smoke and was not motivated to stop until he quit smoking for good. plaintiff failed to prove that addiction -- addiction, not smoking, but addiction was a legal cause of his injuries and not his choices and decisions. number 3, plaintiff failed to meet her burden of proving that copd -- copd caused mr. smith's death as opposed to his numerous other health issues including aspiration and sepsis, which is a word for infection. and finally, plaintiff brought you no credible evidence -- none -- that mr. smith reasonably relied on statements by reynolds. let us look at the first key issue. addiction. this is that first issue, the first hurdle. and this is a question -- this first issue is part of a question, the first question on your verdict form: was julius smith addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine? part one. we are going to talk about that now. 3266 and part two: if so, was such addiction a legal cause of his emphysema or copd? if you answer no to this question, that is a verdict for reynolds. if you answer yes, that is a verdict for plaintiff, and you have decided that reynolds is liable to mr.~smith for her husband's choices to smoke. so let us look at whether mr. smith was addicted. now, remember on this -- and you heard this instruction from the judge. you cannot consider the findings for purposes of answering this question. the findings do not apply yet. and let me remind you, too, and you did not hear it this morning, the court has not and will not give you a definition of what it means to be addicted. the court will not give you a set of medical criteria to use to determine whether mr. smith was addicted. so let us look at the evidence that you heard. now, at the outset, you saw a lot of medical records in this case. they contained many medical diagnoses. but not one, not one record that you saw contained a diagnosis from one of mr. smith's doctors that he was addicted 3267 to nicotine. no one who ever treated mr. smith made a diagnosis of addiction. you heard from dr. hurt last week, he was the lead-off witness, the guy that goes around making presentations about not giving yes-or-no answers on cross-examination. he told you that it was this simple: just count up the number of cigarettes that mr. smith smoked each day and see if he smoked early in the morning. and if he did, he is addicted. those are the two questions under the heaviness of smoking index. and it should come as no surprise plaintiff wants you to use that test in this case. it is a test with only one outcome. i asked dr. hurt about this on cross-examination, and you saw that. you are considered addicted under this test even if you score 0. even if you score 0. and you remember dr. hurt quibbling with me on that point when i asked him: so even someone who only smokes one cigarette a day, under this test, that person would be considered addicted? and he did everything i think he could to avoid answering that question, but i think we know the answer. there is only one outcome under 3268 this test, and that is everyone who smokes daily is addicted. dr. hurt also told us that addiction meant a loss of control. he said that was addiction 101, loss of control. you have now heard the evidence. you know mr. smith was in control of his smoking. he stopped smoking in the house by the late '70s or early 1980s. never smoked in the house again. he did not smoke inside the jail when he worked at the volusia county branch jail. he was not allowed to smoke inside the jail. when he went places where there were nonsmoking restrictions like church or work, mr. smith could abide by those without difficulty. under dr. hurt's addiction 101 test, mr. smith was not addicted. smoking did not control him, and he did not lose control over his smoking. and we know that mr. smith could quit because he did quit. there was nothing in the record that told us, absolutely nothing, that he could not have quit earlier. smoking never controlled mr. smith, and when he made a motivated, determined effort to quit, he did so. 3269 this is not the picture of a hopeless addict or tortured smoker. mr. smith was a willing smoker for almost the entire time that he was smoking. based on the evidence you heard, we believe you should find that mr. smith was not addicted, and your answer to this first question on the verdict form should be "no" for that reason. well, let us get to the second key fact. even if you ultimately decide that mr. smith was addicted, your work is really just beginning because you have to get to the second part of that first question. and this is that second key fact. plaintiff failed to prove that addiction was a legal cause of mr. smith's injuries. this is the second hurdle. plaintiff has to get over both of these hurdles, has to meet her burden on both of these to get a yes on the first question on the verdict form. now, mrs. smith has the burden to prove by the greater weight of the evidence that mr. smith's claimed addiction was a legal cause 3270 of his copd. and, again, this is asking about addiction, not smoking. the court gave you an instruction on legal cause. and honestly, the language in the instruction is hard to follow, even if you are a lawyer. but in a case like this, the question of legal cause really boils down to quitting. ask yourself this: based on all of the evidence you heard, was mr. smith's claimed addiction so strong, so substantial, that it stood in the way of a motivated and committed effort to quit? and let me step back here for just a moment because there was some suggestion this morning that we have somehow criticized mr. smith's attempts to quit smoking. we are not here to do that. we are not here to do that. but for all of the evidence you heard about a patch or gum or spray or hypnosis, whatever you heard, the bottom line is this: mr. smith never, not once, threw out his cigarettes until the last and final time that he quit in 2002. 3271 and whatever he was allegedly using to try to quit, whatever it was, he never, not once, tried to stop smoking until he actually stopped in 2002. he never put those cigarettes down. i said it at the outset, and the evidence and your common sense tells you you cannot quit smoking if you do not stop smoking. now, mrs. smith really told us all we need to know on this issue yesterday. she told us that when mr. smith quit for good in 2002, this was different. it was different than all of the other times. she said he told her, this is it. this is it. i'm quitting. that is what he told her in 2002. and he had never done that before. and she told us that, for the first time, for the very first time, he actually put down his cigarettes and did not pick them up again. folks, actions speak louder than words. you can say you are going to quit, but if do not actually try to quit, you are not going to stop smoking. this time in 2002 when mr. smith quit for good, he was not going through the motions. he was not just putting on a patch or chewing gum but not throwing out his cigarettes and not 3272 stopping. dr. cummings tried to tell you that people cannot quit without a patch or a cessation aid, but for mr. smith, we know that is not true. maybe there are smokers out there who honestly and truly cannot quit, but we know that mr. smith was not one of them. when he finally decided to quit for good, he did it and he never picked up a cigarette again. and despite whatever he felt after he quit, you heard this testimony from a variety of witnesses, he continued to experience cravings, he was desperate, he wanted to smoke. despite those feelings, once he decided this is it, i'm quitting, he never picked up a cigarette again. those cravings, those feelings did not make him go out and buy a carton or a pack of cigarettes and start smoking again. for the next 13 years after mr. smith quit, he stayed off cigarettes. and what was it -- what was it that kept him from giving in and going and buying a carton or buying a pack? his choice was to stay quit. it was his choice. it was his decision. 3273 addiction did not cause him to smoke for those 13 years after he quit for good. when you decide to quit and you say, this is it, i'm quitting, and make a motivated, committed effort -- and mrs. smith told us this effort was different. those are not my words. those are not the words of defense counsel or lawyers representing reynolds. this is mrs. smith's words. when you make a motivated effort and for the first time put down your cigarettes and stay quit, an alleged addiction is not driving your actions. mr. smith's choices stood in between any alleged addiction and his copd. they always did, and they certainly did in 2002. now, if you decide that mr. smith could have quit smoking when he was truly motivated to do so, and we know here that he did in 2002, then addiction cannot be a legal cause of his copd. instead, it was mr. smith's choice to smoke and not to make a concerted, sincere effort to quit in the years that he was faced with so many warnings. 3274 those choices, those decisions are the one and only legal cause in this case. this is part of the legal cause instruction. in order to be a legal cause, it has to be direct. it has to be natural. it has to be continuous. we know it was none of those things. because we know mr. smith's choices stood in between any alleged addiction and his disease. now, remember what dr. hurt told us about motivation. dr. hurt talked about motivation. despite everything he told you about nicotine, he acknowledged that motivation is the key to quitting. that is true about a lot of things in life. and where does motivation come from? ask yourself. apply your common sense. it comes from within each and every one of us. he cannot come from outside. it cannot come because others want you to quit. it cannot come from patch or gum. it comes from inside. for mr. smith, that motivation came from his prostate cancer diagnosis. and dr. hurt told us, ultimately, that all smokers can quit. all smokers can quit, even heavily addicted smokers. he admitted that. that was one thing that he actually agreed to without trying to 3275 get his point in. now, we heard from both him and dr. cummings that 60 million -- this is dr. hurt's manual. we looked at this with dr. hurt as well. this was his manual, "the path to a smoke-free future." and what does he say in the manual that he prepared at the mayo clinic? he says: "only you can decide when to quit smoking. not others. only you." and for mr. smith, we know that was true. now, dr. hurt and dr. cummings both told us 60 million americans have quit in this country. they have made the choice to quit, and they have quit. most of those folks would be considered addicted. all had nicotinic receptors. all had brain changes that mr. wichmann talked to you about. all had dopamine. they all had all of that. but they all quit, many cold turkey like mr. smith. the nicotine in cigarettes did not prevent these people from understanding that smoking is dangerous and making a choice to quit like mr. smith did. let us take a look at smart move. you saw this with dr. cummings on cross-examination. 3276 this is another pamphlet. this is the one that dr. cummings prepared for the american cancer society. and he talks about the things you need to have, what it takes to stop smoking. and when mr. smith quit, he had all of those things, things he had not had previously when me had made efforts to stop smoking. so what did mr.~smith do when he was finally able to quit for good in 2002? this was mr. smith's smart move. he said for the first time, "this is it. i'm quitting." he had never done that before. for the first time, he actually stopped smoking. he had never done that before. and he put down his cigarettes. he put down the pack. never done that before. you have heard all of the evidence, and you have heard that mr. smith always made his own choices. not the nicotine in cigarettes, not reynolds. whether you find that plaintiff did not meet her burden of proving that mr. smith was addicted or that his claimed addiction was the cause of his copd -- and you all do not have to agree on those points. but if all of you 3277 together find that he either, one, was not addicted or that addiction was not the legal cause of his copd, you should check "no" -- you should check "no" to this first question on the verdict form. and we would ask you to check "no" to this first question on the verdict form. now, let us get to the third key fact: cause of death. i do not think you should get this far on the verdict form, but it is my job to talk to you about each and every one of these questions on the verdict form. so let us get to this issue. this is whether mr. smith's death was caused by copd. i'm not going to spend a lot of time on this point. you heard the testimony. you saw the death certificate. but there are two things that i want to talk to you about, and the first is the death certificate. y'all have seen this. it does not say copd, and it does not say that tobacco use contributed to the death. like any other official record, dr. martinez -- you heard from dr. martinez on this point. he told you that doctors are 3278 obligated to complete death certificates to the best of their professional ability. and the doctor who signs the death certificate must certify that the record is accurate. that is what dr. martinez told us. in other words, a death certificate is something, as you would expect, as your common sense would tell you, that doctors take very seriously. looking at mr. smith's death certificate, we see it was signed by dr. kayyal. we heard a lot about dr. kayyal in this trial, and i think mr. praglin told you they were not here to criticize what the doctors at the hospital who treated mr. smith -- they are not here to criticize that treatment. and that would include dr. kayyal. now, dr. kayyal was not just any doctor who sat at a disk and reviewed records and filled out death certificates. you saw that dr. kayyal admitted mr. smith during that final hospital stay. he was in charge of mr.~smith's care and treatment during that entire week before he passed. he was there when he died. he had personal, firsthand knowledge of 3279 mr. smith's condition. and most importantly, everything that dr. kayyal observed and wrote in mr.~smith's medical records, including his death certificate, occurred entirely independent of this lawsuit. that is, dr. kayyal was not getting paid to reach a certain conclusion. he had nothing to gain from completing this death certificate. based on his treatment and experience with mr. smith, dr. kayyal identified mr. smith's causes of death as septic shock and aspiration. dr. kayyal made no mention on the death certificate of copd or emphysema, and you saw that he did not -- he did not check "yes" as to whether tobacco use contributed to this death. now, mr. praglin suggested when he stood up to talk to you that dr. kayyal somehow did not have all of the information; that he did not know about mr. smith smoking. we know that was not true. dr. kayyal knew that mr. smith was a former smoker, and he knew that he had copd. he knew about his smoking history. now, as you heard from dr. martinez, he, of course, was a paid expert. he was not 3280 someone who ever treated mr. smith. he never met mr.~smith. he never made any attempt to reach out and talk to any of mr.~smith's doctors, including dr. kayyal. ands despite all of that, ms. smith's lawyers hired him to come in and testify that somehow he knew more than the doctors who treated mr. smith in his final days. but like every other issue in this case, remember that plaintiff bears the burden of proof as to mr. smith's cause of death. as you evaluate the medical records during that entire hospital stay and the death certificate, as you evaluate both of those things, we ask you to consider who had firsthand experience with mr. smith. who actually treated him? ultimately, it is clear that plaintiff did not meet her burden. she did not prove that the death certificate was incorrect. she did not prove that it was incomplete. and she did not prove that anything other than aspiration, which caused that sepsis, which caused that infection, caused mr. smith's death. now, i want to quickly talk here about mr. smith's other health conditions. 3281 mr. praglin talked a lot about the fact that mr. smith was hospitalized a week before he passed away due to a copd exacerbation. dr. martinez and plaintiff's counsels would have you believe that the exacerbation was the beginning and the end of the story here. that, you know, is not the case. indeed, you saw records from a few days after mr. smith was hospitalized which indicate that he was improving. so what happened after that? what happened? well, mr. smith had a number of other serious medical conditions. you heard lots of evidence about that. upon being admitted to the hospital, dr. kayyal reports that mr. smith was experiencing diabetes, diabetic neuropathy, chronic kidney disease. he had prostate cancer. he was hypertensive, meaning he had high blood pressure. he had heart disease. he had afib. and he had significant urinary and bladder issues. and you saw evidence that while he was in the hospital, mr. smith had a gastric or stomach bleed. and i think mr. praglin showed 3282 you a container, 5 coke cans. 1700 milliliters of dried blood had accumulated in his stomach. now, as noted on the death certificate, mr. smith aspirated; and he developed that sepsis, that infection that killed him. plaintiff did not meet her burden of showing that either of these, much less that both, were caused by smoking. no evidence that his gastric bleeding was caused by cigarette smoking. he had been experiencing gastrointestinal problems since the 1990s. we saw that in his medical records from the 1990s. and dr. martinez agreed on cross-examination that there are many different causes for this kind of bleeding. ms. baker: and they have not met their burden. plaintiff has not met her burden of showing that mr. smith's aspiration was caused by his copd. dr. martinez testified that people can aspirate for any number of reasons and that aspirations can occur both within and outside the hospital. we know that. finally, mr. smith's sepsis was not caused 3283 by smoking. he had that dried blood in his stomach which was suctioned out during the time period he was very, very ill. now, one other point about mr. smith's medical background and history. during opening statement, mr. wichmann repeatedly told you that we were going to say -- what we were going to say and what we were going to do. he accused tobacco companies of making claims about alternative causes for a smoker's disease and challenging the official findings on the death certificate. we are not doing that here. plaintiff is doing that here. here it was smith himself, not reynolds, who made the claim that his respiratory symptoms and other diseases, like his prostate cancer, were caused by workplace exposures, not smoking. and it was mr. praglin and dr. martinez, not reynolds, who said that the death certificate in this case was wrong. now, when you get to this question -- this is question 2 on your verdict form: "was mr. smith's emphysema or copd a legal cause of 3284 his death?" you should check "no." let me get -- before we get to the next key fact, let me talk about question 3 on the verdict form. "was smoking cigarettes manufactured by reynolds a legal cause of mr. smith's copd or emphysema?" now, this question asks whether it was smoking cigarettes or something else that caused mr.~smith's copd. on this question, i ask that you look to 2003. that was when mr. smith made the claim -- you will have this exhibit in the jury room. this is defense exhibit 8. this is where mr. smith made the claim, under penalty of prosecution, for respiratory symptoms due to his workplace exposures at the volusia county branch jail. this was a claim for long-term exposure, not just one date that mr. praglin was showing you. when you look at the document, you will see that. it talks about long-standing exposure to mold, to chemicals, to bleach. so on this question, ask yourself: did plaintiff meet her burden of proof in light of mr. smith's previous claim that his workplace www.phippsreporting.com 888-811-3408 caused his respiratory symptoms, not smoking? y'all will have to decide that. and let me add one final point on this. mrs. smith claimed that she was completely unaware of this document, completely unaware of this claim that her husband had filed a serious claim that made serious allegations about his health and what had caused his respiratory and sinus symptoms. but whether mrs. smith really knew about it or not -- and you will have to be the judges on the credibility of that testimony -- this claim and its allegations cannot be ignored, cannot be swept under the rug. plaintiff brought you no one to refute that. now, either this was a serious claim -- mr. smith signed it under penalty of prosecution -- or if, i guess as mr. praglin would have you believe, it was frivolous. you cannot have it both ways. you cannot have it both ways. mr. smith's claim in 2003 tells you that he believes -- he believes his symptoms were caused by workplace exposures. his claim in 2003 tells you to check "no" to this question 3286 on the verdict form, question 3. now, let us get to the fourth and final key fact, and then we will have a few additional verdict form questions to talk about. our final key fact, plaintiff did not prove that mr. smith relied on a statement by reynolds. now, this one is actually pretty straightforward. i'm going to spend some time on it because mr. wichmann spent some time on it this morning. and i expect when he stands up, he is going to spend some more time on this issue. but it was pretty straightforward. i have already this morning talked a little bit about some inconsistencies between the records and the testimony that you heard in this case. for instance, when we compare mr. smith's medical records to his family's testimony, we see different stories about mr. smith's health. and when we look at the family's testimony about mr. smith's quit attempts, we hear varying stories about those attempts. but on this issue, but on this issue, everyone agreed. on the issue of whether 3287 mr.~smith relied on something that reynolds said or did, the testimony is actually one hundred percent consistent: he did not rely. now, did any family member come in here and testify that mr. smith smoked his first cigarette because of an ad or something a tobacco company did? all of the family members, everyone told you "no." did any family member testify that mr. smith became a regular smoker because of cigarette ads or because of something a tobacco company said? the answer is "no." did any family member testify that mr. smith smoked winston because of an ad? again, they all agreed: "no." did any family member testify that mr. smith ever relied on a cigarette ad or a tobacco company statement? they all told you "no." did any family member testify that mr. smith believed that filters were safer because of an ad or a tobacco company statement? and on that point, yes, they all agreed. he did not rely. they could not point to any tobacco company statement that he relied 3288 on for that point. did any family member testify that mr.~smith ever heard, discussed, or relied on any statement from those groups you heard of? from the tirc, from the ti, from the ctr -- you heard lots of testimony about those groups. no one came in here to tell you that he had ever seen any of those statements, let alone relied on them. they all agreed. no reliance. did any family member testify that mr. smith made any smoking-related decision whether to keep smoking, whether to try to quit because of something a tobacco company said or did? and, again, you know the answer is "no." he did not rely on tobacco companies in making smoking decisions. no one in mr. smith's family testified that mr. smith was ever misled. mr. wichmann can get up and say as many times as he wants. no one came in here and told you he was misled. no one came in and told you he was deceived. the reality is that mr. smith never made any smoking-related decision because of something a tobacco company said or did not say. 3289 because plaintiff could not show you any direct evidence of this, they could not bring you a witness who could tell you this, they called dr. cummings to the stand for an entire day. and we already know the first thing he testified, the first thing he said on cross-examination is that he could not tell you a single thing about mr.~smith because he did not read a single word about mr.~smith. he gave the same generic testimony that he has given in almost 100 other trials since 1996. so what was the point of bringing dr. cummings to court? what was the point of that? i submit to you that it was to show you some tobacco company documents in the hopes of upsetting you, in the hopes of making you angry. but remember what i told you in opening statement and again today. we would not be here today if the only issue to decide was whether reynolds said some wrong-headed things in some documents many, many years ago. this case is about more than that. it is about whether 3290 mr. smith relied on any of the things that reynolds or any other tobacco company said. now, with that in mind, i want to quickly run through some of the things that dr. cummings showed you so that you can see it had nothing to do with mr. smith's choices. places people smoked. when talking about this -- and you saw this in opening statement. you saw it again, i think, with both dr. hurt and dr. cummings. dr. cummings specifically, though, talked about people smoking in government buildings. it is a red herring in this case. mr. smith never worked in a government building where smoking was permitted. in fact, we know at the jail through the entire 16 years he worked there, there was no smoking inside the jail. despite having a stressful job, this restriction did not affect mr. smith -- it did not affect his job performance. he was able to do his job and do it with no problems. health care professionals. let us pull up the slide that you saw with dr. cummings. 3291 actually, let us go ahead and just go to -- we will go to celebrities and movie stars and then go back to health care professionals. look, this is the slide that dr. cummings showed you. the advertisements circled are for the brands that mr. smith -- we know he never smoked. there is no evidence that he smoked because of celebrities or movie stars. in fact, his daughter testified that he said he never smoked -- he never thought smoking was glamorous. and dr. cummings admitted on cross-examination that celebrities and movie stars are used in all sorts of advertisements. nothing unique about cigarette ads. health care professionals, you heard a lot about that, doctors smoking, more doctors smoke camels. those ads ran from 1949 to 1951. mr. smith did not have a tv until 1955. there is no evidence he ever saw any of those ads or it made any difference to him. cigarettes for the holidays. holiday themed ads. again the ads circled are for brands mr. smith never even smoked. you heard dr. cummings testify that using holiday themes 3292 was -- again, just like celebrities and movie stars, it was a popular and common advertising technique for many products, not just cigarettes. and more importantly, there is no evidence that mr. smith smoked because of these types of ads. now, filter ads, i want to spend just a minute on these. you saw these again this morning with mr. wichmann. mr. smith never said that he smoked filtered cigarettes because of any advertisement. and he actually smoked filtered marlboros. you heard the testimony from sue pigue. he smoked filtered marlboro before he ever smoked a filtered winston. marlboros are not manufactured by reynolds. they are manufactured by philip morris. they are not a defendant in this case. now, these -- the advertisement for winston cigarettes focus on taste -- not health, not safety. none of these advertisements, no winston advertisement claims that filtered cigarettes are safer or healthier. 3293 filters were another point, and mr. praglin touched on it this morning. it was one of the first things he said to you. filters were another point where mrs. smith said something at trial that was different, that was contrary to what she told us under oath prior to trial. he said it was a mistake. he said it was -- she made a mistake and something occurred to her later. well, you heard the testimony. you and only you can be the judges of the credibility on that issue. famous athletes, you heard a lot about famous athletes. the advertisements circled are for brands that mr. smith never smoked. we saw lots of ads for brands that he never smoked on that slide. there is no evidence that mr. smith ever smoked because of a famous athlete or because he saw an athlete smoking on television. "beverly hillbillies." look, now, here again, witness credibility matters. and you know why. before trial under oath, mrs. smith told us flat out that she did not remember any cigarette ads. she did not equivocate. she 3294 told us that flat out. she did not remember cigarette ads. not one. but here in this courtroom, she suddenly remembered that winston sponsored "the beverly hillbillies," and she claimed that she remembered watching that with mr. smith. i ask you to use your common sense here, ladies and gentlemen. even though she claimed they watched it together, when i asked her whether mr. smith ever said anything about an ad, beverly hillbillies or not, an ad affecting a smoking decision, she had to concede he never said that. at the end of the day, mr. wichmann can throw up as many ads as he wants, but none made a bit of difference to mr.~smith. again, as dr. cummings said, facts are facts. and the fact is, mr. smith never smoked, he never picked a brand, he did not keep smoking because of an ad. ads did not affect mr. smith. there is no testimony, no testimony in this courtroom that ads made a difference to him. let us take a quick look at tobacco company statements in "the new york times." i want to 3295 spend just a minute talking about that. you saw a lot of that when dr. cummings was on the stand. he showed you articles that contain tobacco company statements. articles from "the new york times." mr. smith never lived outside of florida and certainly nowhere near new york. he never received "the new york times" and never told anyone that he thought there was a controversy about smoking. instead, here is what we know. mr. and mrs. smith in a conversation, starting in 1964, the same year as the surgeon general's report, the first surgeon general's report on smoking and health. y'all saw that during dr. cummings' testimony. that was the first report. it received widespread news coverage. front-page news over the country. it was the first story, the lead story on every network, abc, cbs, and nbc, and they all did special reports on that report. starting around that time, that is when mr. and mrs. smith start talking about nicotine and the health risks of smoking. now, dr. hurt came in and showed you a presentation as well, and that was a 3296 presentation of slides much like dr. cummings' that contain the name actually, as we talked about a few moments ago, the name of a different smoker from a different trial. the reason he does not have to worry about changing the names on his slides is because he reaches the same opinion in every case. in fact, in this case, dr. hurt told you that he reached his opinions, he came to his decision about this case before he had ever read a single page of deposition testimony given by any of the family members in this case. so not surprisingly, dr. hurt gave the same old presentation to you that he has given over a dozen times and in at least seven cases with mr. wichmann. and he talk about company documents and public statements that, again, mr.~smith never saw, heard or relied on. he talked about the frank statement. he showed you that congressional hearing testimony. you remember when i stood up and asked him, did mr.~smith see this, is there any evidence that he saw that. he had none. he talked about the ti, the tobacco institute, ctr and trc. no evidence that it reached 3297 mr. smith. he talked about white papers and, again, he talked about company statements and "new york times" articles. i told you from the beginning, we said it again today, this case about mr. smith. and from the beginning, plaintiff has not shown one thing that mr. smith relied on. not one. none of mr. smith's family members could identify anything that he relied on, and both -- both plaintiff's experts, both dr. hurt and dr. cummings, said the same things they say every time they testify, showing you ads of brands that mr. smith never smoked or company documents that he never saw. that is not reliance. that is not reliance, ladies and gentlemen. plaintiff has clearly, clearly failed to met her burden of showing that mr. smith reasonably relied on anything that reynolds or any other tobacco company said or did. we know mr.~smith made his own decisions for whatever reasons were good and sufficient to him. now we have covered the four key facts in this case. let me go to the verdict form before we 3298 move on. these are questions 4 and 5. please state whether julius b. smith reasonably relied to his detriment on any statement made by reynolds which concealed or omitted material information not already known -- not already known or available to him. there is no evidence of that. your answer on this verdict form question should be no. no on question 4. let us go to question 5. it asks a similar question. please state whether julius b. smith reasonably relied to his detriment on any statement made in furtherance of reynolds' agreement with other tobacco companies or organizations to conceal or omit material information. again, you know there is no evidence of reliance. your answer on this question must also be "no." no to question 5. so now we have covered those four key issues, the four key facts that we talked about in opening statement and we have covered those again this morning. but i want to go on and talk to you about the rest of the questions on the verdict form. 3299 i do not think you should get down this far on the verdict form. but if you do, i want to talk to you about the evidence that you saw as it relates to these questions. comparative fault is the next question. verdict form question 6. please state the percentage of any fault that was a legal cause of mr. smith's emphysema/copd that you charge to reynolds and that you charge to mr. smith. now, this question, despite what mr. wichmann told you this morning, this question does not call for some sort of global comparison of conduct. it is not a question of what julius smith did over the course of his life versus the global conduct of tobacco companies. it is a comparison of actions that mr. smith and reynolds took that were a legal cause of mr.~smith's death. this is actually a very narrow inquiry. now, you may have seen things in this case that tobacco companies said or did that you did not like. a majority of dr. cummings' and dr. hurt's testimony focused on those very 3300 things. you saw that. but despite the hours of testimony that you heard from them, the issue here, the issue addressed by this question on the verdict form is whether those things affected mr. smith and caused his death. we know that -- we know that there was no evidence of that. on the question of comparative fault, remember that reynolds cannot be assigned fault for things that were not a legal cause of mr. smith's death. and remember that plaintiff -- plaintiff has the burden of proof, and reynolds can only be responsible for conduct that, in your determination, had some connection to mr.~smith. now, i want to reemphasize something i mentioned in opening statement. we are not blaming mr.~smith. we are not asking you to assign blame to mr. smith for his choices of. this is not about blame. this is about responsibility. we are not criticizing mr. smith's choices. we are not asking you to criticize his choices with your verdict. we are simply asking that you respect his choices and that you hold him accountable, 3301 personally responsible for his choices. we have been up front with you from the beginning. our position is that mr. smith and only mr. smith was responsible for his smoking decisions. reynolds could not make those decisions for him. only mr. smith could have chosen to start smoking. only he could choose to keep smoking. only he could choose to quit. and the evidence in this case is that it was mr. smith, and mr. smith only, that made those choices. now, i think you heard a little bit this morning, and it is been no secret, i think, that the theme of plaintiff's presentation is that all of mr. smith's choices, all of his choices were about somebody else or something else. it was somebody else's fault he started. somebody else's fault he kept smoking. and somebody else's fault that he could not quit until 2002. now, we spent a whole day listening to dr. cummings, who knew nothing about mr. smith. did any of his testimony help you in determining the extent to which mr. smith was responsible? and the answer, of course, is no. dr. cummings tried to shift all the blame to 3302 reynolds, despite the fact that he did not know anything about mr. smith or his choices. you saw all of the information that was available to mr. smith when he made his choices. the newspapers, the magazines, the warning labels. those are really important. we know mr. smith saw those warning labels. we know he believed and understood and told his family members about those warning labels. you saw public service announcements and you heard about the messages that he received from loved ones. and it was in the face of all of this that mr. smith decided to smoke and keep smoking until 2002. now, mrs. smith testified, and you heard it from sue pigue as well, that while mr. smith was growing up, his parents were strict and they forbade smoking and they would have tanned his hide if he was caught. mr. smith defied his parents' rules, snuck around, hid his smoking. you heard that mr. and mrs. smith had repeated conversations when they met in 1964 about the fact that cigarettes were addictive. we talked about that. 3303 six years later in 1970, mr. smith shows mrs. smith the warning label on his pack of cigarettes. and he says, the surgeon general has now determined that smoking is hazardous for your health. he kept smoking for 30 years after that. he smoked for 30 more years. now, we heard some mixed testimony about the types and extent of his quit attempts in the '80s and '90s. but consistent among all of the witnesses is that he never actually stopped smoking. we talked about that. now, plaintiff tells you, mrs. smith tells us that mr. smith was diagnosed with a serious respiratory disease in the mid 1990s, that he was diagnosed with copd at that time. yet mrs. smith does not recall mr.~smith quitting for a full day until eight years after that diagnosis. she would have you believe that he was diagnosed with a serious respiratory illness in the 1990s and no doctor -- no doctor talked to him about quitting. mr. smith chose not to quit in an era when 60 million americans, many of whom were addicted, many of whom were addicted, quit. 3304 was he somehow different than those 60 million americans? was that somebody else's fault? i submit that the answer is no. ultimately, your answer here comes down to the question of what it means to accept responsibility for decisions that you make in life. this is not about blame. this is not about blame. do not let plaintiff's counsel tell you otherwise. this is about personal responsibility. now, i want you to also look -- and i'm going to show you an instruction that the judge read to you this morning. it is a little bit confusing. but it says in this case, plaintiff has pled that mr. smith's acts or omissions relating to the frequency and duration of his efforts to quit smoking, that they may have been a partial legal cause -- a partial cause of his injuries and death. here what plaintiff is saying is they accept some responsibility, but not all. you heard that again this morning from plaintiff's counsel. they take some, but not all. now, mrs. smith may not have wanted to tell you about this when she was on the stand 3305 yesterday, but this will be the instruction, this is the instruction from the court. as you go back to deliberate, ask yourselves whether mr. and mrs. smith ever spent one minute outside of a courtroom or a legal proceeding talking to each other about mr. smith's smoking, using words and phrases like that. do you think the smiths ever talked to each other about the frequency and duration of his efforts to quit? do you think they ever discussed that it was his acts or omissions that were the partial legal cause of his injuries? mr. wichmann: your honor, i object. may we approach? the court: come on up. (sidebar discussion held:) mr. wichmann: she is now doing what your honor indicated you would not allow her to do, which is read the complaint language to the jury and suggest or imply that mrs. and mr. smith had some hand in writing it, when it was written by the lawyers, it is from the complaint. www.phippsreporting.com 888-811-3408 it was not signed or verified by mrs. smith, so i think she can argue this is an instruction that the judge gave her, but when she started saying, i remind you that mr. or mrs. talked about this or imagine this -- i think that is improper, judge. the court: all right. that is facts not in evidence. do not have them imagining if they talked or inferred that mrs. smith had anything to do with the complaint. ms. baker: that is an instruction to the jury. the court: i understand. but saying they do not talk like this and that -- facts that are not in evidence, do not get into it. so you can make the argument, but just stay away from that. ms. baker: thank you, your honor. (sidebar concluded.) ms. baker: now, accepting responsibility, that means just that: accepting full responsibility for the consequences of your actions. it is not a complicated sentence full of legal jargon. the evidence that you heard is clear that 3307 mr. smith knew smoking was dangerous and addictive for decades. we talked about that at length. you saw that evidence. it was very clear. going all the way back to the 1950s, before he ever picked up that first cigarette. despite this knowledge, and in the face of repeated warnings and requests to quit from his family, mr. smith never -- before the final time that he quit, never said, this is it, i'm quitting. he never stopped. he never put down his cigarettes, not until 2002. that is what we are talking about when we talk about motivated, sincere, persistent efforts to quit. we are not criticizing mr. smith. we are talking about doing the things that dr. hurt and dr. cummings told you that you have to do to be successful in quitting smoking. and it was in 2002 that mr.~smith did it for the first time. he says, this is it, i'm quitting. he made a decision, and he quit. he put down his cigarettes and he never smoked again. now, ladies and gentlemen, you know that mr. smith made his own choices. we all make 3308 our own choices. we do not make 75 percent of our choices, as mr. wichmann would have you believe. we are not 75 percent responsible for our choices, we are not ten percent, we are not fifty percent, and that is what we are talking about here with this question. mr. smith made one hundred percent of his choices. nobody else was responsible for those choices. if you get to this question, and again, i do not believe that you should, but if you get here, i would ask that you find mr. smith is one hundred percent responsible. not that you blame mr. smith, but that you hold him personally responsible for his choices to smoke in the face of all of that knowledge that he had. now i want to briefly turn to the issue of damages. mr. praglin talked to you about that a bit ago. these are the questions 7 and 8 on your verdict form. and he talked to you about the fact there are two kinds of damages claimed in this case. you will only answer one of these questions. one asks about damages to mrs. smith and one asks about damages suffered by mr. smith. now, it may seem obvious enough, and we talked 3309 about this in opening statement, but not every loss, not every loss, whether physical or emotional or otherwise, means that someone is entitled to money damages in a court of law. just because we have a loss, that does not always mean we are entitled to money for that loss. before plaintiff is entitled to any damages, she must meet her burden of proof. not speculation. not guesswork. but the hard building blocks of evidence. plaintiff has the burden to show and prove every dollar of damages. and equally as important, equally as important, however sympathetic we may feel about the passing of mr. smith, sympathy has no place in determining your verdict in this case. we talked about that during jury selection. we talked about that during opening statements. you all promised and committed to set aside any sympathy that you might feel and decide your case just on the evidence and the instructions that the court provided you. and, actually, this morning judge craig instructed you on this issue. and that 3310 instruction is, in reaching your verdict, do not let bias, sympathy, prejudice, public opinion or any other sentiment for or against any party influence your decision. your verdict must be based on the evidence that you heard here in this courtroom. now, in this case, mrs. smith can only recover damages that are directly linked or legally caused by reynolds. in other words, any damages that she may have because of mr.~smith's chronic health conditions, injuries or pain that he felt or suffered from a car accident, prostate cancer or workplace exposures, those cannot be considered for purposes of damages in this case. now, again, based on everything that we have already talked about, i do not believe you should reach this question. but if you do, judge craig's instructions told you that any damages you award must be fair and they must be just. and that here, too, plaintiff has the burden to demonstrate with evidence -- not guesswork, not speculation -- that any damages she or mr. smith incurred had anything to do 3311 with reynolds. that connection to reynolds is an important limitation on damages, any damages here. you heard that mr. smith had many serious injuries and health conditions and that mr. smith and plaintiff's relationship with him have absolutely nothing -- you heard about those problems and those issues, those had nothing to do with cigarette smoking or copd or reynolds. those injuries took a toll on mr. and mrs. smith, and it is not fair and just -- in fact, it is against the court's instructions to ask reynolds to pay for injuries that it had nothing to do with. now, we already talked about mr.~smith's workers' compensation claim in 2003. and in this claim, he makes a claim for long-standing exposure to mold, a sick building and toxic substances and chemicals during his work as a corrections officer at the volusia county branch jail. he was there for 16 years. and he sums up his claim at the end of his claim petition, and i encourage you to go look at it, he talks about long-standing exposures. and, again, he signed this claim under penalty 3312 of prosecution. the injuries that he claims here, whatever injuries that he claims here were obviously substantial and long lasting. and by his own admission, in mr. smith's own words, they were not caused by reynolds. they were caused instead by his workplace exposure. again, these are not my words. these are not the words of reynolds. this is what mr. smith put in his claim form. so you cannot award any money to mrs. smith in this lawsuit against reynolds for any injuries that mr. smith claimed in that 2003 claim form. those were damages against the county here in volusia. now, whether you believe the claim form or not -- and it sounded like this morning mr. praglin was asking you not to believe it -- plaintiff and smith cannot have it both ways. either mr. smith was telling the truth in the 2003 claim, in which case plaintiff cannot meet her burden of proof on damages, or mr. smith submitted an inaccurate claim; this claim was inaccurate when he signed it under penalty of prosecution. now, when it comes to the multiple other 3313 diseases and conditions that mr. smith had for years prior to his death, on top of this 2003 claim, on top of this workplace claim, those other diseases, those other conditions prevent plaintiff from proving her or mr. smith's damages and from proving they were related solely to his emphysema or copd. we have seen this list before. we have gone through this list. you also heard -- when mrs. smith took the stand, you heard about a car accident, a serious car accident that is reflected in mr. smith's medical records. you heard that he was in a car -- a very serious car accident, and he suffered chronic cervical pain and chronic headaches. he was treated by numerous doctors for that pain. and you heard from plaintiff, you heard from her that accident changed their lives drastically. it left mr. smith in excruciating pain, that their relationship suffered for a time. it impacted the way they communicated and that it was tough on plaintiff, that she became bitter and resentful in how that accident impacted their lives. 3314 these things have nothing to do with reynolds. the 2003 workplace claim for exposures to mold and toxic substances, all of mr. smith's other diseases, there is no -- allegation, no claim that any of those things were caused by copd or smoking -- and his car accident. none of these things have anything to do with reynolds. and, as a result, damages, any pain and suffering through those -- for those things cannot be attributed to reynolds. in light of all of the evidence you heard about these other things, we would submit that plaintiff has failed to meet her burden of proof on damages specific to reynolds. and, look, this is difficult. this is a difficult part for me to discuss, because we all wish mrs. smith well. we all wish her well. but her lawyer stood up this morning and asked for an extraordinary amount of money, an extraordinary amount of money, $10 million. any verdict in this case should not exceed good reason -- should not exceed reason and good judgment and common sense. 3315 plaintiff did not prove millions of dollars' worth of damages against reynolds when you remove all of the other things, all of the other injuries, all of the other diseases, all of the other things that mr.~smith suffered from. we believe that you should award mrs. smith no damages in this case. we believe you should award her no damages. we believe that is what the evidence shows. but if you feel compelled to award damages, we would submit that something in the thousands, something in the thousands, not millions, is appropriate. now, i want to move to the final question, the final question on the verdict form, question 9. and we are almost there. we are getting closer to lunch. this is the issue about entitlement to punitive damages. you heard a lot about punitive damages during voir dire; right? and you know -- you know that if you check "yes" to this question that punitive damages should be awarded in this case, that there will be another phase of this trial. there will be 3316 additional evidence and witnesses presented, and you will have a second round of deliberations to decide the amount of those damages. any punitive damages that you award to mrs. smith would only go to her. they go to her, no one else. no -- nothing else. they go to mrs. smith. the purpose of punitive damages is to punish and deter -- not to compensate. if you decide that mrs. smith is entitled to recover money for the choices that mr. smith made to smoke, you will have fully compensated her with an award of compensatory damages. punitive damages are over and above the amount you award to compensate someone. and they can only be for things -- only for the legal cause, things that were legally caused by reynolds. they cannot -- any determination of punitive damages in this case has to have a tie to reynolds. and you cannot -- in considering this question and making a determination on this question, you cannot consider the findings. now, the court instructed you before we 3317 got started today that this question has had a higher burden of proof. it is a higher burden, clear and convincing evidence. and that is evidence that is precise, explicit, lacking in confusion and of such weight that it produces a firm belief or conviction without hesitation -- without hesitation. this is higher. this is a higher burden of proof. to get you to give more money to mrs. smith, again, mr. wichmann and mr. praglin want to talk about a lot of stuff that has nothing to do with mr. smith. and they showed you that stuff. they showed you that stuff through dr. hurt and dr. cummings, and you saw it again this morning. and i expect you are going to see it again when i sit down. but what they showed you is just half the story, so let us talk about a few examples. dr. cummings talked to you about the fact that filters were in effective; however, on cross-examination when mr. gordon stood up to ask him questions, you learned that the government, the u.s. government, including the surgeon general, believed that filters reduced 3318 the risks of smoking and that they encouraged -- they actually encouraged the development of filters and encouraged smokers who could not quit to use filters. you heard from dr. cummings that ctr was an organization that sponsored research having nothing to do with smoking and health. you heard about that. however, again, on cross-examination, you learned that ctr funded good research at many prominent institutions, including institutions right here in florida, florida, florida state, university of south florida, and university of miami. you also heard about concealment, and mr. wichmann talked to you about that this morning. but on cross-examination, you learned that the companies made information about the carcinogens in tobacco smoke available to the surgeon general before that first report in 1964 and that the surgeon general's committee thanked the companies for their contribution. you learned that reynolds' scientists identified over half of the different compounds that are known to be in cigarette smoke and 3319 that they published on the methods to analyze cigarette smoke. and, importantly, importantly, you learned that reynolds is now tightly regulated by the fda. that started in 2009. they are tightly regulated by the fda. that includes reporting all of the -- all of their additives and ingredients for every brand of cigarette. it includes getting permission and approval from the fda before they can change their products. and it allows the fda, it allows the fda to regulate the amount of nicotine in cigarettes. nothing can be done without fda oversight anymore. and you learned that today, all of those documents that you saw up on the screen with dr. hurt or dr. cummings, you learned that those are all publicly available. they are secrets no more. and reynolds even has -- as you saw when mr. gordon cross-examined dr. cummings, reynolds even has a document, a repository on its web site. finally, you heard about the reynolds of today from dr. cummings. you saw the web site. this is what reynolds says today. this is what 3320 reynolds' guiding principles and beliefs are today. number one, no tobacco product has been shown to be safe or risk free. unequivocal. two, quitting smoking significantly decreases the risk for lung cancer, heart disease, chronic bronchitis, emphysema, and other serious diseases and conditions. this is on the reynolds web site today. and, three, the best course of action for tobacco consumers concerned about their health is to quit. dr. cummings told you that is on the web site today. any -- anyone can go look at that. any consumer can go look at that. and you heard dr. cummings say that it was a good idea for reynolds to sell nicotine replacement products, like nicotine gum and the nicotine patch, through its sister company niconovum. dr. cummings commended reynolds for its research, for medical conditions, including its work to develop an ebola treatment called zmapp through its sister company kentucky bioprocessing. dr. cummings said facts were facts, and 3321 these are the facts that you heard when mr. gordon stood up to cross-examine dr. cummings earlier this week. the reynolds of today is devoted -- is tightly regulated and devoted to researching and developing products that are less harmful and developing medicines and other products that are improving the quality of life for folks everywhere. this is not the type of conduct that requires punishment or deterrence. this is not a record that requires an award of more money to mrs. smith. if you should get to this part of the verdict form -- and i do not believe that you should -- but if you do, we would urge you to check "no." "no." no need to punish or deter the reynolds of today. no need to deter. they are now tightly regulated by the fda and no need to punish the reynolds of today for the acts that occurred many years ago. punitive damages are not appropriate in this case, in mr. smith's case. we would ask that you check "no" to the ninth question on the verdict form, should you get there. 3322 now, let me make one last point and hopefully we will all be eating lunch soon. as i've said before, this case is about mr. smith. it is not a class action. it is not about other smokers. as judge craig instructed you this morning, other folks have had an opportunity to bring their own lawsuits and ask for damages. so this is about whether the conduct that you heard in this trial harmed mr. smith. and we know plaintiff brought you no evidence of that here in this case, mr. smith's case. based on the evidence that you heard in this case, there is no basis to award punitive damages. you know that reynolds had nothing to do with the smoking decisions that mr.~smith made. he made his own decisions. there could be no question that punitive damages are inappropriate in mr.~smith's case. so, again, if you get this far on the verdict form, your answer to question number 9 should be "no." now, i'm about to sit down, and i want to again thank you for your patience and your attention. i know it is a lot to have to sit 3323 there and listen to both sides argue all morning long. i know that y'all have had to listen to a lot of evidence. in the past week, there is been a lot of things thrown your way. now, when i sit down, i do not know what mr. wichmann or mr. praglin -- what they will say, how they will respond to some of the things that i told you. but i suspect that they will say some pretty critical things. i'm pretty certain of that. but as you listen to the things that they say, ask yourself this. ask yourself, every time they say something, every time they show you a document, every time they show you an ad, ask yourself: what does this have to do -- what does this have to do with mr. smith's choices? what does this have to do with mr. smith's case? mr. smith is smart and hard working and had common sense. you heard that from all of the witnesses. and we know he was warned about the health risks and that he was aware that smoking could be dangerous and addictive, period. that is undisputed. that is a fact. 3324 but it was not until he was motivated to quit in 2002, that motivation that came with the prostate cancer diagnosis. it was not until he was motivated to quit in 2002 that he finally did so, that he finally said: this is it, put the cigarettes down, and stopped smoking. now, the truth is we enjoy a tremendous amount of freedom in this country. we talked at the beginning of the case, and you heard it in the testimony throughout the trial, cigarettes are a legal product. we talked about this during jury selection too. cigarettes are legal in this country. congress has decided that cigarettes will remain legal, legal to manufacture, legal to sell, and, yes, legal to advertise. we have the right in this country to make decisions for ourselves and to make choices about our lifestyle that maybe are not always in our best interests. but with that freedom, with those choices, with that right, with that tremendous amount of freedom comes the obligation to accept personal responsibility for those choices. not for a 3325 little bit. not for 25 percent. not for part of the choices. but for one hundred percent of our choices. and in the end, that is what this case is all about. that is what this case is all about. based on the evidence that you have heard in mr. smith's case, i would submit that there is one and only one true verdict. and that is a verdict in reynolds' favor. and i would ask you, as you go back to deliberate and you have the verdict form in front of you, that you enter a verdict for reynolds. now, this is my last opportunity to speak with you, and i want -- i just want to leave you with this. i want to again thank you. it has been a pleasure and an honor. and on behalf of mr. gordon and mr. hansen, we have truly appreciated your service. it has been a true honor to present this case to you, and i thank you so much for your attention this morning. thank you.