closing statement mr. wichmann: good morning, folks. you have heard evidence for the last two weeks about the smiths, about julius, about the family, about a good, patriotic, loving, religious family. you have heard evidence that julius wrote 3183 in his medical records -- i'll show you in a minute -- where was he born, "the good ole usa." well, folks, reynolds and the other cigarette companies intentionally got julius and 20 million other americans hooked into the cigarette epidemic beginning in the 1950s through the year 2000 and caused over 20 million dead, and devastated the folks you are seeing out there, the smith family. now, reynolds told you in opening statement this case was all about the smith family and that it was mrs. smith who would be asking you at the end of this case to award her millions of dollars. well, would you put slide number 1, please, dan. this is one of the pieces of evidence that you will get to take back to you in the jury room. a previously secret internal industry document that tells you all you need to know about these companies, about r.j. reynolds, who put money -- money -- over morality for nearly 50 years. and what were they writing? let us provide 3184 consumers with the exquisiteness and the hope that they, our consumers, continue to remain unsatisfied, talking about this addictive, dangerous product -- cigarettes. so the company wrote: all we would want then is a larger bag to carry the money to the bank. companies put money over morality. ms. baker: objection, your honor. not the legal standard. the court: rephrase. mr. wichmann: companies put their profits over the health of the american people during the course of this conspiracy and this concealment campaign that y'all heard about. go to slide number 2, please. this is what the case is not about. and this was from the reynolds slide that they put up in opening statement. it is true, cigarettes are legal. it is true, the case is not about sympathy. we are here for accountability. we are here so that the smith family gets justice from this cigarette company, this fortune 500 company, and its part of its concealment. ms. baker: objection, your honor. 3185 assumes facts not in evidence. the court: sustained on the "fortune 500." mr. wichmann: this case is not about whether cigarettes can be addictive. you will recall when dr. cummings came and testified, they showed the current web site and what they are telling everybody now. they did not admit that cigarettes were addictive until the year 2000. they did not admit it back when julius and 20 million other americans were starting smoking, smoking cigarettes before there were any cautions on the packs. this case is not about whether smokers can quit. they can. everybody has admitted that. you can be addicted to cigarettes and still quit. but the evidence has been that what was available to julius in 2000, in the late 1990s, was not what was available to julius in the '50s, '60s, '70s and '80s. they told you that this case is not about whether nicotine occurs naturally in tobacco. it does. we all heard from dr. hurt, who showed you the process. and in the process, 3186 they take the nicotine out and they put the nicotine back. and i'm going to show you the evidence which you are going to get when you go back there that shows that they were manipulating the levels of nicotine to keep their consumers addicted. and they told you this case is not about whether smoking can cause disease. well, guess what? that is another thing they never admitted until the year 2000. now, what has been the overall result of this conspiracy and this concealment? that is the next slide. the uncontradicted evidence in the case is from 1953 until the present, over 480,000 dead americans a year from smoking, 20 million dead from 1964. and we showed you the consumption chart. and here it is. and dr. hurt and dr. cummings went over it. as the sales went up, the lag time, copd/emphysema and lung cancer deaths went up. and you will see the little spikes and recall all of those little spikes were when the government or public health community came out with warnings, came out with surgeon general's reports and, yes, 3187 americans took notice, and smoking consumption went down. but it went right back up because of the cigarette company campaign to create doubt and create controversy and market their cigarettes and put them out on the market so people would say, well, there must be -- there is got to be some doubt. or, if i smoke that filter, it is going to take the bad stuff out. now, who did you hear from? and again, bear in mind reynolds brought no witnesses. these are the only witnesses that you heard from. you heard from dr. michael cummings talk about 30-plus years dealing with nicotine addiction and health, way before any of this litigation started. he has published, he has researched, he has reviewed, he has taught, he has counseled. he set up the new york state quit line. he worked in prisons. and he told you in florida, under the law, the law did not change until 2000 to outlaw smoking in correctional facilities. he volunteered, he told you basically -- next slide, please -- told you about the cohort studies. he said based on the science, they 3188 can tell you today that white men born in 1939 like julius smith out in seville and out in palatka, three out of four of julius' contemporaries became smokers. every single one of julius smith's high school classmates that were on the basketball team -- that is 12 -- you saw the high school picture. twelve people in his high school class. those five boys that were playing basketball, every single one was a smoker. he told you that they concealed from the american public, how their product, cigarettes, were engineered for nicotine addiction. he told you they concealed, how they modified their product many times over decades. they never told julius smith that that winston filtered cigarette he was smoking was two and a half times more toxic, more carcinogenic, than the camel nonfilter cigarettes. they never said that. they just kept marketing them and marketing them and marketing them. they never told them, nah, this filter is not really going to work, but it looks good and it sounds good. it is a good way for us to sell 3189 you more cigarettes so we make more money and more americans get sick. they never told him that. they concealed that they were targeting and studying the smoking habits of young americans, teenagers. they never told the american public that. and dr. cummings told you that everything they did over the past 50 years had a major impact on affecting americans. it created an epidemic of disease that we are still suffering today. and he also told you that as much as ninety percent of copd as we know it today -- of emphysema/copd as we know it today is caused by smoking, caused by this highly engineered product that r.j. reynolds and the other cigarette companies developed and marketed and misled the american people about and concealed the dangers from the american people during the course of the conspiracy. now, folks, you are going to get a verdict form -- dan. and i have limited time, so i would like to walk you through it. the verdict form is going to be three pages. i believe three or 3190 four pages. you take it back there, you fill it out. and this is the roadmap that we like to give you on how the smith family feels that the verdict form should be completed in this case. the first question for you to answer is: was julius smith addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine; and if so, was such an addiction a legal cause of his emphysema/copd? by the way, it is the same thing you heard from dr. hurt, you heard from dr. cummings, and you heard from dr. martinez. emphysema and copd, it is the same thing. we respectfully request y'all answer the first question yes. because if you do not, if you answer it no, the case is over. now, mr. praglin, my colleague, is going to talk to you about question 2 on the first page. question 3 is: was smoking cigarettes manufactured by r.j. reynolds a legal cause of julius' emphysema/copd? respectfully, folks, the smith family asks you to check that small box down there, number 3, yes. the reason that is on the 3191 verdict form is because y'all heard a little bit of testimony about marlboro. the uncontradicted testimony that you heard was that julius smith started smoking cigarettes, and camel brand was his brand, years before there were any cautions or warnings on the pack, and camel was manufactured by reynolds. there was some evidence that when he went into the service and came out, he might have smoked some marlboro for a few years. that is a philip morris product. but there was some confusion by the witness. and the witness said, well, marlboro is a red and white pack and so is winston, so i could be wrong. but the uncontradicted testimony from the family, from sherry, when she met him, tell when he was able to quit -- and i will get to that in a second -- was that he smoked winston cigarettes manufactured by reynolds in a red and white pack. so that is why we are respectfully asking you to check box number 3 yes. now, what evidence do we have on whether or not julius was addicted? started smoking at age 13 to 14. smoked a pack a day by the time he was 15 years old, 3192 years before there were any cautions on the cigarette packs. smoked a pack and a half to two packs a day for over 45 years. bought cigarettes by the carton, sometimes two cartons a day. smoked first thing in the morning. you heard from patti jo say she used to go into her dad's bedroom and he would not even have his feet on the ground, he would still be laying in bed lighting that first cigarette. he smoked through the day, one after another, and smoked before and right after church. there is folks go to church christmas and easter. not the smith family. every sunday, julius and sherry and those kids went to church. they went on holidays. and they went on wednesdays too. he smoked while he was coaching his son's baseball team. y'all heard -- he is out there in front of his son j.b., julius junior, they called him bernie. marine corps veteran. he told you his dad said to him, i smoke these filtered cigarettes because they take the bad stuff out. reynolds is going to tell you, no, do not 3193 believe him, do not believe bernie. they are going to tell you, do not believe this smith family. well, y'all heard the testimony, and it was emotional. and i submit it was straight from the heart. and y'all decide. he smoked at family gatherings. the medical records describe him as a heavy smoker. he experienced withdrawal symptoms. i'm going to get into that. you heard it from patti jo. she told you what he went through when he was not smoking. he was a very calm guy. he was a very level-headed guy. but he sure changed when he did not get his nicotine. he had -- after he was able to quit -- i'm going to get into that in a second -- he had constant continual cravings. you heard that from j.b. and you heard that from patti jo. up until the time when he got to the hospital in march of 1995, he could barely breathe, he still craved cigarettes. he had strong urges to start to smoke again. let us just go through a few of the medical records that you will have and you can take back there. 3194 slide number 8, please. patient states that he smokes approximately a pack and a half of cigarettes per day for 35 years. he also quit. and you are going to hear from reynolds: oh, he could have quit whenever he wanted to quit. it is all his fault because he did not quit. you are going to hear they are going to blame their best customer when they never did anything -- nothing -- to help him to quit during the course of the conspiracy. i'm going to get into that. well, did he quit? he attempted in the 1960s. he cut back in the '70s. he tried quitting cold turkey. he was given a prescription for the nicoderm patch when it first became available in '92. he tried hypnosis. he tried nicotine gum. he tried nicotine spray. he tried to taper off the amount he smoked. he was only able to quit in 2002 when he was hospitalized with prostate cancer. i'm going to get into that in a second. let me tell you, they are like: the nicotine patch? not julius. could we have slide number 10, please? 3195 well, there is the record. it is back there. i gave nicoderm patches for 10 days, two 21-milligrams for the next two weeks. it is -- the prescription is in the record. and you heard from the family again. you heard from patti jo. you heard from j.b.you heard from sherry. he took the nicotine patches. he tried. and guess what. he still was not getting enough nicotine in his body to sustain his addiction. they did not bring a single witness on addiction. i brought -- we brought dr. richard hurt. let me get to that in a second. and he told you all about the neurobiology of addiction and how it affects the brain. but let me tell you what reynolds said in opening statement. the evidence will show that mr. smith did not persistently try to stop. what? is that what you heard from the family? he did not persistently try to stop? they told you at the beginning he was not a tortured smoker. remember that? they told you he was not a hopeless addict; said smoking relaxed him on a product 3196 that gave him copd/emphysema and led to this misery at the end of his life. they told you in opening statement that product, that cigarette, it relaxed him. he enjoyed it. he enjoyed socializing. they talked about the quit attempts. they said, this is what you are going hear about them. they called them "these so-called attempts, if you can even call them attempts, were not motivated." those were their words. well, let me summarize for you what patti jo told you. she prayed for her daddy to quit. everybody in the family prayed for him to quit. he asked them: "pray for me to quit. this is how hard it is for me." he begged -- those were her words -- he begged for cigarettes when he was in the hospital in 2002, when smoking was prohibited, for his prostate cancer. she told him when he was medicated in the hospital, he was begging for cigarettes. his words, according to patti jo. they are going to tell you: do not believe her. well, it is up to you. it was as if he was being tortured. he 3197 wanted a cigarette so bad. that is what that -- daughter, patti jo, the smith daughter, told you: it was as if he was being tortured. he would say how bad he wanted a cigarette. he was very, very agitated. she told you this is the way it was every day. she told you that she took care of him when he got him, when he was discharged. he had a suture that came open. she was with him every single day. she said she and her mom, sherry, made his favorite foods, snacks, candy, to take his mind off of this. but he would still continue to want cigarettes. and she said, in her words, "this lasted weeks, weeks, and weeks." all right? most important, let me read this to you, of her testimony. after he was discharged from the hospital, could not get cigarettes, was medicated, got medicine for that, got his prostate cancer done, when he came home, he was, in her words, "extremely agitated, extremely fidgety, and always, always asking for a cigarette. we would just continue to tell him he could not 3198 have one; we would not give him one." and she said: "he would have conversations with me about how he could just smoke -- he could smoke a cigarette and eat a whole pack of them." those were her words from the witness stand. she said: "he just wanted them so bad. it was like he was desperate. it was every day. it was every day that i saw him." that is not a tortured smoker? that is not somebody who is trying everything he can to quit? what does that tell you about this product that reynolds manufactured, this product that reynolds misled the american people and misled smokers like julius for -- for decades? what does it tell you about that? that this is what he has to go through to get off of a product that is so deadly that the evidence in the case has been it caused the deaths of 20 million americans. now, slide 11, please. this is the record i told you about. julius goes to the hospital. he fills it out. country of birth: "the good ole usa." this is 3199 julius from seville in putnam county, who went into the air force. 12 people -- imagine that, 12 people in his high school class served his country. and this is what cigarettes did to julius. y'all recall they were shopping for their granddaughter's wedding, and this is how his life changed as a result of his addiction and his disease and his smoking. now, what is our burden of proof, folks? greater weight of the evidence. at a basketball game, if someone gets 51, the other team gets 50, they win. but in this case, the evidence is overwhelming that he was addicted to cigarettes and that his addiction caused his copd. let us start out with dr. hurt. came down from -- started the smoking cessation clinic at the mayo clinic and has treated over 53,000 addicted smokers, written articles published in the journal of the american medical association, testified before congress, board certified. he put julius to the test, the heaviness of smoking test, and told you all about that. why does he want to know whether 3200 they smoked first thing in the morning in an addicted smoker? because nicotine goes from the cigarette to the brain in a nanosecond; does not stay up there long. so smokers, right before they go to bed, they smoke a cigarette to get that nicotine up in their brain; and when the nicotine wears off, they get up at night, which julius did, smoke cigarettes. and then first thing in the morning when they wake up, it is their brain -- it is their addicted brain telling them: i have to have that nicotine. so what do they do? first thing in the morning they have their cigarette. and you heard the evidence from -- it is uncontradicted. not only did he smoke first thing. he smoked when he was in bed. now, he also -- the second test is: how much did he smoke? you heard the evidence. it is in the record. it is pack and a half to two packs. the family says two packs. the family says more than two packs. dr. hurt came and told you addicted smokers often underreport. pack and a half, that is a lot of smoking. that is a 3201 lot of smoking for 40-plus years. now, just going to talk about it. talked to you about what addiction was, that it was a brain product -- relapsing brain disease. there is no evidence to the contrary. that is it. that is medical science. they did not bring anybody because that is medical science. remember the film we put up that shows you about the receptors and shows you how the human brain reacts? that is human science. now, dr. hurt also told you: addiction keeps a smoker smoking. addiction fuels the smoking. why? because some smokers smoke to get the nicotine to the brain like i just told you. some smokers smoke because they want to avoid the symptoms of withdrawal. the family told you he was a very calm guy. but when he was not smoking, when he was trying to quit, his demeanor changed completely. that is why some people smoke. they do not smoke because they like it. they do not smoke because they are out there socializing with their sister on the porch. there is no evidence about that. 3202 but here is what dr. hurt said: you do not get copd from smoking 10 cigarettes. it is basically a long period of time. smoking cigarettes over a long period of time, in high dosages. think about a cigarette as a dose. if you smoke 20 or 30 cigarettes a day for 25 or 30 or 40 years, then all of those toxins that you are getting in your body affect the body and create disease. and here we have another slide. he started smoking as an early teenager. you heard from dr. hurt, because the human brain is not fully developed. if you bathe it in nicotine when you are a teenager, the studies show it is harder -- later in life it is harder for people to quit. smoked for 13 years before there were any cautions or warnings on the packs. he kept increasing his cigarette use. dr. hurt told you about tolerance, how people do not start out smoking a pack a day in the first week they started smoking cigarettes, because the first cigarette you have is harsh and you have to develop a tolerance and you have to keep smoking. and as you keep smoking, 3203 your brain wants more nicotine. he talked all about the things he went through, tried multiple quit attempts, smoked while sick, tried hypnosis. and so -- the next slide please, dan. no. this is how the evidence has been. this is how the scales of justice tilt in this case, all on one side. nothing on the other side. now, next slide please, dan. dr. hurt told you all about cigarettes, how they are engineered; how they put flavorings in them so that the smoke can go down; how they put the false filters, part of the filter flaw on there so folks would think that a filter would make a difference; where the disease comes from. it comes from the smoke. it does not come from the nicotine. how addictive nicotine is. he went through all of that, and he also told you the following: smoking cigarettes causes emphysema and many other diseases -- why? because of the thousands of chemicals. and get a load of this: over 65 percent, according to dr. hurt, 65 percent, of all 3204 long-term smokers will die from a smoking-related disease. do you think r.j. reynolds disclosed that to julius smith in 1960, 1970, 1980, 1990? no. now, they are also going to tell you: we put the warnings on the packs, so we are off the hook. would you play the video. (the video clip was played and transcribed as follows:) q. would you put that warning on if congress did not require it? a. no. q. so american disagrees with the warning, does not it? a. we certainly do. q. you do not think it harms smokers, so there is no reason for the warning on there, is there? a. we believe our product is not injurious to health. q. as far as you concern -- as far as you are concerned, sir, is the surgeon general simply wrong in concluding that cigarette smoking causes lung 3205 cancer? a. i would use the term "misguided." q. if it is misguided, then i take it your opinion is he is wrong? a. i was simply trying to be polite about it. q. but not being informed about it, in your opinion, he is wrong; correct? q. dead wrong. (the video clip concluded.) mr. wichmann: that was he -- he was retired at the time, but he was speaking on behalf of the american tobacco company, r.j. reynolds. they did not want -- they did not think the labels were -- the warnings were needed on the cigarettes -- ms. baker: objection, your honor. preemption. mr. wichmann: we just talked about it. the court: overruled. mr. wichmann: you just heard him say: the government made us do it. we did not think it was appropriate. now 1988, surgeon general's report, there it is. dr. hurt told you; dr. cummings told you: nicotine is the drug in tobacco that 3206 causes addiction, and the whole behavioral processes is similar to drugs like heroin and cocaine. big surprise. that is what the uncontradicted evidence in this case was. that nicotine to some people, not to everyone -- and dr. hurt explained to you differently. but to some people, it is every bit as addictive as heroin and cocaine. think about that. think about what julius went through. think about what patti jo told you quitting was like for him. that is not addiction? now, what did they know about addiction. 22, please. you will see internal documents. they knew, 1967, if someone is addicted, it is no longer a matter of free choice. in 1980, if someone is addicted, no longer a matter of free choice. and then we have the surgeon general writing in 1989, two factors refute; smoking is free choice because the younger you start, the more likely you are to get addicted, the harder it is to quit. so the law of the case -- y'all find 3207 julius smith was addicted. the law of the case is -- ms. baker: objection, your honor. objection to standard law of the case. the court: overruled. mr. wichmann: if you find julius addicted, these are the findings that apply. smoking causes emphysema. nicotine in cigarettes is addictive. they put cigarettes on the market that were defective and they conceal -- they block material information not known or otherwise available. okay? now, go back up to the verdict form. third page, please. i'm sorry. i stand corrected. second page. these are two more questions that we submitted that the evidence has proved that you need to check "yes." the first one is: did he rely on the conspiracy? and the second one was: did he rely on the concealment? and let us hear what the industry expected julius to do while he was smoking. (the video clip was played and transcribed as follows:) 3208 q. does advertising play a role in the person's selection of a cigarette? a. we hope so. when we advertise, it is difficult to confirm this, but we do make the effort. and i think it is fair to assume that the expenditure of large funds for advertising does give status to a brand and, therefore, influences some people to select that brand. q. would you expect a consumer to rely on the advertisements? a. yes. our advertising is truthful, and we would anticipate that they would rely on it if they chose. q. that is your promise as to what the consumer can expect from your product, is not it? a. yes, it is. (the video clip concluded.) mr. wichmann: there you have it. we expect folks to rely. all right. our advertising is totally truthful. well, you heard last two weeks it was not. it was false. let us show you what they did not disclose. 26. they did not disclose that this new filter 3209 brand that they had that they introduced in the 1950s that became the most popular cigarette in america and that julius smith smoked, they did not disclose that it had two and a half times more carcinogenic properties in the smoke than the camel that they had before that. and by the way, here we are again. 2010 surgeon general report: the powerful addicting effects of commercial tobacco products are mediated by diverse actions of nicotine at multiple types of receptors in the brain -- this is all the science that dr. hurt told you about. they never disclosed that nicotine was their key chemical in cigarettes that would cause an addiction -- would cause a result, that would cause a reaction, that you heard about from patti jo about her daddy, when someone tried to quit. now, here is what they did about addiction. next slide please, dan. we see this. they say they deliberately downplayed the role of nicotine. confidential. here is the next slide, 29. they wanted to manipulate the nicotine levels -- and you will get these documents back 3210 there -- to determine the minimal level of nicotine that will keep people smoking. they said, we can regulate fairly precisely the nicotine in our product. we saw the black slurry that they take out in the factory and they spray right back on. this is not -- they would have you believe that people go out and they pick the tobacco leaf and they roll it up and put it in a cigarette and that is what you smoke -- no. dr. hurt told you about that. no. this is highly engineered. they take the nicotine out, spray it back on so it is all uniform so they can regulate and manipulate exactly how much nicotine it takes to keep people smoking. and let us talk about quitting. let us talk about what they could have done for julius. would you play the video, please, dan. (the video clip was played and transcribed as follows:) we have no program that i know of to try to help people stop smoking. (the video clip concluded.) mr. wichmann: that was 1978. you will get 3211 a record back there that shows brown & williamson 1978 document that says: we have to design products to intercept people who are trying to give up smoking. so they had no program, but they are going to come and tell you now that it is julius' fault for not quitting sooner, their own best customer. never once did they say to him: do not buy two packs a day, please. do not buy a pack a day, please. you are going to get addicted. you are going to get sick. no. they never told him that. but they are going to say even though they did not have any programs to help their consumers that got sick during the conspiracy, now they are going to say it is all his fault. now, number 31, again, on reliance, they had to, according to their own documents, give people a psychological crutch and self-rationale to continue to smoke. he said -- and you heard sherry on the witness stand, raise her right hand and say "yes, sir" every time the question was asked. "yes, ma'am" every time the question was asked. this family, i would submit, is honest as 3212 the day is long. and they are going to get criticized -- you are going to hear it in a minute -- what did she say? he got coupons from the cigarette companies to go out and buy their product. coupons. does this sound like a company that is warning people, that wants people to stop? no. you have tote bags, winston tote bags. you heard about how when the government said, "do not put ads on tv anymore," that r.j. reynolds now starts sponsoring events like the nascar 500 because they did not have to put warnings anywhere and they could distribute all these products that encourage people to continue to smoke. and i'm getting to the end of my presentation here before mr. praglin picks up. but -- 33, please. they advertise their filtered cigarettes as being safer, as being the -- if you had any doubts about whether smoking was bad, buy a filter, because it would protect you. you are going to get literally a stack of filter ads at the time. you can go and look through and see all about how they marketed this and made 3213 people think that filters were safe. next slide, please. so what about -- what about julius? you have the document. they say in their own words in a secret document: the filter is just an illusion. it is just a marketing device. it is an illusion of filtration. well, again jb told you -- and there he is. jb said, my daddy told me when i was a kid he smoked with filters to take the bad stuff out. here we go. you have more documents on how they knew that filters were just a marketing device and they did not disclose that. now, i'm going to talk briefly about percentages of fault. could you turn back up the elmo, please, dan? on that page 2, you are going to have right here -- right here, right there -- you are going to have the opportunity to decide what the percentage of fault is in this case. now, maybe you think that julius should have tried harder; he should have tried sooner to quit. well, that is where you assess fault. 3214 we respectfully submit 75 percent of the blame should be on reynolds. and if you feel that julius is some way at fault, it should not be any more than 25 percent. but i would like to make this clear. for what reynolds did intentionally, for what they did on purpose, for their manipulating the nicotine levels, for their marketing filters as a fraudulent device, for their not disclosing to julius that their cigarettes had two and a half times more carcinogens than camel, we do not accept any responsibility because there is no way he ever could have known that. now, the last question on the verdict form -- and i'm going to be brief here so i leave mr. praglin with some time -- is another very important one, and that is number 9. and that is: under the circumstances of this case, do you find that reynolds should be responsible for what are called punitive damages -- punishment damages. and, folks, the evidence shows the answer to that question has to be -- it is in your discretion, y'all are the jury -- but i urge you, it has to be yes. 3215 why? would you put up slide 36. you heard from dr. cummings about how this company denied publicly that they were interested in getting kids as smokers, but that the internal industry documents -- and you will get them back there -- we must get our share of the youth market, we must induce a pre-smoker or a nonsmoker to become a habituated smoker, talking about the 12- to 14-year age group -- 14 years old, that is who they are looking at; that is who they are studying; that is who they are trying to get as customers. why? because in their own words, you heard it, uncontradicted -- they are looking for replacement smokers, replacement customers. because they know -- they knew that more than half of people who regularly smoke their cigarettes, like julius, would get sick and die. so it is all a business model to them. it is profits over people. it is a business model. how can we continue to make money -- and y'all saw the consumption chart. it keeps 3216 going up. how could it keep going up so we can make that money to the roof if our product that is used exactly the way they intended it to be used is going to kill our customers? and what do we do? so they went shopping for more kids. number 37, please. and there he is. they got one. right? they got one. and this is what they did during the course of the conspiracy, and this is why they need to be punished and why y'all need to answer number 9 yes. now, last but not least, slide 40. you are going to get the 2014 surgeon general's report. you heard about it. look back at what the surgeon general did, what dr. hurt and dr. cummings told you, they both got all of these secret documents, they studied them all, and they told you that the tobacco epidemic that caught julius smith and devastated the smith family was initiated and has been sustained by the aggressive strategies of the tobacco industry which has deliberately misled the public on the risks of smoking. folks, thank you for your time and attention. mr. praglin is going to talk to you 3217 now. thank you very much. mr. praglin: thank you, your honor. may it please the court, counsel, ladies and gentlemen of the jury. first of all, i want to thank the court and the court staff and our court reporters for all of your courtesies for the last couple of weeks. this has been a wonderful experience to try the case here in this courtroom. you have made it very easy for us. you have been patient with us, and it makes it easy for us as lawyers. ladies and gentlemen, i want to thank you for your jury service. we know that you have sacrificed time from your families, from your work, so we can hear this civil dispute. this is the greatest system in the world for resolving cases where parties like this have a dispute, and we cannot do this without you. so hopefully some day, if you all have a dispute, someone will pay it back to you so that you can have your dispute resolved in the same way that you are doing it for these parties, so we thank you on behalf of ms. smith. we really appreciate it. i want to start with talking about julius smith. and if we have learned anything about 3222 him, it is that he was honest and patriotic and religious. and because he was religious, i'm going to quote from isaiah 1:18. ms. baker: objection, your honor. may we approach? (sidebar discussion held:) ms. baker: two things. number one, i think that is at least the fourth or fifth reference to mr. smith being patriotic. i know your honor asked not to make it a feature of closing, and i think that should apply going forward. and more importantly, i do not think we should be quoting scripture during closing argument. it is not relevant. it is not probative, and any focus on scripture or references to the bible should not be made in closing arguments. the court: what is the legal objection to that? ms. baker: it is 403. the court: what is the quote? "let us come, let us reason together." that is the quote. the court: i'm going to let that -- so i'll overrule. make sure on the patriotic, 3223 okay, not too much more. mr. praglin: yes, sir. ms. baker: thank you, your honor. (sidebar concluded.) mr. praglin: this is a quote from isaiah 1:18 is: "come now and let us reason together, sayeth the lord." that is part of what deliberations is about. it is a reasoning process, because it is your job to evaluate the evidence and come to a decision. i thought we had a paper here. somehow it is gone. other side. sorry, ladies and gentlemen. so let us reason together on the evidence. that is what we are going to do. we are going to look at the facts, the testimony, and the evidence. what we know is that all of the witnesses came from the plaintiffs. the defense brought no witnesses. it is unrebutted testimony. that means there is nobody from the other side. what else do we know? we know it is your job to weigh the evidence. mr. wichmann touched on that, and we are going to cover that. so this is your task, among others. and i'm 3224 going to have a slide show and i'm going to go through it. so on unrebutted testimony, this is one of the jury instructions that you are going to get. it is on believability of the witnesses. and his honor read it, and i want to focus on the second line, which is: consider the demeanor of the witness while testifying, the frankness or lack of frankness of the witnesses. so you heard the witnesses. and i'm going to suggest to you that the witnesses that you heard, the smith family, dr. hurt, dr. cummings, dr. martinez, were all completely credible, believable, and truthful. and if you think that on each one of them, they may have stumbled here and there, they may have made a couple of mistakes, but when you take the core of their testimony, they were believable witnesses. and the family witnesses, i will take those witnesses every day and stack them up against everybody. they took the witness stand, they took the oath, and they were truthful. you heard from ms. smith. she gave 3225 testimony for over an hour. she may not have remembered everything, but she testified from the heart about everything, and she was truthful. now, you are going to hear some argument from the defense about mrs. smith having had inconsistent testimony. and she did. and she explained how she gave inconsistent testimony. and the issue was whether she had said that filters take out the bad stuff in her deposition. and she explained what happened in her deposition. and she said, i made a mistake. she said it was a three-day deposition. it was videotaped. she was nervous and she made a mistake. and the testimony that was read was that -- she said: "i said that he had not talked to me about it in my deposition. i got home. i was stretching in my room and i was thinking about the whole deposition. i was very nervous. i wanted to tell the truth, and i realized that we had not talked about filter. and so i knew i had -- i wanted to correct it, and i was told that i could correct it." then the question: 3226 "and you came back and did so on the next day of your deposition? "answer: yes, ma'am." so she made a mistake. how many of us have not gone back at home, thought about something and said, i think i made a mistake, and come back and corrected it? there is a difference between making a mistake and not being truthful. she made a mistake. so keep that in mind when you hear from the defense that ms. smith had an inconsistent statement. one inconsistent statement. what about weighing the evidence? we talked about the scales and tipping the scales and how we have to tip the scales in our favor. look at the evidence. on the right, the defense. did they bring any evidence? on the left, you have dr. hurt, you have dr. martinez salas. think about his credibility. he sat up here -- if you are in the er and you have a belly full of blood and you are dying and someone is trying to figure out how to save your life, i would want dr. martinez in there trying to figure out what the heck is going on 3227 with me. that man knows medicine. it may have been his first time testifying, but he withstood cross-examination from a very good lawyer, and he held his ground and he did not waver, and he figured out the cause of death. so look at the scales. look at the evidence. and the r.j. reynolds tobacco company, do not you think that if there was a doctor out there that could rebut -- ms. baker: objection, your honor. no burden. the court: overruled. mr. praglin: do not you think if there was a doctor out there that could rebut dr. martinez on these issues that they would have brought him in here? they did not bring somebody. they did not bring anybody. there is nothing on their side of the scales. unrebutted evidence. and what we do know from dr. hurt and dr. martinez is that emphysema is one type of obstructive disease that is under the umbrella of copd. and dr. martinez was very clear that emphysema is the disease that julius smith had; it was diagnosed in '94; and that is the disease he had 3228 his entire life, for the 21 years until he passed at 1:55 on march 30, 2015; that he suffered for 21 years and passed away. so when you consider that evidence, this will answer questions 1 through 3 on the verdict form that mr. wichmann talked about. and i will take you to the verdict form. is it on the elmo? thank you. question 2: was julius b. smith's emphysema/copd a legal cause of his death? we suggest that the answer should be yes, that you should check the "yes" box, and that that should be your answer. i will talk to you in a minute about questions 7 and 8 as well. i want to talk to you for a second about other illnesses, because you heard testimony about other illnesses: chronic kidney disease, heart disease, diabetes, urinary problems, prostate cancer, neck injury and headaches. what was the testimony on that? we know that mr. smith took medication for all of those illnesses. the prostate cancer was cured by surgery. the neck injury and the 3229 headaches cured over time. you heard ms. smith testify about that. but none of those diseases killed him. and none of those diseases are an issue in this case insofar as his death or the pain and suffering that he had over his lifetime for those 21 years. you did not hear any evidence from the defense on that. again, it is unrebutted testimony because the evidence was from dr. martinez. this was his testimony. you can see this. smoking causes copd. copd is a contributing cause to the death and pain and suffering. and under the law, it only needs to be a contributing cause -- not the only cause. that is the law as his honor has already instructed you. and dr. martinez ruled out these other causes of emphysema and copd. you heard his testimony. he ruled out -- he had a laundry list of things that he said in a differential diagnosis, he ruled these out: asthma, bronchiolitis, bronchiectasis. he ruled out a false positive for a tall, healthy, athletic man. and he ruled out mold and bleach. and this is where i want you to think 3230 about this. i mentioned this in opening statement. i said keep your eye on the ball. and i will talk to you about that in a minute. let me sort of shift gears and talk to you about julius smith. i'm going to take you through this quickly because i know you were paying attention about his life. we know he was born in seville, that he had a large family, a simple home life. you heard testimony about the home-place, that he worked at an early age. we know about him being in the air force, his early life with sherry, how they met, how they married, their kids. they had a 50-year marriage. how many people are married nearly 50 years? they had plans to retire together and stay retired. sherry is going to live a long time, god willing. they would have planned to live together, enjoying their lives together for a long time. you heard the testimony about how mr. smith would call his son just so that he could be with sherry when he was so sick that he could not stay with her and walk with her in the stores and he would say, i'm waiting on a 3231 woman. they are a singing family. mr. smith would sing at weddings, funerals, spending every day together. so you saw photographs of mr. smith smoking in the house, around kids. ask yourself: mr. smith loved his family, he loved his kids, he loved his voice. he smoked around sherry when she was pregnant. if mr. smith really thought that smoking was dangerous, would he jeopardize a fetus? would he jeopardize his expecting family? there is evidence he was smoking around kids. now, you are going to hear from the defense that there was a niece who had asthma, and when she came over, he did not smoke around her out of respect or because he thought it would make her ill. but she only came around occasionally. so this is mr. smith here in his uniform. we know that he was family-oriented, he was hard-working, protective of his wife, trustworthy. and you heard the testimony about how, when he had the fern business and he was making good money, it was good for the family, 3232 but it was so hard on him. he would leave on sunday nights, tearful sundays. then he would come back on thursday and they would be reunited. and so they made a family decision. they had a family meeting and decided it was better to give up the business so that they could all be together. he put family first. so i want to talk to you -- when i say "keep your eye on the ball" -- because you are going to hear about this from the defense. you saw a lot of questioning of dr. martinez about this and then mrs. smith, this mold plan. i invite you to look at this document in your deliberations because we are going to look at it now. it is just a few pages. when you look at the document, look at the top line, it says "accident date." there is only two dates there, june 4, '02, eight years after the emphysema diagnosis. june 6, '02. and it says describe the accident: exposure to sick building, mold, toxic substances, chemicals. it does not say what kind of mold. it could be any kind of mold. it could be a harmless kind 3233 of mold. ms. baker: objection, your honor. assumes facts not in evidence. the court: sustained. mr. praglin: there is no specific type of mold listed. toxic substances. what kind? it does not say anything. does not say what kind of chemical. but dr. martinez testified there is not enough information here to say anything. and there is nothing here that says that it causes emphysema or copd. and then look at the section -- it is pretty hard to read here. i think i have it at the table. it says: parts of the body, respiratory and sinus symptoms. nothing about lungs. nothing about what dr. martinez talked to you about on exhibits 54 and 55, with hyperinflation or attenuation of the vascular markings. nothing about obstructive lung disease. dr. martinez said that mold could cause a restrictive problem, which is different -- 3234 sinus, in the nose -- but not about obstructive. and do not you think, using your common sense as jurors, that if this mold issue had caused mr. smith some problem, that he would have gone to a doctor? if you are sick and you have a problem, you go to a doctor. well, what does the form say? that would be important. it says on the right-hand side, under "work being performed when injury occurred," right underneath that "according to doctor" and there is handwriting there. and it says "no authorizing doctor." you will not find the name of a doctor or anything about a doctor on this form. so if he did not go to a doctor and we do not know the kind of mold or the toxic chemical or the toxic substance and you do not have any information, how is this any cause of anything that mr. smith had a problem from emphysema that was eight years before? do not you think that he would have gone to a doctor for it? then it says "bleach." dr. martinez says 3235 bleach does not cause emphysema. so what are we talking about? this is a smoke screen to take your eye off the ball when they do not have a witness or any evidence. so they throw it up, and they try and take your eye off the ball. keep your eye on the ball and look at the evidence; the evidence about emphysema and copd and 21 years of medical treatment. and so the law on this, which is jury instruction 17-c, which you will have, says: "however" -- i should read the whole thing. "you have heard that julius smith may have been injured in two events. if you decide that julius was injured by r.j. reynolds tobacco company and was later injured by another event, then you should try to separate the damages caused by the two events and award julius b. smith money only for those damages caused by r.j. reynolds tobacco company; however, if you cannot separate some or all of the damages, you must award julius b. smith any damages that you cannot separate as if they were all caused by r.j. reynolds tobacco company." now, even if you thought mold or bleach 3236 played a role, how could you ever separate? there is no evidence. so let us go back to the verdict form. the verdict form -- dan, let us go back for a second. your first question is whether "after addiction," and then you get to cause of death. we suggest that you answer cause of death "yes." but if you were to think that the cause of death was not copd, that is not the end of it because we still believe that mr. smith suffered for 21 years from his copd. and so really what you have is a fork in the road that, if you believe it is death, the fork goes right and you go down the wrongful death path on the verdict form. but if not, you go to the left and it is the pain and suffering. and on the verdict form, the question for pain and suffering is question 7 -- it would be question 7. and so question 7 would be the question for damages for wrongful death. question 8 would be the question for pain and suffering. so if you take the fork for wrongful 3237 death, question 7; if you take the fork for pain and suffering, it is question 8. it is alternative. under this verdict form, you should not answer both questions 7 and 8. it is one or the other, depending upon how you view the evidence. so let us look at the evidence for wrongful death. this is the last hospitalization. and what we know from dr. martinez is that patients who have had prior hospitalization are at a higher risk. he testified to that. and we know that julius smith was hospitalized on january 2nd, 2015, with copd exacerbation. and then he had the second hospitalization on march 24th. and this is what was written on the emergency room admission form. we know on march 28th he had atrial fibrillation. his heart rate raced up to 240 beats her minute. dr. martinez said, "that is not good. you are a very sick man," and he was put in icu. and the attending cardiologist, dr. wang, wrote in the medical records here on the 3238 bottom -- this is dr. wang. this is not even dr. martinez. this is the treating doctor, who said, "i do think the underlying copd contributed to onset of atrial fibrillation." so now you have two doctors saying that the copd contributed to the afib. dr. martinez from the witness stand and dr. wang. and let us be real clear about one thing: we are not blaming the hospital for anything that they did. they had a dying man when mr. smith presented to them on march 24th. they did the best that they could insofar as the medical care that they gave. so here is the chronology of what happened to mr. smith. march 24 he comes in. march 28 he has the afib that sends him to the icu. this is what dr. wang said in quotes. and then on march 29 is the aspiration. here is what we know about aspiration. we showed you this in opening statement. everybody has had this experience. something goes down the wrong pipe. we know that mr. smith was not breathing well; that he was drinking ensure or an ensure supplement for diabetics called glucerna. 3239 and i invite you to look at exhibit 1 in this case, and it is the medical records just from the composite. it is not all of mr. smith's medical records, but it is a composite. and it shows the progression of his disease, and it has some of the last hospitalization. and you can see in there that he had trouble breathing. he coughed up a chocolate drink, and there is no evidence that anything other than aspiration occurred at 11:00 at night on march 29. and so dr. martinez testified -- this is from the transcript. "question: are patients with copd at higher risk of aspiration? "answer: yes." so the aspiration was caused by the copd. that is what then sent him into his multi-organ system failure. and then on march 30, they put an ng tube in him after he goes into cardiac arrest. you heard the testimony about the code blue. everyone came running. they do compressions on his chest trying to save his life. and the 3240 ng tube goes into him. and what do they find? now, mr. gordon and i actually have the same idea because i have a measuring cup too. and what did we hear? that there was 1500 milliliters -- maybe even 1700 milliliters of coffee ground material that they suctioned out of mr. smith. imagine that having been so much more fluid in your belly than you are supposed to have with the equivalent of 5 coke cans of gastric contents that they had to suction out. that is how sick he was as his body was stressed as a result of his deteriorating condition. that much fluid sucked out through the nasogastric tube. but that is not what the defense told you in their opening statement. the r.j. reynolds tobacco company told you this in opening statement. they told you: "so how did mr. smith die? the evidence will show that during a hospital stay in march 2015 -- and you heard about that hospital stay a little bit from mr. praglin" -- and i'm quoting. "mr. smith aspirated a massive amount of 3241 blood into his lungs, at least a quart and a half, which means -- that means he vomited blood that was in his stomach and then inhaled that blood into his lungs. and that caused an infection, and that is what killed him." we know that did not happen. ms. smith testified there was no vomit. there was no blood. this is what was in as he had his cardiac arrest. and dr. martinez testified to that. so what we know is that he died -- as dr. martinez said on the death certificate -- this is what dr. martinez says. this is how the death certificate should have been filled out. on the left is how it is, and we highlighted everything that was in complete. dr. martinez testified this is how it should have read: sepsis with hemorrhage -- on the right-hand side -- aspiration on line b, copd exacerbation, copd, and then atrial fibrillation. and dr. martinez testified that not only was this death certificate incomplete; but it was incomplete and wrong on tobacco use, because if you look at the left, it said, "did 3242 tobacco use contribute to death? answer: no." and why did it say that? because they did not take a tobacco use history when mr. smith went into the hospital. it has a tobacco use grid. and they do not have any information about quantity of smoking, nothing about packs per day, nothing about years of use, nothing about when tobacco was last used. so mr. smith could have smoked a pack of cigarettes when he was a teenager; and looking at the chart, dr. kayyal never would have known because he did not ask. so when he went to fill out the death certificate, he wrote "no." so a death certificate, it is a statistical document. it is not legal proof in a court of law as to the cause of death. let me talk about loss of companionship. because what we know is that sherry smith -- she lost her world. that was the testimony of patti. they were best friends. there was so much pain and suffering. you heard about the 21 years of pain and suffering. mr. smith had lost 2/3 of his lung capacity. he could only walk half a block in the year 3243 before he passed away. you heard the testimony about how he had all of his breathing apparatus that he had to use; that he was not the same person; and that she did everything for him. he was a young, athletic man when she met him. and this is the way he looked in the months before he died, not even able to walk through a store when he was shopping. and so you have a choice. is it wrongful death? is it personal injuries? and how do you evaluate the damages for the loss of a life on a 50-year marriage? it is not an easy thing to do. and i cannot tell you how to do it. all i can do is to give you some ideas and some guidance. and i thought about it this morning. i woke up this morning, and there was a beautiful sunrise. and i thought about sherry and all of the beautiful sunrises that she is not going to have with julius. she has got 18 years without julius. so there is no test for how you evaluate loss of companionship. but i think that your verdict has to be fair and just compensation. it 3244 should be something that, when you close your eyes at night, you can feel like you did justice; when you talk to your friends and family, you can tell them that you did justice. and so what i'm going to suggest to you is, that, as a society, we place high value on things. paintings go for millions of dollars sometimes. homes go for millions of dollars. but now we are evaluating human life, human life that was erased from the smith family. so if sherry smith could have julius back here today, she would not want any money. but we know we cannot do that. we know that cannot happen. so we have to place a value on the loss of his life and the suffering that he went through for those 21 years. so the number i'm going to suggest to you in your collective wisdom that i think would be fair and just compensation is $10 million. and you may know better. it may be more. but that is what i think would be fair and just, after the evidence that you have heard and under the law as his honor has instructed you. and there is the choice on the upper box for either -- not for both, but for either 3245 wrongful death or pain and suffering. and then if you check the box under clear and convincing evidence, then there is punitive damages. i want to thank you, on behalf of sherry smith, so much for your attention. i know this case has been long, and i know you will do the right thing. thank you, each and every one of you. rebuttal closing statement mr. wichmann: nobody is claiming reynolds is responsible because they sold a legal product. what we are saying is, it is not right to lie; it is not right to conspire; it is not right to conceal; and it is not right to deceive the american people for as many years as they did. reynolds will tell you this is all about choices and people have to own up to their own responsibility, personal responsibility. let us talk about choices. and let us talk about corporate responsibility, the responsibility of the manufacturer, who the evidence was knows the most about their product, more than anyone else. what responsibility did they have? dan, would you play the video clip, please? (the video clip was played and transcribed as follows:) speaker: to this question, it must be answered insofar as the correlation -- to this question, it must be answered insofar as the 3327 correlation -- mr. wichmann: what did they know? and when did they know it. do you have that clip? is that this? the technician: yes. (the video clip was played and transcribed as follows:) speaker: to this question, it must be answered: insofar as the correlation between lung cancer and cigarette smoking are concerned, no one knows. it may. it may not. speaker: do cigarettes cause cancer? speaker: i do not know if they do or not. speaker: i'm not in a position to give you a "does" or "does not" answer. speaker: i have to disagree with you in that we do not know what causes the illness that has been attributed to cigarette smoking. the jury has not come out. speaker: it may not be harmful. we are not convinced. speaker: it may or it may not be. we do not know. speaker: does cigarette smoking -- no causal relationship between cigarette smoking 3328 and emphysema? speaker: despite all of the research to date, there has been no causal link established. speaker: no causal relationship between cigarette smoking and heart disease? speaker: no. as a matter of fact, there are studies that, while we are accused of being associated with heart disease, there have been studies conducted over 10 years that would say, again, that science is still puzzled over these courses. speaker: we do not know what causes cancer in general right now. so i think that we may find out what causes cancer, and we may find out there is some relationship, which has yet to be proven. (the video clip concluded.) mr. wichmann: so i guess it is okay they can lie about that product that caused the deaths of 20 million people and blame mr. smith, who they never helped -- they had no programs, never did anything to help him to quit -- during the course of the conspiracy. and i want to clear something up on the 3329 verdict form. there are two lines on the third page for you to award damages. please do not fill them both out. please look at the bottom of page 2. and it will tell you which element of damage applies to which of the particular claims that sherry smith has for you. also, talked a lot about choice and how all of this was julius smith's choice. y'all heard evidence that he started smoking years before there were any cautions on the packs. but let us look at what reynolds knew about where choice fits into the use of their product and what they did not disclose and what dr. hurt, who spent his life trying to help addicted smokers, did not know at the time -- he said we have helped the treatment community to -- to treat people like julius, had they known. please put up slide 22. so here they are telling you in 2016: it is all a matter of choice. he just should have chose in 1980 to put it down, '85 to put it down, 1967 put it down. well, this is one of the internal 3330 documents. it is got a pt number on it, 3870, from reynolds, and it says: "smoking is no longer a matter of choice for him, a person who smokes heavily and gets addicted." that is what they knew then. that is what they still know today. please keep your eye on the ball. pt2184. you will get this document back there. in 1980, they were writing in secret amongst themselves: "we cannot continue to defend smoking as free choice if the person was addicted." here is what the surgeon general wrote in 1989: "these two factors refute -- refute the argument that smoking is a matter of free choice. most smokers start smoking as a teenager," just like julius, "and then become addicted," just like julius. dr. hurt told you: when you get addicted, it affects your ability to choose to quit. yes, he did quit in 2002 when he was medicated in the hospital where he spent five days for prostate cancer. dr. hurt told you the things available to 3331 doctors to help addicted smokers. in 2002, there is a world of difference with what was available for doctors in the '70s, in the '80s, and in the '90s. and, by the way, you saw the cigarette company executive on tape saying: we do not -- in the '70s, we do not have any programs. we do not have one, any program to help our customers to quit. you saw the document. it is back there. by brown & williamson. it is now owned by reynolds. it says: let us intercept -- let us intercept the smokers that want to quit. intercept them. stop them. stop them from -- stop them from quitting. why? because they want to sell their product that they knew was killing people and make more money. they put money over morality. he talked about the public service announcements. yes. yul brynner, yes, the poor guy that was the opponent for perry mason, telling people on tv: "do not smoke." well, guess what. those were not blacked out in the state of north carolina. they -- and did they come forward when those were being put on the 3332 air by the public health authorities and saying, "you are exactly right. let us show you what we know, and let us see if we can help folks so they do not get sick"? no. they blocked the message. they put out the false message like you saw before. they lied. they lied to the american public. they got in front of the congress in 1994 and lied. and they raised their right hand and lied. but it is okay for them to do that. it is not okay for mr. and mrs. smith -- and mrs. smith to have brought this lawsuit. that is their position today. reynolds' lies over the years matter. the statistics show that: 20 million dead americans. ninety percent of copd caused by cigarettes, the modern cigarette that they developed, designed, and marketed. that is the evidence. the fact that julius smoked, because -- you heard from his sister, by deposition: it was peer pressure. everybody else smoked. all the guys in his 12-student high school class started smoking. all right. then as time went on, he took 3333 up filters, just like the vast majority of american smokers did, and smoked winston. why? his son got up and told you, and sherry got up and told you: he said filters take the bad stuff out. y'all are going to get all of the filter ads back there to look through, and you will see that they put that out and they falsely marketed that product. and it is right, like dr. cummings said. at a certain point in time, the government said: well, if cannot quit and you are worried about your health, smoke a filter. but the government was fooled too, dr. cummings told you. the government got fooled too. they cannot do that today. they cannot make those representations today. why? because it was false, and they knew it was false. and that is all in their papers back there. they knew that it was an illusion of filtration, just a marketing device so we could keep selling cigarettes to addicted smokers who are going to smoke them, get sick, and die. folks, we are not telling you to go one way or the other on the verdict form, that this is 3334 an absolute wrongful death case or that it is an absolute survival action. we are going to leave that in your hands. y'all can decide. and as you look through it, it will tell you where to go, if you think that smoking caused his death or not. the one thing that is not in dispute and that is, is that his copd was caused by his smoking addiction, and that copd resulted in an absolutely horrible death. had nothing to do with a neck injury from a car crash; nothing to do with breathing mold and bleach over at the old jailhouse; nothing to do with any of that. a man's life and the family was devastated by copd from smoking and from addiction to reynolds' products. thank you, folks. i know it has been a long trial, but we appreciate your attention.