ms. parker: may it please the court? you may proceed. and mr. smith and counsel and ladies we want to start by thanking and gentlemen, good morning. you for your service here. all of us, myself and emily baker and jordon patterson and our whole team, want to thank you on behalf of ourselves and also on behalf of our client. y'all have been here -- what was it, a week yesterday, you came in for jury selection and y'all have been very attentive and we appreciate that. and i'm looking forward to going over now our summary of what the evidence was and how we think you should answer the verdict form in the case. you know, y'all have heard a lot of evidence here over this last week -- over a week. but what i've tried to do was boil it all down into just those few things that are the most important that you need to remember when you are 105 evaluating the case, and those are the reasons why at the end you should return a verdict in favor of reynolds. there are actually ten so let me go over those. and the first truth is very simple truths about this case. this case is only about one person, and that is mrs. wanette smith. every question on the verdict form asks about it is not a crusade. it is mrs. smith. not a chance for you to vote on how you feel about smoking, because our society has already done that. this is not a cause. our society, knowing full well that cigarettes are risky and cause death, has decided that cigarettes should be a legal product. you heard a lot from the trial from ms. barnett, and you heard from ms. barnett again this morning, general statements about cigarettes, talking about other companies, evidence about other companies, evidence about periods of time before mrs. smith was ever born, evidence about periods of time before she started smoking. none of that has anything to do with this case. what is important here is one smoker, and that is mrs. smith. so that is the first simple truth. mrs. smith. you are only here about the second truth is that mrs. smith knew the risks, and she knew them the whole time she smoked. when 106 you are trying to answer the questions on the verdict form, you need to keep in mind the real mrs. smith. you need to keep in mind what was the evidence about what kind of person she was, why she smoked. we brought you a historian, dr. elizabeth hoffman, dr. hoffman researched who testified yesterday. mrs. smith's life. jacksonville and went to a number of other places. conducted research so she could come in and show you everything that mrs. smith had been exposed to. remember, she said she came here to she but here, in their effort to get money, they they are that is what they have been doing and that is why mr. smith, in have -- they are trying to repackage mrs. smith. trying to repackage her. throughout the whole trial. his deposition, testified under oath that mrs. -- you heard him again this morning -- that mrs. smith did not know about the health risks of smoking until she was told in 1993 about the bronchitis and then when she was told in 1995 about the lung cancer. this is a lady who smoked. every single cigarette every single cigarette she had a warning on the package. this is not a case smoked had a warning on the package. where somebody started smoking back in the 1930s or the 1940s or 1950s or early 1960 before there were warnings. that is a different situation. this is a case where, again, 107 every cigarette she smoked had a warning. missed those messages. messages. and mrs. smith did not miss those no one could have i want to go over with you what -- the evidence that you have heard in this case, in this courtroom, about how mrs. smith knew about the health risks of smoking. let us start with her parents, if you will follow her parents did not approve of smoking, and along with me. they told her and her brothers and sisters smoking was unhealthy. remember, he gave up cigarettes when he was saved, and he made sure that his cigarettes -- that his children did not smoke cigarettes and that they did not drink. her father was a baptist minister. and, same thing with her mother. the evidence is her mother told her and her brothers and sisters when they were growing up that they should not smoke. warnings to her. those are all and then remember barbara selph. she is the lady who came in -- she is a sister-in-law, and she came and and testified -- i think it was last thursday afternoon. she testified that she told mrs. smith about her mother. her mother had cancer. she told mrs. smith her mother's cancer was caused by smoking. that stand that that conversation happened in the 1960s. again, another warning to mrs. smith. and she testified there from 108 when mrs. smith's father passed away in 1973, her nobody -- no mother said, no smoking in this house. visitors, no guests, nobody could smoke in the house. and then when she became pregnant with their first child, james jr., back in 1973, you heard from this witness stand that mrs. smith admitted in 1973 that she knew smoking was bad for her baby and she knew smoking was bad for her. that is what she admitted back in 1973. and then we have medical records. medical records we have about this are 1978. actually have two records from 1978 where she was told by her doctors to stop smoking. now, what more of a warning can you get when your doctor tells you you should stop smoking? the earliest and we in 1980, we have a medical record that shows mrs. smith told her doctor that she had a smoker's cough. and, again, that is what she told her doctor. there is an admission. see right there where she wrote it in? and then you heard that mrs. smith told her sons when they were growing up, when they were little, that they should not smoke. and, in fact, she told her sons, i do not want to catch you with a cigarette ever. who is asking for money here, came in and testified. and her son brian, the one he admitted that his mother had told him that he 109 remember he talked about the incident at should not smoke. the bus stop, that he said, well, she only told me one time? well, that still is an admission by mrs. smith. but, again, that is another effort where they are trying to repackage her. and, in turn, you heard mrs. smith told her -- that mrs. smith told her children and, in turn, her children told her, mom, we do not want you to smoke. another warning to her. this is really important. and then remember the life insurance application. it is marked it is going to be with you when you go back to in 1987, mrs. smith applied for life insurance, this is from 1987. in evidence. deliberate. and she had to fill out this form, and she signed it, not just once, but twice. page. insured -- that is mrs. smith -- used tobacco in any form within the past 12 months? okay. what does that mean? was still smoking back then. and it has her name at the top of the and it asks this question: has the proposed and she answered, no. so every witness who testified said she well, either that information is correct and she had been able to quit for 12 months back in 1987, which shows she -- that is proof that she could have quit earlier than 1995, or she answered the way she did because she knew that smoking had a higher -- people who smoked had a higher that is why they are answering rate for their life insurance. 110 that question. again, it shows her awareness. mrs. smith kept up with current events. there is absolutely no question about that in this case. you heard from the stand that she read cover to cover the newspaper here, the florida times-union. you heard that she watched the news on tv every night. subscription to reader's digest. publications, like dr. hoffman showed you yesterday -- all of those publications and what was on the news over and over and over again about the health risks of smoking. you heard that she had the and all of those and then, remember, her family members used the okay. now, terms "cancer sticks" and "coffin nails." somebody hears people talking about cancer sticks, that is information that they know that cigarettes cause cancer. so and then that brings us up to the warnings. these warnings are the ones that have been known since january 1st of 1966. and remember the story about how mrs. smith started smoking, because her older sister carmen was driving and wanted her to light her cigarettes for her? well, i asked some questions of the family carmen was three when carmen members so we could get this established. years older than mrs. smith, three years older. turned age 16, that was 1968. driving. for when mrs. smith started smoking. 1968 seems to be the best time -- the best date even if she started 1968 is when she started okay. 111 smoking a little while earlier, it was still with warnings on every one of these packages. and let us show the warnings. this was the first warning and then the second warning and then the warnings now. by the way, one of the things that mr. smith tried to do as part of this repackaging -- remember, he had said in his deposition, she did not know; she did not know; she did not know about the health risks of smoking up until 1993 or 1995. meant was she knew, but she did not know it caused lung cancer. when he came to court, he tried to say, well, what i well, here -- look right here. this warning from 1985 forward, that first warning specifically says smoking causes lung cancer. the evidence in this case is -- shows that it is just not credible to believe that this lady, who read the newspaper, watched tv, was told by all these family members about smoking, told by her doctor, and had a warning on every package -- it is just not credible to believe that she did not know about the health risks of smoking. mrs. smith did know, but she enjoyed smoking, and she wanted to smoke anyhow. the real now, i want to take a minute and talk to you about what the evidence was about the low-tar cigarettes and about filters. mr. smith said on the stand -- and we showed you 112 his deposition testimony this morning. who bought cigarettes for her, remember? that she never smoked a low-tar cigarette or a light cigarette. there is been no evidence of that. mr. smith said mr. smith is the one and then with respect to the filters, every one of those filtered cigarettes -- she only smoked filtered, by the way. every one of those had a warning. there is not a single advertisement that has been shown in this case that is tied to mrs. smith. advertisements that anybody said, hey, mrs. smith saw this one or mrs. smith saw that one. there are no and that brings us to truth number three, and that you are going to be is mrs. smith was able to quit smoking. asked on the verdict form in questions 3 and 4 about addiction. you need to know about that. and this information is the most important fact addiction was not the legal cause of any of mrs. smith's problems, because she was able and she did quit. was the evidence in this case that nicotine addiction took over her brain and kept her from being able to quit so she just kept on smoking until she passed away? evidence that she became a robot because of the nicotine and had no choice but to just keep on smoking, or was the evidence in the case that mrs. smith had the ability to quit but she just chose to continue smoking because that is what was the 113 she wanted to do, she enjoyed smoking? remember, 60 million people have quit smoking in they are. and that is been known for hundreds of it is not about somebody else and whether somebody this country, 60 million people. now, this case is not about the general issue about whether cigarettes can be addictive for some other people, whether cigarettes are addictive. years. else is addicted. mrs. smith addicted to cigarettes, and why did mrs. smith smoke? was it because of her addiction, or was it because she had a choice? here? it is only about mrs. smith. what was the legal cause of her illnesses was mrs. smith and the evidence -- the evidence about the real mrs. smith just does not fit the profile of somebody who tried over and over real hard to try to quit, somebody who tried sincerely to quit, somebody who was persistent in trying to quit but who was not able to. you know, there may be some people out there like again, that is not mrs. smith. but that is not her. that. another effort to repackage her. and, again, the most important thing -- the most important fact about this whole addiction issue is that mrs. smith did quit smoking. she successfully quit smoking. cigarette. she successfully quit smoking. she never picked up another and she successfully quit smoking for six years 114 until she passed away. she did quit. we know she was able to quit because now, ms. barnett talked about these chemicals in your brain, and you heard about some of that at the trial. but here's what the evidence shows: nicotine does not prevent smokers from understanding the health risks of smoking. nicotine does not prevent smokers from quitting. and every single witness that they called, dr. burns, dr. cummings, every one of them admitted any smoker can quit, including heavily-addicted smokers. and, remember, dr. cummings showed -- we showed he that brochure he has, and we talked about his clinic. has people who come to him, and he gives them a brochure saying, hey, you can quit; here's how; here's a brochure. and then the very first witness that the plaintiffs called was dr. burns. testified many, many, many times for plaintiffs' lawyers like this. remember him? he is but even dr. burns admitted -- when ms. baker was asking him questions, even dr. burns admitted the smoker has control of her own behavior, and addiction does not relieve a smoker of responsibility for her own behavior. and is not that really the bottom line for this if smokers had no choice, the way that they are case? talking about, you would not see all these fluctuations -- 115 remember all those fluctuations in sales that was talked about? you would not see that up and down and up and down and up and down if their theory were correct, that people started smoking and nicotine took over their brain and that was it. instead, people smoke because they have a choice there are a lot of different you have to make the decision for yourself. here in the united states. people -- a lot of different reasons why people then decide and one of those reasons is if they want to quit smoking. they have a health concern. and that is what happened with but what is important is you have to want mrs. smith here. to quit. you and you have to really have to be the one to decide that. want to quit, because it may be hard at first. you know, you may not want to do it. you may have some difficulty. but you have got to have that sincere motivation. if you do not have it for yourself, it is not going to work. not going to be able to quit. you are the fact is that mrs. smith enjoyed smoking. you heard mr. smith admit on the witness stand that she actually used those words. she said, i enjoyed smoking. of cigarettes. she actually used those words. she said, i enjoyed the taste and addiction does not explain risky choices that all of us make every day about how we want to live our lives. 116 whether you -- we were talking about ordering lunch in. you know, whether you eat something healthy or whether you have potato chips, or if you go to mcdonald's, or, when you go home, you know, do you watch tv, or are you going to go out and go for a walk, or do you drive, like, a sporty little convertible that has a soft top, or do you want something more substantial, like a heavy truck with a hard top so it is safer -- those are choices that we make every day about health risks. and those choices are not made because of those choices are made because of things like addiction. pleasure and relaxation, same as mrs. smith with her smoking. mrs. smith could have quit smoking truth no. 4: until she made up her mind that she was truly earlier. motivated to quit in 1995 when she was diagnosed with lung cancer, she only made two -- you heard from her husband -- two efforts to quit before then. and both of those efforts were half-hearted. this was over a 27-year period. she started smoking around 1968, and she did not quit until 1995. that is 27 years where we only have evidence in this case of two efforts to quit. now, can you really say that is somebody who has a sincere interest to quit, somebody who is really persistent 117 and really trying to quit? they only tried to quit twice? can you really say that when and what happened those two times? well, one time remember, it was a full-day is when she went to the class. class here in jacksonville about how to stop smoking. and mr. smith admitted she only went for a couple of hours, and then she left. and mr. smith said she just did not want to do it. the other time she tried was when she went to the she did not go to the doctor to doctor for her bronchitis. say, hey, help me quit smoking. she went to the doctor, and she was diagnosed with the bronchitis, and her doctor said, hey, you need to quit; i'm giving you a patch. and remember, she only tried it for about a week. and even then she did not throw away her ashtrays or her lighters or anything like that. testified she did not stick with it. that is somebody who was making a whole-hearted effort to quit? and, again, mr. smith can you really say that and then in 1995, that is when she did become motivated to quit. that is when she was diagnosed with lung cancer, and that is when she, herself, said, hey, i need to quit, and i'm going to quit. she stuck with it then, including wearing those patches off and on for the period of time that she did. and she was successful. 118 that is an example of somebody who was trying to and she was successful. quit. cigarettes six years until she passed away. she had no withdrawal. and she stayed off no withdrawal. and, remember, you even heard from their witness, you heard on the videotape this morning mr. smith dr. cummings, withdrawal is a hallmark of addiction. had none. say, she seemed fine to me. irritable? was she nervous? they were the ones who were living together. he was asked, was she no, no, none of that. she and we know that mrs. smith was capable of quitting because she did quit. speculate on that at trial here when you are deliberating. now, the question on the verdict form asks you and you are not going to have to about addiction and legal cause. cause." it uses that word, "legal so when you are considering that question, just remember addiction did not prevent her from quitting. addiction did not prevent her from trying to quit earlier if she had been really and truly motivated. so that brings us to truth no. 5, which is every one of the mrs. smith cannot establish legal cause. plaintiff's claims in this case, every one of them -- and they have the burden of proof on every one of their claims -- every one of their claims requires legal cause. 119 it is going to be on the verdict form and in the instructions you are going to get from judge huck. and that means that there has to be a link between there mrs. smith and something reynolds did or did not do. has to be a connection, not guesswork, but there has to be legal cause there. okay? this is not no fault. you know, like, if you drive a car, you can get no-fault insurance, and if you go -- if you hit somebody, the insurance company has to pay, and it does not matter whose fault it was. the case is. that is not what in this case, they have to prove -- the plaintiffs have to prove that there was a connection, that there was legal cause between mrs. smith and whatever it is that they are claiming, whatever that particular thing is that they are claiming. one is like cars, okay? and it is kind of like -- you know, i was thinking last night, working on my notes to talk to you today -- if you think about -- i want to give you a couple of examples to think about. so most of us, i guess, drove in this morning. there is a speed limit, right? it says 55 miles an hour, 30 miles an hour, wherever you are but your car can go, what, 90, 100 miles an hour? driving. it is on the speedometer. that does not mean it is legal for you to go that fast. your car can go that fast. it is up to 120 it is up to the driver. you. the choice. the driver is the one who has another example for you to think about is, like, compare that to prescription medicine. prescription medicine, it is different. choice. taking medicine that is prescribed for you. that, too. you are not doing something voluntarily. with okay. you are not making a you are so remember a lot and that brings us to the next truth about this case, and that is there was no reliance by mrs. smith on anything that reynolds did or said or failed to do. of this evidence that you have heard from other companies -- a lot of this evidence you heard was for periods of time when mrs. smith did not smoke. a lot of this evidence that you have heard, there is no connection that mrs. smith ever saw it, ever heard it, ever knew anything about it. do not let -- do not let all of that -- put that aside. do not let any of that evidence influence you. the questions on the verdict form which has to do with mrs. smith. do not let it distract you from dr. cummings testified that there were 16 million documents from tobacco companies that are now publicly available. have they done? they have cherry-picked a few and pulled out little sentences here and there to come into court to they are on the internet. million. but what 121 that is what is going on. try to make us look bad. they are trying to make us look bad so that you will be distracted and you will not focus on mrs. smith. question on the verdict form. and that is a because let me give you some examples. some of the is that fair? documents they showed you were drafts. that have a connection to mrs. smith, when there is just a draft document that she did not even know -- that was not even acted on? does some of the documents were not even from reynolds. for example, they kept talking about -- with the deposition of dr. gentry, this document that talked about -- that was from a company in england. england. and remember i said, she is never even been to she did not smoke cigarettes from england. and then philip morris -- remember, they played a video of a lady who was on -- i think it was nightline, and she was asked about philip morris making contributions to the movie to get marlboro in the superman movie. marlboro philip morris is a competitor of is not made by reynolds. reynolds. and then remember they had the list of all the movies that they were trying to get placement of cigarettes in? that was philip morris. that was not reynolds. and then, remember, again, there is another 122 document that they asked about over and over. and they said, oh, the evidence is overwhelming; the evidence is overwhelming. that same paragraph that said, hey, wait a minute; we are also looking at air pollution and other things. on cross-examination, we showed the rest of and then, remember, they kept on -- when they had their witness on the stand, they kept on showing this document from 1959 by a reynolds scientist named dr. rodgman that talked carcinogens in smoke. and they were like, oh, there are carcinogens in they knew in 1959. smoke. kept it a secret. they knew. they knew. they reader's digest had an article that exact same remember i said, hey, it is the same month. it was month. both in november. digest says the same thing. november of that year, 1959, reader's that is not a secret. and then mr. cummings tried to make a big deal about a document that was written by a lady from reynolds named diane burroughs. and, remember, he kept saying, oh, this proves that they are trying to market to kids, trying to and, remember, when i cross-examined him, i market to kids. said, hey, wait a minute. that document talks about 18- to 24-year-olds. where the period of -- that the age they are talking about is 18-year-olds to 24-year-olds. and there were 200 places in that document and it is legal for 123 18-year-olds to smoke cigarettes. document was written, how old was mrs. smith? again, that has nothing to do with mrs. smith. effort for them to try to make us look bad. and at the time that she was 29. it is just an and then remember they showed the video of the and the ceo of ceos of the tobacco companies and they showed a little clip where they were asked one after another about is smoking addictive, and the ceo of reynolds was cut off, he was not allowed to finish answering? and so when it was my turn to ask questions, i played the rest of it. reynolds explained very clearly, you know what, there was an earlier definition of addiction, something called the classic definition of addiction, the definition that was used in the 1964 surgeon general's report. definition for addiction required intoxication. remember, he gave that great example. about to get on a plane and take off and fly, do you want your pilot to have smoked a cigarette, or do you want your pilot to have snorted coke or shot up heroin or had a beer? cigarettes are not intoxicating. the testimony he gave was absolutely correct. and that and, he is like, if you are again, they played a little snip and tried to make us look bad. mrs. smith? of this? none. but overall, what does this have to do with what evidence is there that mrs. smith saw any 124 if there is anything that mrs. smith actually saw, actually relied on, actually heard, that is different. there is no evidence like that in this case. but she did not see any of these internal documents. what was the these documents have nothing to do with her. evidence from her family members from the witness stand? here's what they testified: that she never saw or heard any kind of statement from a cigarette company, that she never said anything a tobacco company did got her to start smoking. ms. barnett: your honor, i object and ask to reopen the evidence. the court: ms. parker: overruled. she never said that anything a tobacco company said caused her to continue smoking. family members said she had never heard of this tirc. had never heard of the tobacco institute. of ctr. she had never had any communications with any tobacco company. she never had any communications with reynolds. her she she never heard and mr. smith agreed that mrs. smith was her own she was smart; she was intelligent. he said she person. was not gullible. but what did ms. barnett tell you this morning? i would like to ms. barnett said she fell for the lies. 125 respectfully submit to you that that is an effort to repackage the real mrs. smith. and then what about dr. cummings, the one who remember, he came in here and he had testified on monday? this powerpoint slide show that he went through? remember, ms. barnett even asked him a question about linda denton, who was the plaintiff in the last case that they worked on together. and i think i heard ms. barnett say linda denton just a few minutes ago when she was going through her closing. and dr. cummings goes around the country, he goes from he has this powerpoint set of slides one place to another. and he goes through them for everybody. let me go over and remind you what dr. cummings here's a set of all the depositions that did not look at. were taken in this case. dr. cummings read this many, pages that were selected for him by the lawyers for mr. smith. and the medical records, there were 1400 pages of medical records. dr. cummings reviewed 15 pages pulled out and selected for him by the lawyers for mr. smith. dr. cummings did not know about the real facts of he did not even know about that life insurance he said, remember i asked him about it. mrs. smith. policy from 1987. 126 no, i do not know anything about that. all he does is go around and give the same opinion everywhere; everybody's addicted. smoker who smokes even one cigarette a day, everybody's addicted. remember, he said every they showed you a few advertisements. so let me go back -- i know i talked about it a few minutes ago, but i want to talk about it in a little more detail now. she did not start smoking because of all of the evidence is that she started smoking her older sister there is zero, zero, evidence of that in advertisements. this case. because her sister smoked. after witness, everybody agreed to that. is the one who was driving, asked her to light up her cigarettes for her and then hand the cigarette to her. that is why she started smoking, not because of any ads. remember everybody, witness and remember we showed you the law -- if we could it was illegal for mrs. smith to buy pull this up. cigarettes herself until she turned age 18. 1973. and that was and then ms. barnett -- her witnesses have tried remember oh, there are these coupons and, you know, all that to make a big to-do about the coupons on raleigh. that? you heard about coupons. but what did mr. smith say? okay. he was the 127 they were married for 29 what did you heard him say this morning, she did not smoke to she smoked raleighs, and person who was living with her. years, and he was buying the cigarettes for her. he say? get coupons. it just happened that raleighs had coupons on there. did not rely on anything on those coupons. evidence. she that is not the she liked raleighs. and, again, that is another effort to repackage her in a way that just does not fit with the true facts of her life. by the way, those advertisements were all legal. every one of those it was legal to advertise cigarettes. advertisements you saw were legal. there is zero evidence here that mrs. smith ever saw or heard anything from reynolds; zero evidence that reynolds had any impact on her smoking decisions; zero evidence that reynolds did anything that impacted or affected mrs. smith's choices to continue smoking. that brings us to the next truth, which is that the government knows that cigarettes are dangerous. the documents that y'all have seen in this case, our government knows all about them. cigarettes can cause death. cigarettes can cause cancer. our government knows that our government knows that all of ms. barnett: objection, your honor. pretrial 128 ruling. the court: ms. parker: but our government has said that there are overruled. our government is aware of every bit of that. warnings on the cigarette packages, and those warnings are adequate and sufficient as a matter of law. they are set by congress to warn people. none of this that you saw in the trial is not already known by the federal government, by the state of florida, by the national cancer institute, by the surgeon general or any of those groups. our society has decided that cigarettes can be legally sold. now, that is truth no. 8: cigarettes are a legal and reynolds cannot be held liable just for making cannot be held liable just for making okay. and reynolds has complied with all -- there is product. cigarettes. cigarettes. absolutely no evidence otherwise. with all federal and state laws the entire time mrs. smith smoked. reynolds has complied ms. barnett: your honor, objection. violation of that kessler injunction. the court: ms. parker: overruled. you will not be asked on the verdict form to decide whether or not cigarettes should be legal or whether or not cigarettes should be sold, because that 129 decision has already been made. this is america, and in america, we have freedom to make choices, including sometimes choices that may turn out not to be the best ones for your health. now, the first -- i'm going to transition. and the first couple of questions you are going to have on the verdict form have to do with the medical issues. to talk about those. and here's the next truth: is that mrs. smith had bac. so i want and that when you get to that question on the verdict form, which is the first one, your answer should be no, she did not have a non-bac. and they had the burden of proof on this. there are five things you need to know about the you know, there is a lot of medical case, and that is all. complicated medical jargon that was discussed, but only five things you need to know. proof. one is they have the burden of they have to prove it; we do not. no. 2: the pathology is the deciding factor here. remember, dr. barsky said the tissue is the issue? any hospital, any doctor, if you have a question about what type of cancer somebody has, that decision is made by the pathologist. that is a second thing you know, pathology. third thing is, let us compare dr. barsky and 130 dr. barsky is a pathologist. he is a cancer researcher. dr. feingold. 170 articles. committee that nominates people for nobel prizes. cancer researcher who is gotten grants from the national cancer institute, susan g. komen. he is a professor in pathology. he is board certified in pathology. he is on the he has written he is a compare him to dr. feingold. dr. feingold is not he cannot sign pathology reports at a an insurance company will not reimburse him for a pathologist. hospital. any time he spends on pathology opinions because he cannot do that because he is not qualified. what has he published? he is published three papers about lawsuits that he -- he wrote with mr. wilner, and then he wrote that book about birth control. he is done no cancer research. he has no pathology training. you heard him admit that he even hires pathologists to help him in his consulting business when he needs a pathologist. and what does he do for a living? he goes around ninety percent of his income comes from that. and he testifies. remember, he said he and mr. wilner were best friends. fourth thing you need to remember is the definition that matters about bac is the one that was in place back when she was diagnosed with cancer in 1995. all that -- they tried to show dr. barsky 131 yesterday saying, oh, no, that is not the right definition; you ought to look at this other. that was all recent. and you remember he said, oh, this is from chest -- you remember he put up there, this is chest? those are pulmonologists. those are not they are trying to say dr. barsky is wrong pathologists. because the pulmonologists have changed the way they define bac. okay? but remember what dr. barsky said? he said, i'm still me even if they change my name. they say i'm fred mcgillicutty, i'm still me. it is like even if and that is the same with bac. bac is a type of remember, there is small cell, non-small non-small cell is divided into different adenocarcinoma. cell cancer. types. of adenocarcinoma. one of those is adenocarcinoma, and bac is a subtype and then here's the ultimate issue about the lung when y'all go back there think about this. and cancer. ms. barnett has some more time to talk to you after i finish. time i'll be able to talk to you. because she has the burden of proof. she is saved some of her time. she gets to go last but this is the last and i'd like to challenge her, in her time that she speaks to you afterwards, to give you a good reason about this -- what i'm about to tell you; and that is, 132 dr. feingold admitted and dr. barsky explained there are two tests that they could have done -- one is called kras and one's called egrf -- two dna tests that they could have done on the pathology for mrs. smith that would have shown whether ms. smith had a cancer that was caused by smoking or a cancer that was not. and they have the burden of proof, and they did why not? not run those tests. did not want the answer? when their own witness admitted they are available and could why did not they run those tests? be run on the pathology? why did not they run those tests you think it is because they and, by the way, bac causes death, just like every other type of lung cancer. all right. that was the lung cancer claim. let us and this is the second talk about the next claim they have. question on the verdict form. and mrs. smith had asthma. she did not have copd. she had and there were remember the testimony -- she had lifelong asthma. asthma starting back when she was a child. 55 different references in the medical records to her having asthma. her son had asthma. mrs. smith had asthma. her sister had asthma. there is just no dispute that she had -- she was on an inhaler. now, what is the evidence -- what was the evidence about the copd? because there is a reference obviously in 133 well, she had one test. she and, remember, they the medical record about it. had one pft, pulmonary function test. gave her that test to see whether or not she could have surgery to remove part of her lung. postpone the surgery because she had such severe bronchitis at the time. and they had to remember, dr. farber testified yesterday and said she had -- he used the word "nasty," that she had nasty mucous secretions that were so bad that her surgeon said, i cannot operate on this lady, okay? time that they gave her that pulmonary function test, okay? that is the period of but what happened? it cleared up. she did not have continuing copd. cleared up. up, and they were able to do that surgery on her. all of that it cleared there is -- remember, there are no radiology there was not a word in findings in this case about copd. any pathology report that she had copd. and then mr. smith has admitted when he testified here he did not know she had it. so your answer to question 1 on the verdict form about lung cancer, your answer to question 2 about copd, the plaintiff has the burden of proof on both of those. and we would like to respectfully submit that your answer to both of those should be no. no and no. now, you will be given the verdict form when you go 134 and the verdict form has -- let us see how many i want to go it has a number of questions on there. back, okay? it is. over it with you now. i think all of those truths, those ten truths that i went over with you, that is the information that you need to be -- to be able to answer every one of these questions. you are going to hear the instructions of law from and judge huck is going to explain that the judge huck. plaintiff has the burden of proof on all of her claims. and you are also going to hear from judge huck that you know, it is always -- it is always sad, it is you should not decide the case based on sympathy or prejudice. always difficult, when somebody passes away. and, of course, we all have sympathy when something like that happens. but when you are reaching your decision in this case, you are going to be instructed from judge -- by judge huck that you -- you have to put that sympathy aside. now, the first four questions on the verdict form, and i'd like to ask if the first two are the medical ones. you would answer no and no to those. if your answers are no, you stop right there. i -- part of my job, i've got to go over all the other questions, as well. but the next two questions relate to this issue about 135 and, again, mrs. smith was able to quit smoking. she did not even make an effort other addiction. she did quit smoking. than half-hearted ones to try to quit before then. did not smoke for any reason other than she wanted to, knowing, knowing, knowing that the risks of smoking were out there. so we would like to respectfully ask that you answer no to those questions. she the next question on the verdict form has to do and it is may 5th of 1990. with a date, okay? and here's -- this is a -- kind of an unusual question, because the first question on the verdict form -- i mean, the second question on the verdict form asked you about the copd claim. we are asking you to answer no to that, because she had asthma, okay? we are asking you to answer no. and but if -- if -- for whatever reason, if somehow you go forward on that question, this one asks you, well, when did she have it? and, again, our position is she did not have it. but if you disagree with us, she -- she knew -- she knew, or had reason to know -- that is all the question asks -- that there was a -- i'm going to read this to you: mrs. smith knew or should have known that there was a reasonable possibility her injury was caused by cigarette smoking if the injury manifested itself in a way that supplied some evidence -- not a diagnosis, not proof, just some 136 evidence -- of a causal relationship to cigarette smoking before this date in 1990. well, what do we know about what she knew before we knew -- we have got two doctors' records that told 1990? her to quit smoking. 1980 that showed that she went to the doctor and said she had a smoker's cough. ms. barnett: objection to misstatement of the we have got another doctor's record from law. the court: ms. parker: overruled. so, again, our position is, check no. but if you happen to she did not have copd; she had asthma. go forward, she knew about all that. cough, she knew she had shortness of breath -- her sister-in-law barbara selph testified to that -- well before this cutoff period in 1990. she knew she had a the next set of questions on the verdict form, and i've legal cause is not plain old every one of them asked you about legal cause. already talked about that. cause like if, you know, we were talking, okay? is a very special legal meaning that you are going to hear about from judge huck. legal cause so what does all that mean? well, for example, ms. barnett talked this morning about some safety rules. you remember she said, oh, there would be safety rules? 137 you are not going to hear about any of that from judge huck. mrs. smith -- mr. smith has to prove that mrs. smith would not have developed these illnesses but for reynolds and negligence and design defects on the part of reynolds. attacks that do not have anything to do with mrs. smith is not enough. and they failed to do that. these general the next questions on the verdict form -- actually, it is questions 8 and 10 -- are going to ask you specifically about reliance, specifically going to ask you about reliance. and that goes back to she did not rely on something internal documents do not she never saw and she never heard. matter. you are going to be asked some questions about the date -- this date of may 5th of 1982 -- and you are going to have the jury instructions from judge huck back there with you. about to read to you. but be sure to pay attention to this one part i'm it says in there that mr. smith has to prove to you that mrs. smith relied on something between 1982 and 1994, okay? at all of this. so just remember those dates as you are looking there is no evidence to support that. and i want to take a minute and talk to you about those engle findings from the other jury, from miami, a 138 i said this at the beginning of -- number of years ago. when i first talked to you, when we had our opening statements. from that other jury do not answer the questions on your verdict form here, okay? but let me just tell you again: those findings you are the only jury to hear about mrs. smith. you are the only jury to hear about her smoking, about her illnesses, her life, about what she knew, about the fact she had a warning on every package of cigarettes. jury did not hear any of that. the questions on your verdict form here. that other you are the jury to decide and then that gets us up to the question about comparative fault, and it asks you to decide percentages between mrs. smith and reynolds. who decided whether she would start smoking? so what does -- has the evidence been about that? the evidence has been that mrs. smith smoked with her eyes who made all those decisions for her about her wide open. smoking? who decided what brand she would smoke? would switch and what she would switch to? whether she would try to quit? try to quit? who made all those decisions? who decided how she would who decided when she who decided she did. she made all those decisions for herself. no one forced mrs. smith to smoke. no one forced 139 her to start smoking or to continue smoking. made the choice to smoke. diagnosed with lung cancer and she became motivated, she made the choice to quit. and in 1995, when she was mrs. smith every time that mrs. smith lit up a cigarette with there was a warning on the pack, she made that choice. nothing that reynolds did other than make -- make those cigarettes, and that is not enough -- we cannot -- we cannot be held liable for just making cigarettes. that is legal. there is nothing that reynolds did that caused mrs. smith to start smoking or to continue smoking. and that is why we are going to ask you to put 100 percent responsibility for mrs. smith. ms. barnett: objection to that argument, your honor, based on the law in florida. overruled. we are going to ask you to put 100 mrs. smith is the person who chose the court: ms. parker: percent by mrs. smith. to smoke. knowing there were warnings on every package. the one who chose not to make a sincere, whole-hearted, persistent effort to quit prior to when she was diagnosed with lung cancer. mrs. smith is the person who chose to smoke mrs. smith is so we are going to respectfully ask you, if you get down that far, one hundred percent of the responsibility in this 140 case is mrs. smith. now, i want to be -- i want to be clear about we are not criticizing her. we are not criticizing she has that right. this. her for smoking. mrs. smith had that right to make those choices. saying she should -- her husband should not now be allowed to come into court and get money from us for the choices that she made about how she wanted to live her life. that gets us to the question about damages. in the united states, but we are and i hate to even talk about this question -- the verdict form, but i have to. they are asking for $10 million. that is a windfall that they have pulled -- they have pulled that number out of thin air. they are asking for $10 million for a lady who smoked -- ms. barnett: your honor, objection. there is a pretrial ruling on this matter. overruled. that is asking $10 million for a lady the court: ms. parker: who smoked with a warning on every package of cigarettes. that is not right. case should be zero. damages. you should award no damages, no our position is that the damages in this and that gets us to the last question, which has they are not just asking for to do with punitive damages. 141 they are also asking you to decide that they $10 million. are entitled to something called punitive damages, and we will come back for more witnesses and evidence if they have their way about that. well, what is the evidence been about -- what is the evidence and what is the law about punitive damages? well, first of all, punitive damages are not a right. do not have a right to it. proof. of proof. itself. you and that is the highest level of highest level it is clear and convincing evidence. you are going to see that on the verdict form they have to prove that reynolds' conduct as to mrs. smith was gross and flagrant and recklessly discarded her safety. now, what was the evidence about what reynolds did with respect to mrs. smith? well, you heard that reynolds identified the we did that research and constituents in cigarette smoke. identified that. you are going to hear, or you heard, that reynolds identified suspect carcinogens and they tried to reduce those. you heard that reynolds followed the suggestions that were given to them by the surgeon general and the public health community to try to reduce -- low-tar, low-nicotine. 142 remember we showed you all those quotes from the surgeon general that said, hey, these low-tar, low-nicotine cigarettes are the way to go? and reynolds tried to follow that advice. remember, you heard that reynolds worked with -- for ten years worked with the federal government in something called the national cancer institute tobacco working group. and remember this document that i asked dr. cummings about. in 1968, the year that mrs. smith started smoking, we have in evidence this document that you have seen where the president of the company sent this memo to the chief scientist at the company. and that memo said start working with the government to try to cooperate with others and push the work about tobacco and health. smoking. that was the year she started and then remember the green monster, all these 6,000 articles that reynolds and the other cigarette companies paid for, funded. the surgeon general starting back in 1964. of that research that reynolds and the other tobacco companies funded, including here in florida at the university of miami. have we got that? and this research was cited by and remember all yeah, the university of florida, florida state, 143 university of south florida, university of miami. the places that are doing this research that they are claiming is fraudulent. and remember you heard seven of the scientists who did this research -- seven of them went on to get nobel prizes. these are now, some of you may not like everything you heard some of you may think, you know the cigarette companies should have said earlier but that is not the issue you are asked here you are only asked in this case about legal about cigarette companies. what? about causation. in this case. cause as to mrs. smith. and we would like to respectfully submit that it would she had asthma. she personally knew the health risks of just be wrong and unfair here to render a verdict in favor of mr. smith, where mrs. smith had a cancer -- had bac, a cancer that is not caused by smoking. the only evidence of copd is this one test that was done at a time she was sick. smoking. that she smoked. she never chose to smoke. made a serious effort to quit until she was diagnosed with cancer. successfully quit. she was aware of the health risks, but she she said she enjoyed smoking. she had warnings on every package of cigarettes and when she put her mind to it, then she that is what we are here about. yet, mr. smith has testified that mrs. smith did not know about the health 144 risks of smoking until 1993 or 1995. mrs. smith was the only person who is responsible for the decisions in her life about how she wanted to live her life, her decisions about her smoking. and under all those facts, we respectfully submit this is not a case where you should award money damages. so i want to ask you, as you go back and deliberate, obviously, you are all going to work as a group, but each one of you have your own convictions. and i want to ask very respectfully for you to hold on to your convictions and do not just give in and award any money in this case. i only have one more thing, only one final all that they have thought, and then i'm going to sit down. to do -- all that they have done in this case is they have hired somebody to go through a bunch of old documents, a bunch of ancient documents. they have pulled out snippets here and there to make us look bad that have nothing to do with mrs. smith. and they are trying to get you so mad when you see those documents that you will not stay focused on mrs. smith. if mrs. -- if mr. smith can get money here, that means anybody who uses a risky product, like eating at mcdonald's or drinking alcohol or anything like that, can get damages because this case is really only about money. 145 that is all we are here about. they are asking for money. you are the ones who stand between us and mr. smith trying to get money, when every cigarette that she smoked had a warning on the pack. as you go back and deliberate, we want you to use and thank you so much for your attention your common sense. this morning. appreciate it very much. that y'all have done and your service as jurors here. it is -- well, it is still morning. all of us appreciate everything i that concludes my closing. thank you, your honor.