mr. baringer: thank you, your honor. mrs. soffer, counsel, good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen. before i get into the case i want to start by the one thing we are in absolute agreement with mr. smith and mrs. soffer on and, that is, our gratitude for your presence here. you really do make an extraordinary contribution to our system of justice, this process would not work without your willingness, and you have gone beyond just to show up or go through the motions. we understand how difficult sitting through much of this case can be. it was very complex, it was dense, at times it was less than exhilarating. but you all obviously gave it a great effort to make sure that you gave both sides a fair chance to evaluate the evidence and deliberate fairly based on having heard all that evidence. so we very much appreciate your attention, we appreciate your patience with us above all, and, once again, joining mr. smith and on behalf of r.j. reynolds, i want to thing you all sincerely for your service. ladies and gentlemen, i told you during opening statement that this case was ultimately about one thing and one thing only and, that was, why mr. soffer made his choices to start and continue smoking until he ultimately quit. and i asked you at that time to keep one fundamental question in mind as you listened to all of the evidence, and, that was, what does this evidence have to do with maurice soffer? what did the testimony have to do with the choices he made, what did the documents have to do with the choices that he made? now, you have listened to all that testimony, you saw all the documents, and shortly you are going to have to decide together what it all means. and during my closing, i'm going to talk about the evidence and i'm going to talk about it specifically in the context of what did it have to do with mr. soffer. and i think you will see that that is in marked contrast from what you just heard. i mean, you heard mr. soffer's name mentioned a few times, but, essentially, mr. smith told you -we are not going to focus on maurice soffer. he made no effort to tie a single piece of evidence or a single event or a single claim to mr. soffer. he -- he went out of his way to tell you he was not going to prove what, you know, defect, what negligence, what concealment, how they -- how they constitute legal cause. he simply was going to present all of this evidence and you could change the name, frankly, on it and you could insert any other plaintiff's name and it would be the same in every case because it has nothing to do with mr. soffer. and you will see as we look at the evidence, that there is a very good reason for that, because plaintiff has not been able to sustain her burden of proof in this case. you know, in opening i also told you that it is not just r.j. reynolds that views smoking as a personal choice behavior. and i showed you statements from the surgeon general and the public health service. i'm going to go a little -- ah, there we go, winner. all right. you saw these -- you saw these in opening and you also saw -- you heard me talk to dr. burns about these. the united states public health service classifies cigarette smoking as a personal choice health behavior. the surgeon general in 1982, personal choice behavior, and in 1986 the surgeon general said, cigarette smoking is an addictive behavior and the individual smoker must decide whether or not to continue that behavior. choice is not a concept that was a construct of r.j. reynolds. they did not invent the concept, and they did not perfect the concept for use -- for use in perpetrating what they say is a decades-long conspiracy. personal choice is recognized by these authorities and it is also recognized by the people that you heard testify during this case. dr. burns admitted that calling smoking a personal choice behavior means that smokers, all smokers, have the ability to quit. all smokers have the ability to quit. dr. burns told you that, dr. werner told you that, and dr. myers told you that. there was unanimous agreement that all smokers have the ability to quit. does that mean it is equally easy for every one of them or equally difficult? of course not. you all know from your common sense and experience and what you heard here, the experts admitted that it varies from individual. and dr. burns and dr. werner did tell you that he had a choice, mr. soffer had a choice, but they said it was not a completely free choice because of nicotine and addiction. now, we have acknowledged since the beginning of this case that nicotine is potentially addictive and it does play a role in why people smoke, but the testimony was it is not all about nicotine. does it have an effect? yes. does it make it very difficult for some people to quit? yes. is it easy for some people to quit? yes. now, here's the real question. does it prevent people sufficiently motivated from quitting? and the answer is, obviously, no. as dr. myers pointed out, if that were true, if it prevented someone that was sufficiently motivated from quitting, no one would be able to break out of any addiction cycle, whether it would be heroin, cocaine, alcohol, or nicotine. it is a cycle that can be broken. it is a cycle that every day people break. the unchallenged evidence that you heard in this case is that tens of millions of americans, most of them would be addicted under -- under the definitions that you heard. tens of millions of american smokers, most of which were addicted, have successfully broken the addiction cycle. tens of millions. completely free or not, quitting is a choice exclusively in the hands of the smoker. no one can make someone quit smoking. that is why when you hear the experts talking about addiction, they say they have -- that smoker or that cocaine addict or that heroin addict has to be the one that is motivated. you cannot quit for someone else. nobody can make you quit unless they lock you up somewhere for long enough and stop it that way. it is exclusively in the hands of the smoker. it was exclusively in mr. soffer's hands and it was a choice that he did not make until it was too late. and i want you to think about it this way. if it was not a meaningful choice, even if not in dr. burns' view completely free, if it was not a meaningful choice, how could dr. burns tell you that smokers have the responsibility to quit? and, remember, dr. burns was very explicit. the smoker is ultimately responsible. if they do not have a meaningful choice, whether he calls it free or not, how could he say they were responsible? and he told you that being addicted does not relieve you of that responsibility. and, ladies and gentlemen, do not forget mrs. soffer has acknowledged that mr. soffer bears some responsibility in this case. she told you on the stand why when i was asking her questions. she said, he bears responsibility because he continued smoking. now, how could you hold him responsible if the reason he continued smoking was out of his hands? how could she agree to hold him partially responsible if he did not have a meaningful choice? how could she hold him responsible if he did not have the ability to quit at a time that would have allowed him to avoid his lung cancer? what would you be holding him responsible for? it makes absolutely no sense. the only thing her accepting responsibility can possibly mean is that mr. soffer could have and should have quit sooner. if it does not mean that and he could not have avoided his lung cancer by quitting before -- around 1980 or earlier, as dr. burns told you, what is the point? that has to be what it means. now, if it is not -- and when you heard counsel in closing talking about, not once did they tell you that they admit that mr. soffer could have quit smoking in time to avoid his lung cancer. they said, well, it is human frailty. he should have tried harder and he should have tried more often. did you hear either of plaintiff's counsel say he had the ability to quit and he could have and should have quit sooner? no, you did not. you heard them want to do this balancing in comparative fault between human frailty and the conduct of r.j. reynolds. ladies and gentlemen, if they do not own up to the fact that he could have and should have quit sooner, all they are doing is making an emotional ploy to you that we are being reasonable, we are being fair, and we ought to share this responsibility. and that is an open invitation to get them to the part of the verdict form where you allocate fault between reynolds and mr. soffer, because they know they are guaranteed then to get money off the line where you fill in the numbers. that is what it is. in their rebuttal, ask -- sit there and think about -- challenge them to come up and tell you whether or not mrs. soffer's acceptance of responsibility means that he could have and should have quit in time to avoid his lung cancer. if they will not tell you that, you know it is just a game. i want you to think about one other thing. i want you to remember questions that you heard one of mrs. soffer's lawyers ask dr. cobbs hoffman. and i want you to think about -let us see. i need demonstrative 20. oh, okay. there are two questions that were asked by mrs. soffer lawyer of dr. cobbs hoffman. the first was, mr. soffer quit smoking cigarettes before he was diagnosed with cancer, did he not? dr. cobbs hoffman said, yes, he did. next line. and mr. soffer did what the public health service had told him to do in that regard, correct? eventually he did. what they were asking, what her lawyers was asking goes to the fact that he did not quit and ultimately he -- he quit, not necessarily on time but he ultimately quit. how much of -- you all ultimately are going to have to decide as we start this case, as the plaintiff walks in, the plaintiff is one hundred percent responsible for his own conduct. i mean, that is what dr. burns and everyone told you. what they are trying to do through the case is to deduct portions of mr. soffer's responsibility, but that only happens -- and i want you to keep this in mind. that only happens to the extent she meets her burden of proof on any one of her claims. fault is not that you are mad. fault is not that you have sympathy, understandable sympathy for a woman who lost their husband and children that lost their father. that is not a reduction in mr. soffer's responsibility. you cannot assign fault on that basis. the only basis for assigning any responsibility to r.j. reynolds is because you find that mrs. soffer proved one of her claims, one or more of her claims. i want to turn for a minute to plaintiff's burden of proof. mr. smith completely and totally ignored the whole concept of what it means to prove to you that reynolds' conduct, whatever they say is wrongful, was the legal cause of mr. soffer 's death. he did not even try to explain what it meant because he did not care. essentially, what he did, was he put on all of these documents and he was hoping that you just would not like it and forget that they have a burden of proof that they have to tie to mr. soffer. he made no attempt to do that. he -- he told you it didn t matter. if you find that they concealed something, that is enough, you can go ahead and find against reynolds on concealment. well, he said it did not matter what it was. well, what if mr. soffer already knew it? what if it was something that mr. soffer did not care about? that is the reason the law provides that he has to prove legal cause on every one of his claims. and, frankly, it is an insult to your pledge to follow the law as instructed. he is confident that you will just decide that you do not like what happened with respect to tobacco over 60 years and the law and the instructions are irrelevant. because he made no attempt at all to tell you how to do your sworn duty, to apply the law to the facts, because he does not want you to even think about mr. soffer. he just wants you to not like things, whether they had anything to do with mr. soffer or not. i want you to remember that, you know, plaintiff has to prove every one of the claims by the greater weight of the evidence. every one of the claims. that is their burden. they have to tip the scales a little bit on the other side. 51, 49. that is their burden. you have already seen the verdict form, you saw that when plaintiff's counsel was going through it and i'm going to show it to you as i go through the claim sort of piece by piece. but the one thing i want you to remember is every question you are going to be asked, class membership question is going to ask, if the addiction to nicotine in cigarettes was the legal cause of mr. soffer's death? the negligence question is, was reynolds' negligence the legal cause of mr. soffer's death? the same with design defect, the same with concealment, the same with the agreement to conceal. every one of those is in terms of legal cause. the concept he did not even talk about. and what does legal cause mean? you will be instructed by the court that it means but for the wrongful conduct, mr. soffer would not have developed lung cancer and died. for example, but for, meaning without, without the fact that reynolds was negligent, mr. soffer would not have developed lung cancer and died. without the design defect, mr. soffer would not have developed lung cancer and died. without the concealment, mr. soffer would not have developed lung cancer and died. every one of those, that is their burden. they have to show you that everything would have been different, but they have to prove it. it cannot be -- let us see, i think mr. smith said, think about what a difference something would have made if they -- if they had known, something in the 1950's. think about it. mr. avera said, imagine what it would have been like. that is not enough in court. they cannot ask you to go back in that jury room and think and imagine and daydream about what you think might have happened. they have the burden of proving to you what would have happened with mr. sorter. they can t ask you to guess and speculate. you are not going to get an instruction from this court that says, if you guess that it would have made a difference to mr. soffer, you find for the plaintiff. you will not get an instruction from this court that says, if you speculate and you think or you imagine that something might have been different from him, you can find for the plaintiff. that is not the law. and their invitation to have you think and imagine and guess and speculate is a sure sign that they know they have not met their burden of proof in this case with respect to tying any of what they want to talk about to mr. soffer. i want to talk now about class membership. this is the threshold issue. if you answer this question that, no, mr. soffer was not addicted or, no, his addiction was not the legal cause of his death, that is as far as you go, the case is essentially over and you would find in favor of reynolds, because if he is not a member of the class, the rest is irrelevant and you do not even reach it. so it is the threshold question. to be a member of the class plaintiff has to prove two things. was mr. soffer addicted to nicotine and was his addiction to nicotine in cigarettes the legal cause of his lung cancer and death? two separate questions. it is critical that you understand. you can take that down. it is critical that you understand at the beginning, the question here is not, did smoking cigarettes cause his lung cancer? medically there is no issue. we have stipulated that, that medically that is what did it. these are two entirely different issues. if it was not a different issue, you would not be sitting there because the case would be over because that issue would have been decided. it has to be. the mere fact that you are sitting in those seats is proof that there are different questions than just, did smoking medically cause his lung cancer? the first part, was mr. soffer addicted? i told you during opening that the court is not going to define addiction for you. there is no legal definition that you are going to be provided. and i suggested that what you really need to do is use your own common sense about what addiction really means. now, coincidentally, dr. burns, when he came in to testify for you, he said that he uses his own common-sense definition rather than the more complicated and technical definitions used by psychiatrists like dr. werner and dr. myers. and here is -can i have demonstrative 9? so dr. burns said, my definition of addiction is a common-sense definition and here's what he told you it was: whether the person can control the behavior in a way that allows them to put the substance down and walk away from it. and i want you to think about one other thing, especially since one of you asked the question. one of you asked this question: dr. burns, in your opinion, is it possible for any to smoke especially over a long period of time and not become addicted? and dr. burns answer: it is possible, and we occasionally find folks who have been smoking for 20 or 30 years and all of a sudden someone says, you should not smoke, or something happens where they walk into their closet and their clothes smell like smoke and they just stop and experience no consequences but those individuals are really very, very rare. so that was -- dr. burns gave you his definition. he said it was possible for somebody to smoke 20 or 30 years and not be addicted. so what is the evidence? what was the evidence about mr. soffer with respect to this question? now, the person that everyone agreed knew mr. soffer best, and it made sense, was his wife that he lived with for 16 years. and what did mrs. soffer say about his smoking? according to mrs. soffer, testifying in front of you, she described his -when he quit as this, he just put them down and walked away, right? yes. and mrs. soffer also told you that mr. soffer told her that quitting was very easy for him. and remember the spectrum of individuals. for some it is very difficult, for some it is very easy. mr. soffer's words were, it was very easy. now, she also told you, when she was testifying here in court, that she did not notice any change in mr. soffer's behavior when she thought he quit and did quit in 1990. she did not notice any changes in his behavior. she did not notice him being irritable, she did not remember him being anxious, she did not remember him being depressed, she did not remember him having any trouble sleeping. and remember what else mrs. soffer had to say. she never -- mr. soffer never told her that he wished that he could quit. she never reports him complaining about being a tormented smoker that did not enjoy it. in fact, her testimony was consistent. she testified that mr. soffer constantly said that he enjoyed smoking both his cigarettes and his pipe. the other thing she told you was that prior to 1990, when he quit, he had not been ready to quit before. he had not been ready. now, you did hear a bit of a different story coming from dr. werner. dr. werner testified that she called mrs. soffer and asked her a bunch of questions, supposedly without telling mrs. soffer that she was the expert hired by mrs. soffer's lawyers instead of ours. but she talked to her and you will also remember that we asked for that opportunity to have our psychiatrist talk to mrs. soffer and we were turned down. now, dr. werner told you that the reason she called mrs. soffer was to ask questions that had not been asked in the deposition. but if you remember, the cross of dr. werner you will see -- you saw that the same questions were asked that were asked in the deposition. dr. werner just got different answers. let me show you a few examples. the whole story about how they did on yom kippur was completely different. in her deposition under oath, being questioned by attorneys with a court reporter present, mrs. soffer's testimony was that, cigarette was out as soon that was done, the pipe was out. how long would that last? how long would he go without smoking? hours. even though it was very hard. he went 24 hours. dr. werner's notes, a lot of times we did not go back, we would smoke during the break at home and not go back. the question was asked in the deposition, just the answer changed. let me give you another example. insomnia. in her deposition, mrs. soffer said, do you know if he had trouble sleeping when he quit? no. he never had trouble sleeping? he never had trouble sleeping, no, ma'am. dr. werner's version, same question, this time the answer, he had difficulty sleeping on those days, he would end up sleeping on the sofa. he just could not sleep, i think. let me give you another example. irritability. in her deposition, do you know if he got irritable? when he quit? i do not remember. dr. werner's notes, did he get short tempered? he would be irritable with the children. same question, different answer. another example. restlessness. do you know if he got restless when he quit? i do not remember. dr. werner, we always said -- and i do not know how to pronounce this spilchas. he would not last long, he would want us to hurry up through shopping. same question, different answer. ultimately -- oh, appetite. let us do appetite. do you know if he gained weight when he quit? i do not remember. did you see any difference in his behavior? i do not remember. dr. werner's version, would eat more -- eat more at night, specifically sweets, the portions were bigger after he quit smoking. same questions, different answers. and, ultimately, all issues of credibility, all issues of what facts are true and what weight are to be given to them, that is all your decision. you are the ones that have to decide when you see things like this what do you believe. that is exclusively within your power and you apply common sense and you think about does what happened make sense, does the story make sense, and you decide collectively on what you ultimately believe. now, there was some other testimony about mr. soffer's quit in 1990. i want to talk just for one minute about something about testimony you heard about the attempts, if there were any, prior to when he quit in 1990. mrs. soffer said there may have been one or two others, she was not sure and she was not sure when. her son, joseph, testified that there were other attempts and in his deposition he talked about his father using nicotine gum, nicotine patches, nicotine lozenges. now, you may remember that dr. werner, when she testified said, well, there were some mistakes. he had to have been mistaken about that because they were not available then. so when joseph came in to testify, he said, ah, my father borrowed them from the neighbor who had a prescription. but let me tell you something. the interesting thing is mrs. soffer's testimony all along was he never used them. i mean, can you think of a reason why mr. soffer, who was very bold and outspoken and open about his smoking up until 1990, why would he hide the fact that he was using nicotine gum, nicotine lozenges, or the nicotine patch from his wife? can you think of a reason? there was no reason given. why was he hiding them? she did not know about it. he also -- joseph also testified at trial for the first time that his father was sneaking cigarettes behind his mother's back after he supposedly quit in 1990. did not come up in his deposition at all. and he said his father openly smoked in front of himself and his sister out when they were at sports fields, whatever it was, that he did it openly and they did not tell mrs. soffer because he was their friend. the interesting thing is his sister, rochelle, did not tell you the same story. oh, she said that he snuck cigarettes for a while but she said she was the one that saw it because she could look out from her bedroom at night and see him smoking down in the living room. now, even though they both talk about sneaking cigarettes, they both ultimately admit that their father permanently quit smoking. it is just they put it later in time. rochelle, it is september, october 1991, and joseph says it is a week or two before his diagnosis in december of 1991. but they agree he never smoked even sneaking after that. one thing i want you to think about is what did dr. werner say about this whole scenario that he never really quit? mr. beach asked her, if you go from a two-pack-a-day smoker, plus a pipe, by the way, two packs a day, plus a pipe, and you all of a sudden go to occasionally sneaking a cigarette now and then in the middle of the night or somewhere out when, you know, your kids are playing sports, should people have been able to notice his withdrawal symptoms? and dr. werner said, of course, you would have. but remember mrs. soffer's deposition testimony. she did not notice any at all. i want you to think just for a minute about this whole sneaking idea and ask you to think if it makes sense to you. mrs. soffer testified that mr. soffer's quitting in 1990 came as a complete surprise to her. she didn t know it was coming. she was surprised when it happened. it is not like she gave him some ultimatum all of a sudden and suddenly, you know, he was afraid to stand up to her, so he had to sneak around. that was not their relationship at all. he was always -- every time she had talked to him in the past about quitting or coming down, you remember what his reaction was. he laughed. and we will talk about why, but he laughed, he said he enjoyed smoking and he said he was not ready to quit. why all of a sudden in 1990 does he -- he is, for all intents and purposes, quit smoking and then feel the need to hide in front of the wife who was still smoking? why? does it make any sense? and why did he ask her to quit smoking at the same time? she testified he did. why did he ask her to go outside and smoke? she testified he did. so why is he sneaking around doing all this? what possible motive was there for that? they have not given you any reason why all of a sudden he would up and quit. but someone else -- someone else can give you a reason about why and what happened. the medical record from 1991 that you saw said that, it is pertinent to note that this man smoked one pack of cigarettes daily for 40 years as well as a pipe but quit smoking one year ago with a worsening of his dyspnea. that was why mr. soffer decided to quit in 1990, because for the first time he felt the effect on his health. for the first time he decided he wanted to quit and he did. it had nothing to do with r.j. reynolds' positions on smoking and health, addiction, or anything else. it had nothing to do with anything that reynolds could have influenced. that is what it took. there is no credible evidence that mr. soffer was not in control of his smoking behavior. he enjoyed smoking. when he decided he quit, he quit easily and he was in control. use your common sense. does that sound like he was addicted, tormented, and had no control? he was in control. now, i told you that on class membership it is a two-part question. the second part is -- and this is where, even if you decide that he was addicted, if you -- if you decide that you are not done. the second part of it is, was his addiction to cigarettes the legal cause of his lung cancer and death? and keep in mind when we talk about this question, the focus is on the fact that the addiction does not mean a smoker cannot quit. the plaintiff wants you to assume that once you are addicted, it is an inevitable train that runs from start until you develop a smoking-related disease or something else happens, but it is inevitable that you cannot stop. but we have already talked about the fact that you can stop. so keep in mind dr. burns said, anyone can quit even if they are addicted, and that he believes -- and i believe that this is in response to another one of your questions, someone on slide 28. yes, this is one of your questions. can anyone quit if they are cted? and his answer was, we believe that anyone who is addicted to any substance can, indeed, break that addiction. the observed reality is that many people die before they get sufficient internal resources, external support to allow them to accomplish that. so dr. burns admitted it can be done. and you know, you have heard the statistics, all through the trial. as of now between 55 and 60 million americans have quit. there are now more former smokers in the united states than there are current smokers and most of them were addicted. all of those formerly addicted smokers were able to break out of the cycle. and mr. soffer, based on -- on mrs. soffer's acceptance of responsibility and what you know about how he controlled his smoking behavior, mr. soffer could have quit before he did. otherwise -- remember, otherwise, accepting responsibility means nothing. and it is interesting because counsel showed you a statement that i made during opening and said i had essentially conceded that mr. soffer was addicted because i made the comment that he was no less addicted the day he quit than at any time during his smoking history. the part he forgot is that was exactly the same issue that i was discussing then as i am now, and that presupposes that you -- you have found him addicted and we are talking about if he was addicted, was addiction the cause? i made no such concession and i'm going to tell you the same thing i told you then. if you decide that he was addicted, keep in mind that he was no more or less addicted the day he quit than the day -- any day previously. and why is that important? that is important because if he could do it that day, he could have done it before. and remember dr. werner's testimony. dr. werner's testimony was, he had the ability to quit in the '80's, '70's, '60's and '50's. and what was dr. burns' testimony? dr. burns' testimony was that, if he had quit smoking by the early 1980's or any period -- any period of time prior to that, dr. burns' opinion was it was more likely than not that mr. soffer would not have developed his lung cancer at least when he did. and that -- what that means is, the real question here is did mr. soffer continue smoking long enough to develop lung cancer because he chose to? and if that is the answer, addiction is not the legal cause of his death. or did he continue smoking until he developed lung cancer because his addiction forced him to? only if you believe that, only if you believe the addiction forced him to keep smoking all that time, can his addiction to nicotine in cigarettes be the legal cause of his death. all of the evidence points in one direction. mr. soffer smoked until he was ready to quit, and then he stopped. he could have, and he should have stopped sooner, avoiding his lung cancer. you should mark no on class membership. i want to turn to mrs. soffer's specific claims now, and you only get to this part of the verdict form if you decide he was a member of the class. just like the findings only apply if you get past he was a member of the class. i want to start with concealment because that is basically, i think, all you heard about. it was sort of hard to tell at time but i think it was all about concealment. and that was virtually the only topic that dr. burns talked about. we talked about the burden of proof, and, remember, we talked about the fact that but for the concealment, in other words, without the concealment, whatever the concealment was mr. soffer would not have developed lung cancer. and i have an illustration to try and make sense out of that. the idea is -- and the instruction will talk about the natural sequence of events. so i've used dominos to try and -- to illustrate that. the idea is that he starts smoking, information is concealed which causes him to continue smoking, which causes him to get lung cancer, which causes his death. that is -- that is what they want you to believe. this is how they have to prove it. if you take the concealed information out, he starts smoking but there is no more concealment so he does not continue smoking, he does not get lung cancer, and he does not die. that is what it means. that is what legal cause means. if you take away the concealment, nothing else happens. that is what they have to prove. that is why they have to relate it to mr. soffer, because it is what impact did it have on him that it would stop that chain of events? i want to show you the instruction on concealment very quickly. you will get this and you will be able to take it back to the jury room. but it is talking about to be a legal cause of his death, the concealed or omitted facts must have been unknown to mr. soffer. and that is unfortunate for mr. smith, who does not care. but this is what the law is. secondly, if those facts were unknown, either they must have been not otherwise available to mr. soffer or mr. soffer's opportunity to learn them was less than that of r.j. reynolds. and, finally, and the key -- this is the key to the instruction and this is the law. a material fact is one that is of such importance that mr. soffer would not have acted as he did but for r.j. reynolds tobacco company's concealment or omission of the fact. mr. smith may not care, he may not want to be bothered with tying this to mr. soffer and telling you it made a difference, but if you are going to follow the instructions from the court, that is what you ultimately have to decide. and he certainly did not do anything to help you do it. he did not even talk about it. plaintiff approached concealment with two primary things. one, that reynolds concealed information about the addictive nature of nicotine, and, two, reynolds concealed information about the health effects of smoking. i'm going to talk about the addictive nature of nicotine first, because it could not be more clear why this theory fails. to begin with, remember the part where the information has to be unknown to mr. soffer? dr. burns admitted that it has been common knowledge in this country for well over 100 years that once you start to smoke, it can be difficult to quit. not a secret to anyone. dr. burns admitted that for centuries it is been known that once you start using nicotine, it can be very difficult to quit. it is been known for over 200 years that nicotine has pharmacological properties and is a drug. dr. burns admitted that. dr. burns admitted that popular magazines like reader's digest had articles about how difficult it could be to quit smoking for decades, long before mr. soffer started smoking. none of that was a secret. it cannot possibly be the basis of a concealment claim. and there is zero evidence from anyone that mr. soffer was not aware that nicotine can make it difficult to quit once someone starts. so what did mr. smith try to do to overcome those facts? he said that r.j. reynolds disputed the fact that nicotine was addictive the whole time mr. soffer was alive. problem was dr. burns admitted that he did not bring any evidence to support that allegation. i put up a demonstrative during opening -- i think it is number 42 -- i showed this to you and i told you what the situation was, and the evidence played out exactly as i told you. from very early on, 1700's and even before, the label used to describe difficulty to quit was either addiction or habit. people use them interchangeably so it is no shock that you see magazine articles, scientific articles, all of them use the label addiction or habituation. it was not until 1964 that they got sort of official about it and the surgeon general of the united states applied the definitions then being used and said, a habit or an addiction, what should we call it? one is intoxicating, the addiction. it does not meet that. so the surgeon general in 1964 said, it is a habit. and in 1964 the surgeon general made clear that that did not mean that it was not difficult to quit. can i see demonstrative 45? the court: mr. baringer, before you start that. let us just stand up a minute and stretch. i think everybody can use that. if anyone needs to run to the bathroom. (short recess.) (the jury returned to the courtroom, was seated in the jury box and the following further proceedings were had.) the court: everybody ready? did not mean to interrupt. mr. baringer: no, any time. thank you, your honor. slide 45, please. this is what the surgeon general said in 1964. thus correctly designating the chronic use of tobacco as habituation rather than addiction, carries with it no implication that the habit may be broken easily. so saying it was a habit and not saying it was addiction, was not denying that the behavior was exactly what they always knew it was. once you start, it is difficult to quit. denying that -- when the surgeon general in 1964 said it is addicting, it did not send a message to the american population that it is not difficult to quit. that is not what the surgeon general did. now, that was the definition that stayed in play until 1988. and in 1988, as you know, the surgeon general, surgeon general koop announced that they essentially had changed the definition, they eliminated the intoxication requirement, and adopted the new definition and labeled it addiction. and, yes, surgeon general koop said, it is just as addictive, if not worse, than heroin and cocaine. and r.j. reynolds did say, we do not agree with applying that label to smokers and to cigarettes and nicotine. now, you can say he was wrong for ever worrying about what you call it. it may sound silly. but that did not happen until 1988. and then it was all a debate about which definition or which label do you apply. remember, dr. burns, they talked about the '94 congressional testimony. you saw it here again. and they said that they lied. did mr. johnston lie? mr. johnston said, i do not think it is addictive under the classic definition, which includes the intoxication element, which is what the surgeon general said in 1964. what he said was literally true. they just did not like it because he argued with applying the term addiction. but remember what dr. burns did. dr. burns admitted that during that hearing, in the other eight hours, other than the minute you were shown, mr. johnston admitted that it is difficult for some smokers to quit. now, doctor -- dr. burns also said that all the way back -- if you go from 1988 all the way back during this whole period of time when supposedly reynolds is disputing the addictive nature of nicotine, how many documents did dr. burns bring in to show you that the tobacco companies, including reynolds, ever disputed the fact that once you start to smoke it can be difficult to quit? how many did dr. burns bring? zero. i told you in opening this whole issue started in 1988 and that is exactly what the evidence proved. now, they went on and they wanted to talk about internal documents about nicotine. forget the fact that all -- that the central issue that matters to the smoker is does it make it difficult for me to quit or not? and mr. soffer was well aware of that. that was common knowledge. so they go in and they want to bring out internal documents and they want to create a secret out of internal documents. they started with a document by claude teague. and lord knows we all saw lots of claude teague documents. one was he said that, for purposes of this discussion, nicotine is considered to the sine qua non in smoking satisfaction. and dr. burns was gracious enough to translate that for you, without which nothing. it is the idea is essential, that is what makes it that. and they were very excited about this document, because it showed this incredible internal knowledge on behalf of r.j. reynolds that they knew it was the central ingredient. i showed dr. burns a document from reader's digest, document -- demonstrative 151. now, this is from 1950. this is 32 years before claude teague picked up a pen and wrote in latin but he wrote the same thing in latin that dr. burns agreed was contained in reader's digest in 1950, that nicotine is the essential ingredient in tobacco, it is what makes tobacco tobacco and not just another weed. and dr. burns said, sine qua non, yep. same thing. was it a deep dark secret that reynolds had that mr. soffer did not have? hardly. dr. burns showed you another teague document and this one is sine qua non, he was very fond of his latin. it came up here again and this time he goes on to talk about, tobacco products are recognized as being attractive dosage forms of nicotine. once again, this is earth shattering that reynolds had this internal knowledge in 1972 and did not disclose it. problem was i showed dr. burns an article written in 1942 -- demonstrative 47 -and this was written by lenox johnston, the lancet, which is the most prestigious journal in great britain, and lenox johnson wrote this, on the assumption that smoking tobacco is essentially a means of administering nicotine, just as smoking opium is a means of administering morphine. dr. burns admitted that that is exactly the same concept that mr. -- that dr. teague wrote about in 1972. this was written in 1942. hardly a secret. hardly unknown to anyone. now, in the same document later on, in dr. teague's document, he talked about satisfaction, satisfying cigarettes, threshold amounts of nicotine. they discussed various things that you could do. you could increase ph that mr. smith talked about. you could alter the tar-to-nicotine ratio and on direct dr. burns described this as an effort to manipulate nicotine, manipulate cigarette design to enhance the effect of nicotine to create the impression that the idea was they wanted to make cigarettes more addictive. but remember that on cross i showed dr. burns two passages from the 1981 surgeon general's report. they discussed research on satisfaction and threshold amounts. this one, talking about, still, it is important to determine the lowest ratios, tar-to-nicotine ratios, that still produce a satisfying cigarette. and it talks about the optimum combination of standard yield to ratio that leads to maximum satisfaction and minimal exposure to toxic products. the other piece i showed dr. burns from the 81 sgr is talking again about -- at the bottom, exhibits a threshold value for its acceptability to the consumer. these concepts in dr. teague's document were interpreted as efforts to manipulate nicotine to make it more addictive. in the 1981 surgeon general's report, as dr. burns admitted, the idea of looking at minimum levels of acceptability, consumer satisfaction, was, how do we design a cigarette that satisfies the consumer from the standpoint of what they need from nicotine but delivering less tar because they knew that tar was the problem in terms of disease causation? when it is r.j. reynolds, it is evil. when it is the 1981 surgeon general's report, it is because they are trying to protect the public health. i want to mention one word just very quickly something about documents that i want you to keep in mind. you saw a number of documents, most i guess would probably be reynolds', you saw a lot of documents from philip morris. keep in mind, in terms of -- there are two different claims that i want you to keep in mind. the concealment claims against reynolds, per se, the philip morris documents are irrelevant. only as to agreement. there is no suggestion that pm shared all that with r.j. reynolds. there is no suggestion that reynolds knew everything that pm wrote in its documents. you have to keep that in mind as you consider it. but overall on this whole nicotine addiction or this whole nicotine issue and the idea that reynolds withheld information on the addictive nature of nicotine, ladies and gentlemen, it is nonsense. first of all, they did not deny it all that time and dr. burns admitted it. you did not see a single document until 1988. second, it was common knowledge that once you start to smoke, it can be difficult to quit. and a debate in 1988 about the label changes none of that. and ask yourself, what did they tell you about mr. soffer that makes you think anything that they claim was concealed would have made a bit of difference to him? what? they give you any clue at all why? did they give you any testimony that he ever said, oh, geez, i do not think nicotine is addictive, i do not think its difficult to quit because i heard r.j. reynolds say something? did they ever put on any evidence of that? none. complete and total failure of proof. let us talk about the health effects of smoking. they said reynolds concealed information on that, as well. and under this umbrella they talked about three things. they talked about advertising, filtration, and public statements. let us talk about advertising. i asked you in my opening statement when you saw ads, when you heard all about advertising, to ask yourself, what has this got to do with mr. soffer? and other than the fact that he was a member of the general public, you did not hear anything about what has this got to do with mr. soffer. they tell you that tney spent all this money and they put all of these ads out and heaven forbid they made it look like back then it was normal for people to smoke. well, guess what? it was. they proved that, they put up the pictures and the graphics and they said, oh, my god, back then you could smoke in doctors' offices, you could smoke on airplanes, you could smoke in restaurants, you could smoke in theaters, you could smoke anywhere. and they say that mr. soffer would have got the idea that smoking was normal from ads? what could have made it more -- seem more normal to him than living it? than seeing it? they are the ones that showed you what the environment was like. one thing, keep in mind, remember what dr. burns said about the soviet union, former soviet union. i asked him, was smoking prevalent in the former soviet union like it was here in the united states? and his answer was, yes. second question: did they advertise cigarettes in the soviet union? answer: no. not like we do here. so you have massive prevalence, you have normal, you have acceptable in the soviet union, no advertising and you have normal, acceptable smoking in the united states, and according to dr. burns it is all because of advertising. they talked about how mucn money they spend. it is a highly competitive industry, competing against each other all the time. you saw that from documents. you saw that from dianne burroughs talking about marlboro's market share. you saw that a number of times, they were highly competitive. mr. smith talked to you about, wow, they really invested in pall mall back in the '50's. and it is interesting because when we talk about filtration, it is fascinating because he talks about how the companies advertise and advertise and advertise filters and it reassured the public. all the time that they were increasing their budget for pall mall, guess what, pall mall was still unfiltered. then he showed you -- dr. burns showed you this massive amount of money in 2006, billions of dollars that they were spending on advertising when he -when he gave you the breakdown of how that broke out in 2006 -- or 2005 -- excuse me -- what did it turn out, 1.4 percent was for ads as we understand it, virtually the entirety of the rest was price discounts. and, remember, dr. burns admitted it is perfectly legal to advertise cigarettes in the united states. dr. burns talked about reynolds targeting kids. mr. smith says, does not matter that none of those documents were involved when mr. soffer was a kid. remember the documents you saw? you saw a 1928 document about go out to the schools in the summer, you know, colleges, high school, and then the next one you saw was from the 1970's. and i asked dr. burns about that. you mean you could not find one from the '40's, the '50's or the '60's? i mean '40's and '50's, that is when mr. soffer was young. and dr. burns -- remember what he told you at the very beginning? we have millions and millions and millions of documents now and, amazingly enough, dr. burns could not find one from the '40's, '50 s or '60's, not one. now, he talked about some documents from the 1970's. that is when mr. soffer was in his 30's or 40's and they made no attempt to tie this conduct to mr. soffer at all. none. they do not tell you that if they were targeting kids, which you can judge for yourself, but what did it have to do with mr. soffer? really, what in the world did it have to do? how was it the legal cause of his death? now, they talked about some proposed ad campaigns and you heard -- again, you heard from a long, laborious memo that they proposed the ad campaigns to because they had data on a 12 to 17 market share or whatever and they were going to address that. did dr. burns show you a single ad about what was proposed -- what the supposed youth campaigns were going to look like so you could evaluate for yourself? he did not show you one. i did. i showed you "meet the turk." this is demonstrative 52. these are the ads that were the campaign that was proposed that he did not show you. now, dr. burns believed that these ads were targeted youth because of that document but he agreed when i crossed him on it that they would appeal to 18 to 21 year olds. he admitted that if an ad campaign was targeted at people over 18, that there is a chance that adolescents might find it appealing and most importantly he admitted it would be extremely difficult or very difficult to design an ad that was designed for 18 to 24 year olds that would not possibly appeal to adolescents. now, dr. burns also -- he talked about, well, there were ads way back when that used celebrities, pete rose and athletes. they do not occur anymore. he admitted that all of that went away after the adoption of the cigarette ad code in 1964. there is another internal document that he talked about, another one by dr. claude teague. this is demonstrative 59. this was a document that you saw and it tanned was stamped draft, and i asked dr. burns, did you ever see a version of this that was final, that was ever addressed to anyone, that there was any indication that it was ever sent out? his answer was no, he did not know. now, there was part of this document that you did not see before. i did it on cross. demonstrative 188. you did not see this. see, there is the draft. but they did not show you this part. at the outset it should be said that we are presently and i believe unfairly constrained from promoting cigarettes to the youth market, that is, those in approximately the 21-year-old-and-under age group. it says, they re constrained, they can t do it. and this was a document that the world was supposedly never going to see. this is an internal document where they say they are constrained, cannot do it. dr. teague, crazy idea maybe that he thought they should, but they were not. second piece from this. 186. this is another thing dr. teague said in a document no one was supposed to ever see supposedly. we should not in any way influence non-smokers to start smoking. this was a proposal. dr. burns ever show you that this proposal was adopted? of course not. none of the documents that dr. burns showed you that were proposals, did he ever bother showing you any one of them was adopted or implemented. not one did he show you. then he put up -- dr. burns discussed a document by dianne burroughs, and this one talked about -can we see demonstrative 61, please? dr. burns admitted that what they were doing, that this whole document that you saw and heard about, defines the age group as 18 to 24. let me show you a section he did not show you during direct out of this one. this is demonstrative 187. they did not show you this part and i showed it to you on cross. rjr's consistent policy is that smoking is a matter of free, informed adult choice which the company does not seek to influence. another document that supposedly no one was able to see and yet this is what they write about their internal policy at the time. aside from dr. burns -you can take that down. aside from dr. burns' testimony about ad campaigns he never showed you -- what evidence was there that advertising had anything to do with why mr. soffer started to smoke or continued to smoke? what do we know about why -- you know, how he started and how he pick his first brand? advertising is all about pick our brand, pick our brand. what do we know? he took or stole, depending on how you look at it, cigarettes from his mother. what were they? pall mall. dr. burns admitted that parental influence is a strong predictor of whether or not someone will smoke. and mr. soffer's parents smoked. peers are a strong influence on whether someone starts to smoke. advertising. what was the testimony of every witness with respect to advertising? every one of them was asked, did mr. soffer ever tell you anything about advertising that caused him to start, caused him to continue, caused him to pick a brand, anything? the answer from everyone of them was no. there were not even any discussions. and so you are back in that land where you are supposed to think and imagine. think about what effect this must have had on him. imagine what would have happened to him if there had been no advertising. guess about what we should have proven to you. let us talk about filtration. this one's just, frankly, baffling. you hear this entire story all about filters, they are designed to reassure the public, they are designed to calm down people's nerves about lung cancer, this massive shift took place in the 1950's, fascinating story. the problem is mr. soffer did not go along with the program. the evidence could not be more clear. mr. soffer smoked unfiltered pall mall until they got rid of those, and then what happened when people gave him a cigarette that had a filter on it? what did he do with it? you know very well, you remember, he tore the filters off. why? he told his wife he liked the taste better. what did she do? she said, well, you should not tear them off because they are there to protect you from getting cancer. what did he do? he laughed at her. the whole motivation, the whole story that they tell you about filtration is all about other people because, ladies and gentlemen, it has nothing whatsoever to do with maurice soffer and that is why legal cause is so important. that is why you have to demand from them on every one of these theories that they tie it to maurice soffer because this -- you want to talk about a smoke screen, this is an irrelevant sideshow that they spent all kinds of time with dr. burns talking to you about when they know full well it had knowing to do with maurice soffer. now, they talked about -- just to give it some more confidence. they talked about, well, all this advertising, they introduced filters. and during dr. burns' direct you would have thought that the entire world tilted on its axis because r.j. reynolds and the other companies started running ads and then the public flocked en masse to filtered cigarettes. they forgot to tell you part of the story, and you did not learn about that until direct. you did not learn that dependent science tests having nothing to do with reynolds or anybody else in the tobacco industry in the 1950's began recommending that people switch to filtered cigarettes. they did not tell you on direct that the public health community actively encouraged people to shift to filters. was the public health community trying to falsely reassure smokers when they said, switch to filters? were dependent scientists having nothing to do with r.j. reynolds that were recommending filters, were they trying to falsely reassure smokers? i do not think so. but they did not tell you about that part. but it certainly had an impact. dr. burns admitted that the popular press, like reader's digest carried lots of articles on filtration. he also admitted that during that time articles were being published by researchers that were putting -- giving evidence back to the public saying, guess what, people that smoke filters reduce their risk of lung cancer. it was in newspapers and it was in magazines. and you i want you to thin about this, what was mr. soffer's reaction to that? where the epidemiology, the kinds of studies that indict the cancer, suddenly started showing, if you want to reduce your risk, you should switch to filters. how did mr. soffer react? tore them off. aside from filters, dr. burns wanted to talk a lot about carcinogens. mr. smith talked to you about carcinogens, that r.j. reynolds found carcinogens in smoke. the mouse skin painting studies that ernst wynder did that they say created this panic and started this shift and prompted the meeting at the plaza hotel along with the epidemiology, painting tar on the back of mice, the whole idea was to see if there were carcinogens that would cause cancer. the fact that there were carcinogens in smoke was no secret to anybody. which particular ones and what their names were might have been different, but not the fact that is what mouse skin painting did. then there were articles. you know, there were articles in the reader's digest, again, all kinds of information that was available to the public. the reader's digest published articles listing carcinogens that had been found in tobacco smoke. no deep dark secret. and it was not as if the mere fact that there were carcinogens was enough for anyone to conclude that smoking caused lung cancer. there were all kinds of scientists that you heard about that did not believe it was proven, but they did not deny that there were carcinogens in tobacco. it is all about dose. it is all about how much. it is all about how it affects different parts of the body. remember what dr. burns admitted you, if you eat a charbroiled steak, you are consuming nitrosamine. nitrosamines are carcinogens. is it likely you are going to get cancer from it? no. because it is not administered that way, it is not the right concentration. the mere fact that there is a carcinogen in something does not mean if you touch it you get cancer. and that was not what happened back then. dr. burns admitted that reynolds was very active in identifying carcinogens. as a matter of fact, over half have of the 7,000 carcino- -- or constituents of smoke that have been identified, have been identified by r.j. reynolds. they were the first to publish on half of them. they invented the technology that allowed constituents to be identified. now, mr. smith and dr. burns talked about, well, they promised that they would eliminate them if they found them and they have not done it. and i asked dr. burns, are you trying to imply that they have not tried? he admitted that they have tried. and he never made any effort to show you that anyone anywhere else in the world has figured out how to do it to this day. it is not as if the technology is on the shelf somewhere and they are not using it. dr. burns didn t tell you that. what did he tell you? he said that the target compounds that people thought were responsible for causing cancer changed over time. demonstrative 77. what does that mean? it means over time there have been a lot of different theories about what is it that is the problem in smoke. dr. burns and mr. smith act like in 1953 or 1959 everybody knew what it was, just pull it out, it will be fine. dr. burns admitted that is not true. the theory has changed constantly over time since then. and i went through a list of compounds that r.j. reynolds tried to remove and dr. burns agreed on every one of them, phenols, aldehyde, benzopyrene, polyaromatic hydrocarbons. dr. burns admits reynolds tried to reduce all of them. nobody in the world has figured out how to do it yet. did they know in 19 when they promised, if we find them we will take them out? then 60 years later, the technology no one in the world has figured out how to do it yet? really? they talked about dr. rodgman and they said dr. rodgman has this document, i cannot remember, 1958, '59, that they showed you and they said, oh, the evidence against smoking is overwhelming, the evidence against it is scant. we went through this. when dr. burns testified live. he showed you that paragraph but he did not show you the next sentence that said, the evidence against air pollution is overwhelming, the evidence against it is scant. in some cases the evidence seems stronger with respect to smoking and in some cases the evidence seems stronger with respect to air pollution. once again they left that part out. dr. burns wanted to talk to you about document destruction. you saw the document again. document said, if the decision is made to remove research reports, we can do that. i asked dr. burns, did you ever check to see if they did? no. did you ever follow up, did you ever do a systematic review to see if anything is missing? no. he intimated that, well, i think they probably did because, you know, there was some stuff about ames testing, but let us talk about ames testing separately. he told you that the lawyers told the scientists that they could not do ames testing because if you do ames testing and it proves that your product is mutagenic that means it is not safe so you can do it because it will make our products look like they are not safe. so he said, nope, they did not do it. did dr. burns check to see if the proposal was ever accepted, if the decision was ever made? no. so what happened on cross? i showed dr. burns ames testing that was done in the precise timeframe he said tney were not allowed. demonstrative 192. you saw this during his testimony. ames testing, 1978 to 1982. i also showed you documents -- there was a question about whether they were studying fractions because that was important. can i have asp 50 and 52? this one's talking about in 1983 conducting ames tests on fractions of cigarette smoke. this is a paper that was published in the peer-reviewed literature about testing on fractions. they also wanted to talk to you about ctr. now, they wanted to say, well, none of that research was any good, it was all a sham, it was all public relations. what did dr. burns admit? he admitted that the scientists on the scientific advisory board for the tirc and the ctr were distinguished and respected scientists. he said that grants were given to leading institutions all over the country including the university of florida here in gainesville. he said, they conducted very good research. he said, it was published in prestigious journals. he said, it was quoted in surgeon general's reports over 600 times. he admitted that the ctr, tirc devoted over $300 million to smoking and cancer research, which was more than the united states government spent on the same research during the same period of time. the court: mr. baringer, let us take about a five- or ten-minute break. mr. baringer: that is fine. [#deleted recess#] mr. baringer: thank you, your honor. ladies and gentlemen, before we broke we were talking about tirc research and that general topic and i want to finish that up. the point is, the bottom line is that nothing about the entire filtration story, the carcinogen removal, the document destruction, the mutagenicity testing, any of that evidence was ever tied to mr. soffer to give you any reason to understand why any of that made a difference to him. and that is plaintiff's burden, otherwise, it is information that they ask you to think about what it might have meant. imagine what it might have meant. guess what it might have meant. speculate what it might have meant. but that does not satisfy their burden of proof. you know, in fact, they had dr. burns on the stand for about ten hours and never once did they ask dr. burns to connect any of those documents specifically to mr. soffer in any way. and i did not go through all of those documents with dr. burns. if i had, dr. burns would still be on the stand today and we would still be going through it. it would have taken forever. but there is no point because there is no connection ever made. and i want you to think about it in terms of maybe an analogy of a baseball game. you have to make a connection first to get to legal cause. you have to get to first base before you can get home. they established no connection to mr. soffer, and there is no way then for you to assess whether or not it could possibly have been the legal cause, the but for cause of his death. there is no way for you to assess whether without any of that evidence it would have made any difference to mr. soffer in whether he decided to continue to smoke or whether he would quit -- would have quit soon enough to avoid his lung cancer. they failed on their burden of proof with respect to all of that evidence. i want to talk last in this area of concealment about public statements. the final area that dr. burns discussed was public statements to the effect that it was not proven that smoking causes lung cancer. and it is a little perplexing when you think about everything you know about mr. soffer in what he said and did not say about smoking. you heard no testimony from anyone saying mr. soffer ever responded to their suggestions that he quit, that he cut down, or anything about smoking where he said, "you know, i'm not sure whether smoking causes lung cancer or not." no testimony from a single witness that he ever expressed any doubt about that. he never told anyone that you have heard from that he disputed the fact that smoking can cause lung cancer. even after he was diagnosed he did not express any surprise. he did not say, "how did this happen? i thought they said it was not proven it causes lung cancer." he did not say, "i was deceived by what they said and now how in the world did this happen because they told me it was not going to? nothing. in fact, his response when he was diagnosed was, he knew that he was going to get lung cancer, and mrs. soffer said they knew he would get cancer, and it would be lung cancer because of his heavy smoking. nothing with respect to what you know about what he said is consistent with the idea that he had any doubts whatsoever based on public statements. now, this whole start -- this whole story starts as mr. smith has reminded you, their theory starts at the plaza hotel. now, in opening mr. smith it was a secret meeting. the problem was dr. burns, when i asked him if it was a secret, he said, "no, everybody knew about. it was reported to the department of justice." now, the idea that they tried to plant in your mind was before reynolds ever went to the plaza hotel, dr. teague wrote a memo summarizing all the cancer research that was out there, and they created the impression that that teague memo, that 26-year-old chemist in his first job ever had written the definitive piece and based on that reynolds had concluded that smoking cause lung cancer. the problem is dr. burns admitted that the teague memo did not conclude that smoking causes lung cancer. there was another piece -- they showed you a lot of documents from hill & knowlton, and they showed you one written by mr. goss, it was the background memo on the cigarette industry claim. may i have demonstrative 88, please? and this is what the document said about what the companies told them when they came in. "the industry is strongly convinced that there was no sound scientific basis for the charges that have been made. they believe that the more sensational accusations in the recent papers were premature and in some cases represent publicity issued in the hopes of attracting funds and support for further research." they point out that the national cancer institute of the u.s. public health administration, which is a government agency and supported by congressional appropriations has officially refuted the tie-up between cigarette smoking and cancer. there is nothing in here that says that they came there convinced that smoking causes lung cancer. you will remember that dr. burns pointed out there was one quote, actually just an excerpt of supposedly what some research director said, "would not it be great if we could produce the first cancer-free cigarette." and dr. burns jumped to the conclusion that that means the industry knew that smoking caused lung cancer. well, i asked dr. burns, "do you know what the context of that was?" do you know whether that scientist said, "well, if it is true, would not it be great if we could produce the first cancer-free cigarette?" the point is, dr. burns did not know. he could not tell you what it meant for sure. he guessed and speculated about what it was. dr. burns can do that, he is a public health advocate and he can do that. but you are a jury sworn to follow the law and the law says you cannot guess and speculate, you have to have proof. you have to have evidence. and dr. burns could not give it to you because he did not know. dr. burns also showed you a document that you heard about at the beginning of closings from the visiting scientists from great britain. and i want you to take a look at a couple of pieces of that document that you did not see, and you will find that the document even in and of itself is inconsistent. can we take a look at demonstrative 89, please? this is from the same document where they said everybody we interviewed agreed causation was proven. "the sab and the tirc and the group we met at the national cancer institute bethesda broadly take the view that causation is likely to be indirect. several hypothetical means by which this could occur were proposed but with no experimental evidence to support any of them." it is likely, it is hypothetical. no experimental evidence to support it. let me show you another piece from that document. "others including the sab and the tirc and the group at the national cancer institute, do not accept that a case has yet been made that tobacco smoke is directly carcinogenic to the human lung." the document, itself, does not really make sense. if they attribute these statements to others that they met with but earlier in the document the piece that you heard said everybody agreed. clearly that was not the case. now, remember, again, that dr. burns told you that he has millions and millions and millions of documents that were secreted away that no one was ever supposed to see. did he show you one? a single one that was generated by one of the tobacco companies in the united states that said that they believed that causation had been proven at that time? not one. they have shown you all these other documents that the companies kept. but did they show you one that establishes what the point that they want to make? not a single one. nevertheless, dr. burns talked about the effect that he believed these company statements about causation may have had on some smokers, though he never tried to tell you that they -- any of them had that affect on mr. soffer. dr. burns' theory was that addicted smokers would use the tobacco industry statements as reassurance to enable them to keep smoking rather than quit. he claimed that the evidence was that smokers were uniquely vulnerable to that message and there was a vast difference in the beliefs of smokers and nonsmokers as to whether or not smoking caused lung cancer because of this vulnerability and because of this reassurance. and what was his evidence? he took a piece of the 1989 surgeon general's report and it said, "15 percent of smokers do not believe that smoking causes lung cancer." what did we do on cross? number one, that means 85 percent did. number two, what was the vast difference, what was the chasm between smokers and nonsmokers? 92 percent nonsmokers, 85 percent smokers, 7 percent. if you listen to dr. burns' theory, all of these smokers out there must have been reassured and must -- they must have appealed to their vulnerability and you should have seen a vast gulf between the two, 92 percent to 85 percent. the gulf was not there. now, during -- oh, one other thing, dr. burns talked about this whole idea of laughing. and dr. burns had an explanation for why mr. soffer laughed all the time, every time he was confronted witn this. and his theory was, well, it was a way to minimize the conflict inside and laughing was a way to diffuse the issue. well, what was tne issue, based on what you know about mr. soffer? the issue was he had seen massive publicity all of his life talking about smoking causing lung cancer. and yet as mrs. soffer told you, he was not ready to quit yet. was there some tension inside because he knew that he was taking a risk? that he knew he was taking a risk for himself personally, that he knew he was a taking a risk for his family? i'm not the mind-reader that dr. burns is, i cannot tell you, but i can tell you that they are the ones that have the burden of proving to you that that was true, not dr. burns' attempt to reach into the mind of mr. soffer and tell you why he laughed. dr. burns told you that there was a medical and scientific consensus in the mid to late 1950s. he made it sound to you that it was only the tobacco industry that was making statements that causation had not, in fact, been proven yet. i went through a whole series of scientists. can we have demonstrative 101? i went through a -- whole statements by a whole series of scientists that had nothing to with the tobacco industry that were making exactly the same statements and dr. burns and i went through most of these. these were prominent scientists, no affiliation with the industry, that made the same statements. and if you listen to the cross-examination of dr. cobbs hoffman by plaintiff's counsel, what did he do? he went through a longer list of scientists with no connection with the industry that said it was not proven than i did. there were a lot of other voices. why is that significant? if a smoker is looking for a psychological crutch, they can just as easily embrace statements made by those people and the ones you heard in the cross-examination of dr. cobbs hoffman and they would have a benefit. remember, that the evidence was that tobacco industry was never viewed as a particularly credible source for people's information on smoking and health. could i have demonstrative 95? this is 1959, you saw this in dr. cobbs hoffman, and i talked about this with dr. burns. in 1959, if they said there was no connection whatsoever between lung cancer and cigarette smoking, who would you believe? well, 39 percent american cancer society, twenty percent american medical association, twenty percent u.s. department of health. who would believe it if someone said that there was no connection? only 3 percent would have believed the tobacco industry. can i have 96, please? now, this is '68, the most reliable sources of information. ama and acs, sixty percent, tobacco companies, 5 percent. next. 1970, different organizations, which one or two would you consider the most reliable sources of information? acs, 62 percent, tobacco industry, 3 percent. 1972, same thing. acs, 62 percent, tobacco companies, 4 percent. during this whole time, when these statements are being made by all of these different organizations, who did people look to for reliable information? dead last by a landslide in every one of them was the tobacco industry. so if someone was looking for reassurance, would they have looked to the tobacco companies or would they have looked to the national cancer institute, the american cancer society? those sources that i showed you were saying exactly the -- saying exactly the same thing at the same time. now, what happened while all of this was going on? throughout this entire period where they talked about the tobacco industry statements, what happened? let us take a look at the belief polls. demonstrative 93. during this era where these statements are being made, do you think cigarette smoking is one of tne causes of lung cancer? 1957, fifty percent, up to 71 percent in '69, 81 percent in '77, 87 percent in '87, 94 percent in 1990. during the whole time these statements were made being made the thing that happened was belief increased at every point they measured. remember what dr. horn said. dr. horn was dr. burns' boss, remember? in 1968 this is what he said: "you could stand on a rooftop and shout, 'smoking is dangerous,' at the top of your lungs and you would not be telling anyone anything they did not already know." dr. burns made a similar statement in 1975. dr. burns' statement, number -- he said, "more americans knew that cigarette smoking was dangerous for them than knew the name of the president of the united states." and remember one thing that dr. burns said was critical, it was not just that you believe that smoking is dangerous, you have to believe it would be dangerous to yourself. and what did dr. burns say in 1975, "knew that cigarette smoking was dangerous for them." 1981, dr. burns said -- this is number 191. -- "95 percent of smokers are thoroughly aware of the health dangers of smoking and ninety percent of them realize that their own health could be affected." all during the period when the statements are being made, this is what dr. burns said and it increased the whole time. during this whole period millions of americans quit. by 1975 dr. burns agreed 20 million americans had quit smoking all while these statements are being made. today the number is nearly 60 million. and specifically with respect to quitting, what happened to the quit rates during all this time when all of these people were being reassured? demonstrative 100. by 1965, 31 percent of all men who had ever smoked had quit, by 1970, 38 percent, by 1985 more than fifty percent. the percentage of smokers that quit, the ones that supposedly are not able to quit because they are reassured or because they do not have a free choice or because they have a constrained choice, all during that period of time, the amount of people, the percentage of people steadily increased that quit through that whole time. and keep in mind all of that was going on before a single secret document was ever released. all of this was happening before any company made a different statement. it was a steady advance over that entire period. now, dr. burns claimed that in 1999 after the tobacco companies announced their change policy, actually went on the website, that the decrease accelerated. he did not prove that, he just said, "well, i think it increased." but i want you to think about something else dr. burns said about why people quit. he said, "for a lot of people information is not enough. for a lot of people it takes something else to motivate them." and he talked about the success of the public health communities' campaign against smoking, and he pointed to things like price increases, restrictions on where you can smoke, and declines in social acceptability. now, in his 19 -- post-1999 analysis, does he take into consideration the massive price increases, the tremendous increase in the restrictions that were put in place, or the incredible decline in social acceptability of smoking? you do not know, he did not tell you. he made an assertion and he did not explain it. ultimately, what did all of this have to do with mr. soffer? that is why we are here. and what did dr. -- how did dr. burns answer that? and, actually, in a moment of candor, here's what he told you. demonstrative 103. he was asked, "dr. burns, can we ever know what any smoker would have done if the tobacco industry had not concealed the information that they concealed as to what they knew about the dangerousness of the product or when they knew it? answer: "no. you can never know with certainty what an individual would have done." ladies and gentlemen, this case is about an individual. dr. burns, who testified for ten hours said, "we can never know what would have happened with an individual." what does that do for plaintiff's burden of proof? what is their star witness' admission that you cannot tell what would have happened with any individual smoker mean to whether or not they can prove that it was the legal cause of his death? dr. burns essentially put out the white flag and said, "i can talk to you about what is theoretical. i can talk to you about what is possible. i can talk to you about the population, but i cannot answer the question as to maurice soffer." it was an admission that they could not meet their burden of proof. now, after he said that, something happened that, frankly, was unexpected and shocking when mrs. soffer took the stand. mrs. soffer, in her testimony here in court, flatly contradicted her sworn deposition testimony and said something she had never said before. i want you to remember how litigation works. before these cases come to trial, both sides have an opportunity to take the deposition of witnesses that may have evidence that relates to the case. mrs. soffer was the first person deposed in this case. she sat in front of a court reporter. she raised her hand to swear to tell the truth just like she did here in court. and after the deposition was over she was sent the transcript and she had the opportunity to review it and correct any errors or mistakes or change her testimony. she did none of that. but she did make a dramatic change in her testimony after sitting through this trial, before she took the stand. mrs. soffer told you on the stand on monday that she and mr. soffer laughed at the warnings on cigarette packs because the tobacco companies denied that there was any proof that smoking caused disease and that she and mr. soffer were reynolds' customers, and they believed reynolds. can we show 104? that is what she told you when she testified here. now, i showed her and i talked to her while she was testifying about what she said about that very same issue wnen she was deposed. can we see 105, please? "did you ever discuss the labels on cigarette packages, these warnings we talked about with your husband? "no. "any particular reason why you did not? "as smokers we were not ready to stop smoking. "you think he saw the labels on the cigarette packages? "oh, yes. we would laugh at them because we knew -- we knew that we were harming ourselves." in trial it is because the tobacco companies said it was not proven and they believed them. in her deposition, the laughter was all about, we knew we were harming ourselves. could not have been more different. now, it is difficult to say but, frankly, mrs. soffer's testimony at trial is not credible. i want you to think about as i go through the rest of her testimony whether what she said on the stand makes sense or what she said in her deposition makes sense. first of all, i asked her about mr. soffer's practice of breaking filters off of cigarettes. she admitted she told him not to. she told him not to because he did not want to get cancer. now, if they did not believe that smoking caused cancer because the tobacco companies said so, why did she tell him not to break the filters off because she was afraid he would get cancer? is that testimony more consistent with what she said in her deposition or what she said at trial? now, the other thing we talked about -- in her deposition she said that she was concerned about his cough dating back to the 1980s, and she told him he should quit because of that cough. and what was his response to her? he laughed. but why did -- why did she tell him to quit because of the cough? on the stand she told you the reason, because she was concerned about his health. if she did not believe that smoking caused disease because reynolds said so, why was she worried? does it make more sense with what she said at her deposition or what she said at trial? the deposition. she told him that his copd -- when he was diagnosed with copd she told him it was caused by smoking. what was his response? he said, "so, i enjoy smoking." but why did she tell him that his copd was caused by smoking? because she believed there was a link, she believed it caused. is it really credible to say she thought that smoking caused copd but she did not believe that it caused lung cancer because reynolds said it had not been proven on either score. if that was the reason, why? she testified that she had told him to slow down because he was smoking too much. what was his response? he ignored her and kept on smoking. she admitted on the stand the reason she told him to cut down because she was concerned about his health. is that more consistent with her deposition testimony or at trial? and remember the incident of his uncle ben, she said that his uncle ben died of lung cancer when their children were very young, in the early 1980s. and she said she had a discussion with him about it, and they agreed that his lung cancer was probable caused by smoking. if he did not believe that smoking caused lung cancer, she did not believe that smoking caused lung cancer, why did they come to that conclusion? it makes no sense. i asked her whether mr. soffer ever told her that he started smoking or continued smoking by anything a tobacco company ever said or did. and her answer was no. how can that be if his decisions to continue were based on the fact that he thought -- he believed r.j. reynolds that smoking had not been proven to cause lung cancer? the answer would have been yes, it wasn t. not one of these examples is consistent with the explanation that they laughed at the warnings because they believed r.j. reynolds and the other tobacco companies that said smoking had not been proven to cause lung cancer, not one of the explanations in the rest of the testimony makes sense. but it all makes sense if they laughed at the warnings for the reasons she said in her deposition because they knew that they were harming themselves. they knew they were taking a risk. that is why they laughed. if -- if they try in rebuttal to give you some other reason why mr. soffer was laughing, what i want you to ask them is why, in the face of tens of millions of other smokers quitting, faced with the exact same information environment, most of which were addicted and should have been reassured by filters and should have been reassured by company statements, why did those people quit and mr. soffer did not? especially given everything that she told you about the history of his reaction to the warnings that he got. ultimately, you have to decide which version to believe. if you believe the version in the deposition, you must vote no on the concealment claim. if you believe that and you believe that they have proved that there was an effect, that is fine, but they are the ones that have the burden of putting it all together. they have to connect the statements to mr. soffer, and they have to tell you why. interestingly enough, mr. smith, in his closing earlier today, did not even mention mrs. soffer's testimony. did not even talk about it. as a matter of fact, what he said was, "on concealment, the finding is enough." well, you know the finding's not enough, you would not be sitting in those chairs right now if the findings were enough. he has to take it beyond that. he has to take it from concealment to concealment of something that mr. soffer did not know that mattered to him and would have made a difference. and i want you to think about one other thing connected with story about what they believe. she told you that they believed that until 1988 because they were friends with surgeon general koop and he made a statement in 1988 and it changed how they looked at it. number one, the statement was about addiction; but, number two, if that is true, if it was because they suddenly believe surgeon general koop and not r.j. reynolds, let me ask you this: why did it take to 1992 or -- or 1990 or '91 for him to quit? if that was the magic, if that was the information he was waiting for, if that was why he had continued all that time, despite all the warnings and all the information, if suddenly the light went on and the revelation came with surgeon general koop in 1988, why did not he quit then? because it was not that information that mattered to him. it was not until 1990 when he felt short of breath not because he got secret documents but because he felt it, that she says, "for the first time in his life he was ready to quit." and he did and it was easy. it makes no sense. the light going on in 1988, if it were true, should have made him quit in 1988 and not wait two or three years after that. it makes no sense. overall, think about all the evidence, think about what they have shown you was the legal cause. they have failed on their burden of proof. you should vote no on concealment. i want to talk to you briefly about negligence. the negligence is going to be the same standard. on the verdict form, you saw it earlier, "was the negligence the legal cause of mr. soffer's death?" and remember, once again, the finding that reynolds did something negligent does not satisfy their burden of proof or it would not be on the verdict form. why would you be asked to fill out an answer? why is no an option on the verdict form if the finding answers the question? the critical element is legal cause. "without the negligence would he have avoided his lung cancer?" and i want to show you a demonstrative to illustrate the point of why you have to think about this in terms of legal cause. can i have 116, please? this example -- i want you to consider this hypothetical to illustrate why legal cause is so important. you have a guy driving a car down the street, coming up to a stop sign, on his cell phone. he is not paying attention, he runs the stop sign and he hits the other car. he was negligent for being on the cell phone. and if he had not been on the cell phone, he would have stopped, he would not hit the car. it was the legal cause. but for the fact he was negligent on the phone, would not the -- the accident would not have happened. consider this, he is driving down the same road with the same cell phone, negligent, he is not supposed to be doing that, but he sees the stop sign. he jams on the brakes. the brakes fail. he goes through the stop sign and hits the car. the negligence of being on the cell phone was not the legal cause of the accident. the brake failure caused the accident. both cases there is negligence. one, it is the legal cause; one, it is not. it is their burden to prove to you that the reynolds' negligence was the legal cause. that is why the finding in and of itself is not enough. that is why you have a choice of yes or no on the verdict form. same exact thing is true with respect to design defect. they ve got to show you that the design defect caused -- was the legal cause of his lung cancer. they cannot rely on tne finding that says they put a defective product on the market. there is a yes and no blank for you to fill out. and they have to tell you, in rebuttal demand that they tell you why the design defect was the legal cause of his death. because they have not even given you a hint. and that is their burden. they cannot stand on the finding, and they have made no effort to go beyond that. agreement to conceal, same thing. has to be the legal cause. they have to tell you absent the agreement to conceal and actual concealment, if that had not happened, he would never have gotten lung cancer. it is their burden. you cannot imagine it, you cannot think it, you cannot guess it, you cannot speculate. in rebuttal make them tell you why it was the legal cause. that is their burden. they do not satisfy that, they lose the claim. let me talk briefly about comparative fault. we know, first of all, automatically mrs. soffer has accepted some percentage of fault on behalf of her husband. they told you that from the very beginning. now, at the beginning i told you, if they start at one hundred percent, until they prove a claim against reynolds, they are 100 -- he is one hundred percent responsible. so what do you deduct? the slide -the illustration they showed you is every document, basically, that they read during the course of the trial. they put on the scales and they weighted it down, and they got to eighty percent. but that document and that issue does not get on the scales until they prove to you that that was a legal cause of his death. it may be a document you do not like. it may be a stupid idea that somebody had a long time ago that either was or was not implemented. you think may it was a horrible idea, but it does not go on the scale until they link it to mr. soffer. did they do that? that is what you have to answer. what do we know about mr. soffer's fault? well, they have accepted some of it. we also know from dr. burns and dr. werner that he had the ability to quit in the '80s, '70s, '60s and 50s and that had he, according to dr. burns, he would not have developed lung cancer. we know addicted smokers can quit. we know he did quit. why was not it sooner? their admission that he is at fault makes no sense if it could not have been during the period where he would have avoided his lung cancer. otherwise it is just noise. both of his children admitted that he ultimately quit before his diagnosis. the only question is exactly when. but it is the point that he could and did that matters, not precisely when. the evidence shows that he continued to smoke in an environment that was filled with information about smoking and health. and mercifully i'm not going to repeat dr. cobbs hoffman's presentation that you heari saw, but i hope you paid attention to what she was showing you because there was information from the time he was in the pennsylvania schools. there was information in newspapers. there was information in magazines. there was information on television. there was information provided by the government. there were warnings provided by his family. all of that information which led to the massive increase, ninety percent of the american public in the 1950s, were aware that smoking caused lung cancer, and you saw what to believe. but he, in the face of all of that, continued to smoke. and take his word for it, he enjoyed it. he was not ready. all during this period millions of people quit. addicted smokers quit but mr. soffer did not. he told you his reaction when he was diagnosed, he was not surprised. it was an awareness that he had. it was a risk that he was willing to take, and he bears the bulk of the responsibility for that. and, once again, if it was all this information, if it was surgeon general koop in 1988 that made the difference, why did not he quit then? why did he wait until 1990 or '91? that is their burden of answering. i want you to think about pipe smoking just for a minute in this context. you did hear lots of -- different people had different views about how often he smoked his pipe. some said all the time, some said very infrequently. mrs. soffer on the stand said she bought him a big bad of pipe tobacco every week or two. the important part -- excuse me, the important point is dr. burns admitted on the stand that his pipe smoking made a meaningful contribution to his developing lung cancer. now, mr. smith said, "well, we have" -- "we have a stipulation that smoking cigarettes caused his lung cancer so the pipe's got to be irrelevant." well, that is nonsense. you will see in the instructions on every one of the claims that you will be asked to evaluate, that you can have a cause, a but for cause, and a concurring cause. you can have two things that cause, are legal causes of an injury. and pipe smoking was exclusively within the control of mr. soffer. they have no claim about reynolds relating to pipe smoking. he bears full responsibility -mr. avera: may we approach, your honor? (the following sidebar was held outside the ng of the jury:) mr. smith: i apologize, your honor, you have allowed the line of testimony regarding pipe smoking based on contributory negligence. you said that -- i'm sorry, comparative. but the argument he just gave was that it is concurrent cause. and that is an entirely different thing. there is no fabre issue in this case. this is a -- you said it was for comparative. it is not a cause issue, it is a comparative issue. that is different. to suggest that they attribute cause -the court: no. he is not suggesting -mr. baringer: no, no, no. all i'm saying -- all im saying is that dr. burns hadn t testified it contributed to his lung cancer, i'd have nothing to say on comparative about it because it would not have mattered. the court: make sure it is comparative. mr. baringer: oh, yeah, yeah. (the sidebar concluded and the following further proceedings were held:) mr. baringer: ladies and gentlemen -- ladies and gentlemen, with respect to pipe smoking, it is not reynolds' position that pipe smoking caused his cancer and cigarette smoking did not. it is a comparative fault issue that he bears responsibility for smoking the pipe to the extent it made that meaningful contribution to his lung cancer that dr. burns admitted. it is a piece that goes to him. now, with respect to reynolds, it is very simple. you have to decide whether to put anything down for r.j. reynolds based on what you find they did wrong that ultimately caused mr. soffer's lung cancer and death. that is it. that is what you have to weigh. you do not weigh things that you do not like, you do not weigh documents that did not make any difference, you do not weigh filtration, when the man tore off the filters. it makes no sense. only those areas where you find reynolds did something that contributed, that was the legal cause of his cancer, do you make any allocation to r.j. reynolds whatsoever. let me talk to you about compensatory damages. the idea of compensatory damages, and i hope you remember that we discussed this way back when during jury selection, and both sides explained the concept that compensatory damages are damages that are designed to make someone whole to the best the law has the ability to make them whole for their loss. and i asked everyone in the jury pool, is there anyone that would consider the size or wealth or nature of the defendant in deciding how much money it would take to make someone whole? and everyone agreed that they would follow the instructions from the court. everyone agreed that who the defendant was, was not a relevant factor to consider with respect to how much money they thought it would take to make someone whole. well, you have certainly seen in spades the attempt to make who the defendant is relevant to how much money it takes to compensate someone. they came up with an unbelievable $20 million request for compensatory damages. and how did they arrive at that figure? they arrived at that figure by talking about how much reynolds spent on advertising in some period. it was all about who the defendant was. they made no attempt to justify why they had to make them multi-millionaires to compensate them. i want you to think about them in this context: what if the defendant -- what if it was that car accident that i showed you and it was another driver? the loss to mrs. soffer and her children would be as great. losing her husband, losing her children, it would have been the same loss. would they award $20 million in a car accident case? do you really think that that makes sense? they are trying to make who the defendant is relevant to how much it takes to compensate them. now, there is no doubt whatsoever that there is not a number you can write that could replace mrs. soffer's husband and the soffer children's father. but we do the best we can. and how do we do that? how do we do that in general as a society outside courtrooms? people buy life insurance to provide for their families. $20 million worth of life insurance? $500,000 is a lot of life insurance. $20 million in life insurance? that is not how we deal with things. their request bears no relationship to reality. they are asking you to award $20 million in a case where there was a man who had a responsibility to himself and to his family. he chose to take risk and that was his right. mr. soffer had every right to live his life the way he wanted to and accept or reject whatever risks he wanted to. mr. soffer could have said, "i enjoy smoking and i'm willing to take the risk. i'm not ready to quit yet." and what they are asking you to do is say, he took that risk for that enjoyment and he lost. and now because of who they are, because of what they spent on advertising, they should award $20 million? it makes absolutely no sense. let me talk quickly about punitive damages. when they started talking to you about punitive damages, they said, "let me tell you about this incredible business, you are going to sell a product that is addictive and dangerous and can kill people. that is the start of the model." and they built off that to try and justify punitive damages. the problem is as you heard before, the united states congress in 1964 decided that cigarettes could be legally sold in the united states. you cannot impose punitive damages on r.j. reynolds because they manufacture and sell cigarettes. you, also, as the court told you previously during the trial, he instructed you that the plaintiffs have not made a failure to warn claim. they are not alleging there was some hazard or dangerousness about smoking that they should have told you or that you should impose liability because they did it. the court instructed you that they have no such claim. you cannot award punitive damages for that. in fact, there is only one way that you can award punitive damages and, that is, if you answer yes on the concealment claim or the agreement to conceal claim. if those fail, if you do not believe that they proved that mr. soffer continued smoking because of something that was concealed or he would have done something different, punitive damages are irrelevant. and you have to decide in the context of the overall evidence. and i would submit that you can think about all the filtration stuff, you can think about constituent identification, you can think about all of those things, does any -- was any of that concealment the legal cause of his death and was any of it so egregious, was any of it so willful and wanton that it warrants awarding punitive damages? absolutely not. absolutely not. ladies and gentlemen, on the surface this case seems very complex. you have heard all kinds of scientific theories, you have heard all kinds of scientific terms, you have heard medical terms, and all of this spanning 60 years of history. but in the end, the case is really very simple. set aside the issues of who said what when or who do believe about what. really, the only thing you need to do is listen to what mr. soffer, himself, said based on the testimony of what we know from his wife, primarily. mr. soffer never told anyone that he blamed r.j. reynolds or any tobacco company for anything. mr. soffer consistently said that he enjoyed smoking. mr. soffer consistently said that he was not ready to quit yet. mr. soffer laughed when he heard warnings when people encouraged him to quit because he liked it, and he was not ready to quit. and when he was, when he finally felt some effects on himself, he said he made the decision to quit then and his wife said he never wanted to before and for him it was easy. throughout his life he made choices about what risks he wanted to accept, what risks he did not, and he lived his life according to that and none of that fits within the idea that they have proven that anything reynolds did was the legal cause. the last thing i want to remind you of is when you go back in that room, when this is all over, if you find yourself doing what they told you to do during closing, to imagine, to think what it might have been like, they are asking you to guess and speculate because they know they failed in their burden of proof, and they are hoping you just take this massive information, do not like it, and award damages. ladies and gentlemen, you all took an oath to follow the law that judge roundtree will give you after this is over. ana that law will tell you that if the plaintiff fails to meet her burden of proof, if she fails to prove that any of that was the legal cause of mr. soffer's death, you must return a verdict for r.j. reynolds. once again, on behalf of reynolds, mr. beach, and myself, and plaintiff's counsel, thank you so very much for your attention, thank you so very much for your patience today. i'm asking you to return a verdict on behalf of r.j. reynolds. thank you very much.