mr. geraghty: thank you, your honor. your honor, may it please the court. good morning, ladies and gentlemen. you know my name is bill geraghty, and i represent philip morris usa. and i'm going to start by saying on behalf of myself, my partner, stan davis, and philip morris usa, we want to thank you for your jury service. our jury system depends on good people like you, who are willing to take some time out of your schedule, out of your life, to help us resolve a civil lawsuit like this. we know that you-all have been paying very careful attention to the evidence. we know that you were very patient during all the questioning and examination. and believe me, i think on behalf of all the lawyers, we know there were times when we tested your patience during the course of the last two weeks. no doubt about that. 100 but all i can say is, on behalf of everybody involved, we really appreciate it. we know that jury service is inconvenient, but our system of justice would not work if it were not for people like you who are willing to sacrifice some of their time to be here with us. now, we are getting very close to the end of the case. i'm sure that is music to your ears at this point. and it is almost time for you to retire to the jury room and deliberate. judge bennett has provided you with a set of instructions and a verdict form. and pretty soon, you will go back and you will decide the issues in this case. but before you head off to deliberate, this is my opportunity to summarize for you the evidence that we have seen and heard over the last two weeks. now, when i spoke to you in my opening statement, which was two weeks ago on tuesday, i told you that mr. byrd would spend a lot of his time talking to you about statements made by philip morris and r.j. reynolds, many of which were made 25, 30, 40, and, in some instances, more than 50 years ago. and we told you we would not try to defend those statements. philip morris and r.j. reynolds made statements and had ideas that today neither you nor i would say or think. but i also told you if that was all this case was about, if all mr. starbuck had to prove was that tobacco company executives said inappropriate things, we would not have 101 spent the last two weeks here together. but we did. and we did because this case is not about all smokers. it is not about whether you believe people should smoke cigarettes or not. this case is about william starbuck, his life, and the decisions that he made. that is why, when you go back and look at that verdict form, you will see that all of the questions -- all of the questions on that verdict form ask you specifically about mr. starbuck, not all cigarette smokers and not the general public. now, let me say something about that finding from this earlier class action that you heard about. and there is no debate about this, ladies and gentlemen. those findings do not provide you with the answers to any of the questions on the verdict form. and that is because with your verdict, you get to decide whether any of those findings you heard about have any applicability to mr. starbuck, his life -- mr. byrd: objection. that misstates the law, your honor. the court: well, the jurors will have to follow the law in the instructions. mr. geraghty: ladies and gentlemen, you will follow the instructions as you see them. but you will see in the instructions, they do not give you the answers to any of the questions on the verdict form. and that is because you get to decide, based on your review of the evidence, whether those findings have applicability to mr. starbuck, his life, and his decisions. after all, that class action is over. and this 102 case is about -- mr. byrd: objection. misstates the law. the court: overruled. mr. geraghty: after all, ladies and gentlemen, that class action is over. and this case is about william starbuck. he is the one who filed the lawsuit, and he is the one that now has asked you to award him millions of dollars for his decision to smoke cigarettes for many years. you are the only jury who has heard the story of william starbuck and his life, and you get to decide the issues in this case. and no one else. now, you remember when i first addressed you in my opening statement i told you this case was about two words: control and responsibility. and we are going to walk through all of the evidence that we have seen and heard over the last two weeks. and as we do that, i would ask you again to consider the following questions as we review that evidence. who was in control of mr. starbuck's lifestyle choices? who was in control of his efforts to quit smoking? who controlled mr. starbuck's motivation to quit? was mr. starbuck addicted? and if he was, was he someone whose addiction was so strong, so substantial, in the language of the 103 instruction the judge will give you, that it robbed him of his free will, that it prevented him from sustaining a committed effort to quit on his part? and finally, ask yourself, did mr. starbuck ever rely on anything that philip morris or r.j. reynolds said or failed to say about the health risks of smoking? now, we walked through the significant events of mr. starbuck's life. and we are going to do that again in just a few moments. and, ladies and gentlemen, i'm going to show you that everything i told you about mr. starbuck two weeks ago in my opening has proven to be true. we also talked about something called the sources of evidence. you remember that. mr. starbuck and his highly paid expert witnesses, they want you to focus on documents instead of mr. starbuck himself. we asked you to pay close attention to the important sources of evidence: the medical records that were written by the doctors who treated and cared for mr. starbuck; mr. starbuck's own testimony, both here in the courtroom and before the trial started, in his deposition; and the deposition testimony of his closest family members. we asked you to pay attention to that evidence because you now know much of it was created before the lawsuit was ever filed, before anybody had an interest in remembering things in a way that is favorable to the outcome of his case. and as you saw throughout much of the trial, many of 104 the things that mr. starbuck told you about his cigarette smoking were contradicted. they were contradicted by what he told his own doctors in his medical records, what he said in his own testimony both before the trial and in his deposition, and by what his family members told you. his testimony was contradicted on key parts of the story, for example, whether mr. starbuck knew smoking was dangerous many years before he was diagnosed with lung cancer in 1994, whether his doctors told him he needed to quit smoking in 1986 and 1990, when you now know he was diagnosed with cancer on those occasions. and finally, whether mr. starbuck ever really made a sincere and motivated attempt to quit smoking at any time before 1994. now, i told you at the very beginning of the case, and the judge has instructed you, that you get to decide which evidence you choose to believe. brian, could you bring the first instruction up, please. judge bennett has given you instructions. you will see this, i believe, on page 7, under the section called "testimony of witnesses." the judge has told you that there were a variety of things you can consider in determining the credibility or the believability of the witnesses you heard. and among the things the judge told you is you can consider the interest the witness has in the outcome of the 105 case, any differences between what the witness says now, meaning during the trial, and what the witness said earlier in his deposition. and you can also consider any inconsistencies between the witness's testimony and any other evidence that you have heard and believe. judge bennett instructed you that you get to make those decisions. when you think about it for a moment, the only fact witness -- the only fact witness that mr. starbuck presented to substantiate his claim that he was addicted and that he could not quit was mr. starbuck himself. we brought you the testimony of his family members, the people who knew him the best in his entire life, his wife, his stepdaughter, and his brother, david starbuck. we read key passages of their deposition testimony to you on friday afternoon. and they contradicted key parts of the story that mr. starbuck and mr. byrd want you to believe. and the plaintiff did not bring a single witness, not a single witness, none of his family members, to support any of the things he wants you to believe in this trial. think about that as we review the evidence. we also brought you dr. ticknor. he was the only addiction expert you heard from who actually took the time to interview mr. starbuck before the trial and hear what he had to say before he came in here and testified to you. so as you think about the evidence you have heard, 106 please remember that judge bennett has told you that you have the power to decide whether you find each witness to be believable or whether some of the things they said were influenced by an interest they have in the outcome of the case. the court has instructed you that you can accept or reject any testimony you hear in this case. and that is your job, ladies and gentlemen, and your job alone. now, judge bennett has instructed you that mr. starbuck has the burden to prove that something that philip morris or r.j. reynolds said or failed to say had a direct and substantial impact on his decisions about cigarette smoking. and after hearing all the evidence in this case, ladies and gentlemen, you know that william starbuck was not paying attention to anything that philip morris or r.j. reynolds were saying. i think that is clear at this point. he told you flat out -- brian, if we can put this on the screen. this was his statement to you. "i was not waiting for them to give me information." that is what mr. starbuck told you right here from the witness stand. "i was not waiting for them" -- meaning the tobacco companies -- "to give me information." mr. byrd: objection. misstates evidence, your honor, that -- the court: well, the jury will use their own 107 judgment about what the evidence shows. mr. geraghty: let me just say this right out so it is clear. it is your memory, ladies and gentlemen. you sat here. you listened very attentively and patiently. it is your memory of the evidence that governs ultimately. i'm simply trying to summarize for you the evidence that we believe you have seen and heard over the course of the last two weeks. now, mr. starbuck and his attorneys showed you a lot of documents. but what they failed to show you was that any of those documents had anything to do with mr. starbuck and the decisions he made about cigarette smoking. if we could show the next slide, brian. this is what mr. starbuck told you. this is what he told you. from the top quote, he told you very clearly, he never relied on any advertisement from a cigarette company in making a decision to start smoking or to continue smoking. that was mr. starbuck from the witness stand, ladies and gentlemen. he then went on and told you that before this lawsuit was filed, he did not recall hearing, reading, or seeing any statements by philip morris that misrepresented information about the health risks of smoking. and he said the same thing about r.j. reynolds and the same thing about every other tobacco company that you heard about during the course of this trial. this is mr. starbuck's testimony, uncontradicted by any 108 other evidence in the case. and, of course, now, you know, ladies and gentlemen, that that is exactly how mr. starbuck chose to live his life. he told you, "i'm independent. i'm intelligent. i am strong-willed." from an early age, mr. starbuck knew that cigarette smoking came with serious health risks. but despite those risks, he chose to smoke for many years. he was not waiting for philip morris or r.j. reynolds to tell him, "you know what? smoking is dangerous. you need to quit." his wife, his stepdaughter, his own doctors told him many times over the years, "smoking is dangerous. you should quit." that is the evidence you heard. but william starbuck enjoyed smoking. you heard from his own expert, dr. cummings, he loved smoking cigarettes. and for many years, mr. starbuck simply had no interest in quitting. that is the evidence you have heard in this case, ladies and gentlemen. if we could show the testimony of his wife. this is from eddie starbuck. we read passages of her deposition to you on friday afternoon. what did his own wife tell you? she told you that her husband, william starbuck, enjoyed smoking cigarettes. she said that she could not say whether he truly wanted to quit smoking before 1994, when he was diagnosed with lung cancer. but the final point is the key. she told you she 109 knew that he was not going to quit until he had to. until he had to. that is from his wife. mr. starbuck did not have her come testify. we read her deposition to you, ladies and gentlemen. we read her deposition to you. mr. byrd: objection, your honor. misstates facts. both sides had designations. the court: both sides did have designations. mr. geraghty: well, okay. we chose to read the deposition to you, ladies and gentlemen. that much is clear. we chose to read that deposition to you on friday afternoon. it was one of the last things that you heard before we rested our case. the court: and, mr. geraghty, let me just clarify. the statement that he just referred to was a statement that the defense read into evidence. mr. geraghty: thank you, your honor. i appreciate that. now, you have heard testimony from mr. starbuck and his family that he was independent, that he was stubborn, that he did not want people telling him what to do. he wanted to be his own boss. and that is how he has lived his life. and that was his attitude when it came to cigarette smoking. if we could put the next slide up, please, brian. you heard that when his family encouraged him to quit, these were the things that mr. starbuck told his wife and his stepdaughter. "mind your own business. leave me alone. i do not want to hear it. i did not pay attention because i did not 110 want to hear it." he told you that being told to quit pushed him in the other direction. it made him less likely to actually try to quit smoking. that is what mr. starbuck told you. but when mr. starbuck was finally motivated to quit, he did quit smoking. you heard that he quit smoking in january of 1995, and he has not smoked a cigarette in 20 years. 20 years, ladies and gentlemen. but the important point here is that this all was mr. starbuck's decision. these are all his decisions, and his decisions alone. we have the right to make decisions for ourselves, even decisions that today, with the benefit of hindsight, we might say were not in his best interests. we believe in free will, ladies and gentlemen. that is a fundamental principle upon which our country was founded. you have the right to make your own decisions. but with that right comes the obligation to accept personal responsibility for the consequences of those decisions. now, we are going to walk through the significant events you have heard about in just a moment. but before we do that, let me tell you a little bit about the burden of proof. you heard mr. byrd mention that. you have seen documents and 111 medical records and you have seen several days now worth of testimony. the plaintiff bears the burden to prove each of his claims by what is referred to as the greater weight of the evidence. the greater weight of the evidence. so what does that mean? that means to tip the scales in his favor, the plaintiff has to present you with more persuasive, more reliable, and more compelling evidence than the mountain of evidence that we presented to you over the last two weeks, the mountain of evidence that shows that mr. starbuck was always in control, that mr. starbuck knew that cigarette smoking was dangerous, that mr. starbuck was not heavily addicted, and that his addiction was not a legal cause of his disease. and we are going to walk through all of that evidence in just a moment. and i'll point out to you that the plaintiff has failed to meet his burden of proof in this case. ladies and gentlemen, this is the same timeline that i showed you two weeks ago on tuesday, same exact timeline. and we are going to walk through these events. and i'm going to show you that during the course of the trial, we have proved to you everything we told you about mr. starbuck during this trial. remember now, everything above this blue-gray bar here are events that occurred in mr. starbuck's life; everything below this bluish-gray bar are things that happened 112 here in the united states with respect to cigarette smoking and health. so let us get started. you have heard that mr. starbuck was born in 1939 in a small town in new york. you have heard that he lived in a home without electricity until he was about 10 or 11 years old, and his family did not have a television until he was about sophomore or junior in high school. he was the oldest of three children. and i think there is no debate about this, ladies and gentlemen. mr. starbuck is intelligent. he told you that. you heard he was a good student. he graduated at the top of his class. and he was an avid reader. now, mr. byrd again told you that philip morris and r.j. reynolds somehow hid that cigarette smoking was dangerous and addictive, and that the american public did not know that cigarette smoking could be dangerous or addictive for the last 50 years. based on the evidence you have heard from dr. cummings and dr. burns and all of the experts, you now know that is simply not the case. dr. cummings told you that it has been common knowledge in this country, common knowledge that it has been difficult to quit, hard to quit smoking for more than 100 years. he told you that as far back as the late 1800s, before philip morris even existed as a company, people were smoking roll-your-own cigarettes, hand-rolled cigarettes. he told you 113 they were smoking them, they were inhaling them, and they were just as dangerous and addictive as manufactured cigarettes. that is what you heard from dr. cummings. if we could show the next slide, please, brian. the state of florida, as you heard, banned the manufacture and sale of cigarettes in this state as far back as 1900. 1900. dr. cummings told you that one of the reasons for that was because they were addictive. we showed you the florida health notes, that is the document at the top, from june 1907, published by the florida department of health right here in jacksonville. and in 1907, the florida department of health said, "today, the cigarette is looked upon by all smokers as the very worst form of tobacco addiction." and those are some of the other documents that we showed you that talked about nicotine being in cigarettes, that cigarettes are addictive. ladies and gentlemen, none of this was a secret. this was known before mr. starbuck was even born and certainly long before he ever picked up a cigarette. dr. cummings told you -- and here we are on the timeline -- that people in this country used terms like "coffin nails" to refer to cigarettes. they called them cancer sticks. they referred to cigarette smokers as nicotine fiends. nicotine fiends. these were terms that were used at the turn of the century. 114 mr. starbuck had heard cigarettes referred to as coffin nails while in high school. and later he heard the term "cancer sticks," and he understood exactly what those terms meant. later on, as we move into the 1930s and 1940s, you heard that articles in reader's digest magazine and other magazines are talking about the health risks of smoking and the addictive nature of smoking. dr. cummings told you that reader's digest was the most popular magazine in this country in the 1930s, '40s, and '50s. as we move into the 1950s, you heard scientific studies were published that specifically linked cigarette smoking with lung cancer. dr. burns told you that these studies were front-page news. front-page news. he told you so widely published was this information that by 1954, the year that mr. starbuck started smoking cigarettes, ninety percent of the people in this country had heard that cigarette smoking could cause lung cancer. ninety percent in 1954. that was the information that was being published leading up to the time that mr. starbuck first starts to smoke. let us go above the blue bar here. we are in 1950. mr. starbuck told you that at the age of 10 or 11, he stole cigarettes from his aunt, ruth, and he was caught and punished by his parents. but mr. starbuck tried to tell you that he was only punished because he stole and because he was playing with 115 matches. he somehow tried to suggest to you that his parents were not upset that he was smoking cigarettes. you have to ask yourself whether you find that to be believable in light of all of the evidence you have heard in this case. what else did mr. starbuck tell you? he told you that his mother was a very serious baptist lady. she was strongly opposed to cigarettes and alcohol. she believed that your body is a temple and you do not defile that temple with drugs like cigarettes and alcohol. she told him not to smoke and drink. and she specifically told him not to smoke because smoking is not good for you. those are all the things mr. starbuck told you from the witness stand when he testified. now, he also told you that the leaders of his church also told him that he should not smoke. that is what mr. starbuck was being told when he was growing up in new york. but despite these warnings, mr. starbuck said he was curious. he had friends who were smoking cigarettes. and in about 1953 or 1954, one of his friends gives him a cigarette. and he tries it. around the same period of time, ladies and gentlemen, this is when he and his friends are referring to cigarettes as coffin nails, coffin nails, meaning every cigarette you smoke is another nail in your coffin. another nail in your coffin. now, mr. starbuck also testified that he hid his smoking 116 from his parents and his neighbors. but then he tried to suggest to you that he smoked openly in front of his teachers. and he said that he even walked with cigarettes rolled up in the sleeve of his shirt. that is what mr. starbuck tried to tell you. but remember what happened when mr. davis began to ask him questions. he then quickly told you, "well, we would smoke in someone's car or we would go around behind a building and smoke." the evidence, ladies and gentlemen, is clear. mr. starbuck hid his smoking from his parents, his neighbors, and his teachers because he knew he should not be smoking. he knew smoking was harmful. and he knew he would be punished if he were caught again. in fact, mr. starbuck even told you that he never even openly smoked cigarettes in front of either his mother or his father after he left his home at the age of 19. that is what you heard during the course of this trial. now, you heard a lot about advertising from mr. starbuck and his attorneys. but remember the quote i just told you. mr. starbuck told you very clearly, he never made a decision to start smoking or to continue smoking because of a cigarette advertisement. his own experts, dr. burns and dr. cummings, they told you the most important influence on whether someone begins smoking 117 is whether their parents, friends, and family smoke cigarettes. mr. starbuck told you that he started smoking because of peer pressure. a lot of people around him were smoking, including his father and his friends. and he was curious. but you also heard -- and i do not have it here in the timeline, but it was in about 1957. you heard that in 1957, when mr. starbuck was 17 or 18 years old, that his father, who he acknowledged was a big influence in his life, quit smoking. mr. starbuck would have been about 18 years old. this is important because, by 1957, according to dr. burns, there had been massive publicity about cigarette smoking and lung cancer. and this was the height of the so-called conspiracy of the cigarette companies. but that conspiracy certainly did not affect mr. starbuck's father, because we know he quit smoking for good. we asked mr. starbuck very pointedly about this. we asked him about his father quitting. and mr. starbuck claims he does not know why his father quit smoking in 1957. he never bothered to ask him. the court has instructed you that you can draw inferences and reach conclusions based on the evidence and what your common sense and logic tell you. ladies and gentlemen, your common sense will tell you that mr. starbuck knew back in 1957 that his father quit smoking because of the health risks associated with smoking cigarettes. 118 you can reach that conclusion based on the evidence you have heard. now, that brings us to the 1960s. this is the late '50s, early '60s. you heard that mr. starbuck moves to nevada to work with his uncle. and then in january of 1960, he joins the united states air force. during his basic training, mr. starbuck is ordered by his commanding officer to stop smoking for three days. now, at this point in time, mr. starbuck told you that he had been smoking for five or six years. he was smoking about one pack of cigarettes per day. but he told you when he stopped smoking for three days, he did not experience any physical withdrawal, no anxiety, no jitters, no irritability. if mr. starbuck were truly addicted, as he and his experts claim, you would have expected that he would have experienced physical withdrawal. but the evidence and what he told you is he experienced none. none. now, after basic training, mr. starbuck is trained in radar and electronics. he spends time in alaska and virginia. you heard about that. and dr. burns told us that he would have received an annual physical exam from an air force doctor. an air force doctor. dr. burns told us that all of the armed services initiated a campaign ordering physicians in the military to take a history from their patients to find out if they were cigarette smoking and to tell them they should quit because they were increasing their risk of developing serious diseases 119 like lung cancer. now, dr. burns told you he had not researched exactly when that program first started. but we know that mr. starbuck was in active duty from 1960 to '64, and he was in the reserves for the next two years until 1966. and you now know from all the evidence you have heard that this is a period of time when the public health community is telling the entire country, the entire country, about the health risks of smoking. now, that brings us to 1964. and let me go to the next page of the timeline. in january of 1964, we know that mr. starbuck was discharged from active service in the air force. but then he is in the reserves. he begins to work for a company called general electric in virginia. so let us drop below the bar here. that same month, in january of 1964, the united states surgeon general issues a landmark report. that report concludes that cigarette smoking causes lung cancer. cigarette smoking causes lung cancer. mr. starbuck would have been about 24 years old when this report was issued. the report was front-page news in newspapers all across the country, including virginia and the military newspapers that mr. starbuck would have read. 120 this report was also the lead news story on every television station. you heard there were three stations. each station carried a special program devoted to the results of the surgeon general's report. and we showed you a passage of that broadcast from cbs news with harry reasoner. so every american, including mr. starbuck, was told in 1964, 50 years ago, that cigarette smoking causes lung cancer. and this was a turning point, ladies and gentlemen. dr. burns himself told you that from this point forward, cigarette consumption in this country has steadily declined ever since 1964. that brings us to 1965, one year later. mr. starbuck maries his wife, eddie starbuck. in 1966, they move to florida and he begins to work for a company called rca. that same year, if we drop below the bar here, in 1966, congress passes a law that requires a warning label to appear on every pack of cigarettes. beginning in january of 1966, every pack of cigarettes has a warning that says, "caution: cigarette smoking may be hazardous to your health." cigarette smoking maybe hazardous to your health. mr. starbuck would have been 26 years old when this warning label first started to appear on packages of cigarettes. but mr. starbuck told you he saw this warning, he understood what it meant, but he simply paid no attention to the warning. no attention to the warning. he enjoyed smoking 121 cigarettes. during the same period of time -- if we move back up above the bar. in the same period, he heard cigarettes referred to as cancer sticks. cancer sticks. and mr. starbuck told you he understood that meant if you smoke cigarettes, you would get cancer. you would get cancer. this is in 1966. but he told you he also ignored this information. in fact, you have now heard that that was mr. starbuck's attitude whenever he was confronted with information that cigarette smoking is dangerous. mr. starbuck told you he was interested in current events. he enjoyed reading newspapers and magazines. but he testified that he intentionally avoided reading articles that talked about the health risks of smoking because he, quote, did not want to hear it. he just did not want to hear it. during the same period of time, we have told you he married his wife, eddie, in 1966. you heard that eddie starbuck was raised as a mormon, was strongly opposed to cigarette smoking as both unhealthy and impure. and almost from the beginning of their relationship, she encourages him to quit smoking many times. many times. that is what mr. starbuck told you. she told him that cigarette smoking was bad for his health, that cigarette smoking is nasty, and that he needed to quit. that is what mr. starbuck told you. but just like all of the information here, mr. starbuck ignored what his wife was telling him about the health risks of 122 smoking. now, i want to -- i want to respond to this claim that you heard from mr. byrd that somehow mr. starbuck switched from unfiltered cigarettes to filtered parliament cigarettes because he believed the filter made them safer. now, during our case in chief on friday afternoon, we read to you a short passage from the deposition of mr. starbuck, where he testified before the trial started. and let me remind you what mr. starbuck said in that passage. he said he switched to filtered parliaments for several reasons. number one, he told you he liked the taste. number two, he said that he liked to hang that recessed filter off the end of his tongue. he said he enjoyed doing that. and then he also said he liked the fact that the recessed filter kept the tobacco away from his lips. that is what he told you, ladies and gentlemen. and, in fact, that was how philip morris marketed that recessed filter. it said it kept the tobacco away from your lips. but then during the trial when he was being questioned by mr. spragens, mr. starbuck told you for the first time, "well, you know what, i really switched to parliaments because i believed the filter made that a safer cigarette than the ones i was smoking before." that is what he told you. but then mr. davis began to cross-examine him. and very 123 quickly, mr. starbuck said, "well, you know what, the truth is, it was a long time ago. i have no idea why i really switched to the parliaments. i have no idea." well, what do we know for sure? what evidence do you have for sure that lets you know that there is no basis for this claim that that is the reason why mr. starbuck switched? well, let us take a look at his verified worksheet. we explained to you that this verified worksheet was a document that mr. starbuck filled out in writing under oath before the trial started. mr. starbuck was asked to identify the brands of cigarettes he smoked and the period of time that he smoked each of those brands. look at the two highlighted references. he says he smoked parliament filter -- that is the second highlighted reference -- from 1960 to 1975. well, if you look right above that, mr. starbuck also says he smoked pall mall unfiltered cigarettes for -- from 1960 to 1970, during the same ten-year period. the same ten-year period. if he smoked parliament cigarettes because he truly believed the filter made it safer, then why was he also smoking an unfiltered cigarette at the same time for the same ten-year period? ask yourselves that, ladies and gentlemen. like a lot of what you have heard, it simply does not add up. it does not add up. and the bottom line is, whether it is an unfiltered pall 124 mall or an unfiltered lucky strike or an unfiltered camel or a filtered benson & hedges or a filtered parliament, they all have the same surgeon general's warning on them. the exact same language appeared on every pack of cigarettes, filtered or unfiltered. now, ladies and gentlemen, that brings us to about 1970. and we are going to drop below this blue bar here. you have heard that congress changes the warning label. and the warning label now, as of 1970 -- this is 44 years ago -- says, "warning: the surgeon general has determined that cigarette smoking is dangerous to your health." mr. starbuck told you again, he saw the warning, he understood the warning. and he simply ignored it because he, quote, did not want to hear it. he did not want to be hassled about his cigarette smoking. one year later, in 1971 -- you heard this from dr. kyriakoudes -- all cigarette advertisements are taken off of television and radio in this country. there have not been cigarette ads on television or radio since 1971. and one year later, in 1972, this warning label was required to be printed on every single cigarette ad in a newspaper, magazine, or billboard. that is the evidence you have heard in this case, ladies and gentlemen. around the same period of time, in about 1971 or 1972, mr. starbuck starts his own business as a glassblower or glass 125 artist. i told you in my opening statement -- this is 1971 to 1972 here. i told you in my opening statement that mr. starbuck would deny this, but the evidence shows that mr. starbuck did not smoke cigarettes while he was making glass objects and figurines. at the very end of our case, we again read you very short passages from his brother, david starbuck, and his stepdaughter, toni powers. and they told you -- they both told you that mr. starbuck would work for an hour or two or more at a time, and he would not smoke cigarettes. even dr. cummings agreed. remember dr. cummings, ladies and gentlemen? he was the very first witness you heard. so it is been a while since you saw him. dr. cummings, he basically disagreed with almost every question i asked him, at least the first time i asked it. but even dr. cummings testified that mr. starbuck did not smoke when he made glass objects and figurines. he told you that he needed two hands, one to hold the blowtorch and one to hold the molten glass. but mr. starbuck not only denied what dr. cummings told you, he also claimed that he only tried glassblowing early in his career. well, that is not what mr. starbuck said in the verified worksheet that i just showed you. that is not what he put in his handwritten medical questionnaire to dr. amgott. but the bottom line is no matter what sort of glass work that mr. starbuck did, he does not want to admit that he did not smoke at work except when he took breaks. he knows that contradicts his claim that he could not control his cigarette 126 smoking. the testimony of his closest family members, his brother and his stepdaughter, shows that he controlled his smoking. and if they would have supported his claim, do not you think mr. byrd and mr. starbuck would have brought them here to testify and tell you that? but they did not. and we read those passages to you on friday afternoon. now, during the 1970s you heard that eddie starbuck continues to encourage her husband to quit smoking. mr. starbuck's stepdaughter, toni powers, begins to encourage her stepfather to quit smoking at about the age of 9 or 10 in the early 1970s. toni powers later became a nurse. when she was younger she told mr. starbuck, "if you keep smoking cigarettes, you are going to get cancer. you are going to get cancer." that is what she told him in her youth. later on, when she becomes a nurse, toni powers actually shows mr. starbuck a picture of the dark, blackened, diseased lungs of a heavy cigarette smoker and compares that to the healthy pink lungs of a nonsmoker. and so what did mr. starbuck say to toni powers and his wife when they told him these things? "leave me alone. mind your own business." he told them proudly, "i'm going to live my life the way i want to live it." he did not want anybody telling him what to do. he did not want anybody hassling him 127 about his cigarette smoking. now, mr. byrd suggested to you that somehow all of these warnings and health messages were being drowned out by statements made by cigarette companies that questioned whether there was any connection between cigarette smoking and lung cancer. but the evidence you have heard in this case, ladies and gentlemen, from dr. cummings and dr. burns and all of the witnesses show that is simply not the case. dr. cummings told you that millions of smokers, millions of americans, have quit smoking, hearing the same warnings and health messages that mr. starbuck heard. he told you from 1964, when the first surgeon general's report was released, until 1979, 30 million americans quit smoking. 30 million americans. that is 2 million people every single year. these people who quit heard the same information as mr. starbuck. many of them may have been addicted. it may have taken them more than one try. they would have experienced the same increase in nicotine receptors, the same brain changes. they smoked cigarettes with the same design changes, the vent holes, the filters. but 30 million people made the choice to quit. and they quit for good. even dr. burns had to admit this. dr. burns told you he gave a speech in 1975 in which he said more people in this country know that cigarette smoking is dangerous to their health than know the name of the president of the united 128 states. six years later in 1981, he said that 95 percent of people in this country, 95 percent, are thoroughly aware of the health risks of smoking. that is what dr. burns said. he said all of these things many years before he was paid $4 million to testify against tobacco companies. but mr. starbuck enjoyed smoking cigarettes and had no real interest in quitting. all of the experts told you -- dr. burns, dr. cummings, dr. ticknor -- many smokers enjoy smoking, and many smokers have no interest in quitting. and, ladies and gentlemen, i think it goes without saying, it goes without saying, if you do not want to quit, you are not going to quit. every single expert agreed with that principle. and that statement describes mr. starbuck's attitude up until the time he was diagnosed with lung cancer in 1994. he told you he was stubborn, he enjoyed smoking cigarettes, he did not want to hear anything from anybody about cigarette smoking. and when people encouraged him to quit, it pushed him in the other direction. it made him less likely to want to quit. now, that brings us to the 1980s. and i'm going to show you the last page of the timeline now. we are going to start below the little bar here. this is in 1985. and you heard that there were a series of rotating warnings that went on every pack of cigarettes sold 129 in this country. one of those warnings says very clearly, "smoking causes lung cancer, heart disease, emphysema, and may complicate pregnancy." this warning right on the label says, "cigarette smoking causes lung cancer." this is in 1985, ladies and gentlemen. 1985. one year later, in 1986, you heard that mr. starbuck was diagnosed with throat cancer. because of the location of the cancer, the surgeon had to remove part of mr. starbuck's epiglottis in order to remove the cancer. he had part of his epiglottis removed. you now know that the epiglottis is the flap in the back of our throats that prevents food, liquid, and gastric contents from going down into our wind pipe and our lungs. you heard when stomach contents go down into our lungs, the doctors refer to that as aspiration. aspiration. this 1986 throat cancer and surgery to remove mr. starbuck's epiglottis is important for several reasons. first, even though mr. starbuck tried to deny it, his stepdaughter told you in her deposition that his doctors told him he needed to quit smoking. dr. cummings read the depositions too. he told you that is what the family members said. and even dr. burns said -- dr. burns told you there is no question in his mind that the doctors would have told mr. starbuck that he needed to quit smoking in 1986. and dr. burns also told you that because of the relationship between alcohol and throat cancer, the doctors 130 also would have told mr. starbuck to stop drinking. now, in the same period of time, you heard that his wife, eddie starbuck, is very upset and concerned because her husband has been diagnosed with cancer. she tells her husband if she ever catches him smoking a cigarette again, she is going to take that cigarette out of his mouth and she is going to slap him. that is the testimony you heard. but you know that despite what his doctors told him, despite what his wife and stepdaughter told him, as soon as he is out of the hospital, mr. starbuck chooses to start smoking again. he hides it from his wife. but she eventually sees him. and she slaps him across the face, just as she said she would. but mr. starbuck keeps smoking cigarettes; he just does not do it around his wife anymore. so for the next eight or nine years, up until about 1995, mr. starbuck continues to smoke, knowing full well, knowing full well he is taking a serious risk with his health, knowing that he is had a brush with cancer. but he never smoked around his wife. i told you, ladies and gentlemen, this case was about control. and the evidence demonstrates that mr. starbuck was able to control his smoking and did not smoke around his wife for the next eight or nine years. and as with the cigarette smoking, mr. starbuck denied that the doctors told him that he should stop drinking. and he 131 admitted during the trial, from the witness stand, that he drinks as much as he wants. as much as he wants. now, i want to be very clear about why mr. starbuck's drinking is relevant. i want to be very clear about this, ladies and gentlemen. we have never tried to suggest that drinking alcohol caused mr. starbuck's lung cancer or that drinking makes mr. starbuck a bad person. we would never say that. we raised it because mr. starbuck's decision to continue to drink alcohol after his doctors told him to stop is yet another example of what we have told you about him from the beginning. mr. starbuck is someone who lives his life the way he wants to live it, no matter what anyone else says or thinks, including his doctors. and, ladies and gentlemen, that is okay. he is entitled to make that decision. but, again, that is his decision. that is his decision and his decision alone. now, you heard that in 1990 -- i do not have the date very clearly marked here -- but in 1990, mr. starbuck has a recurrence of his cancer. the cancer has spread to the lymph nodes in his neck. he has surgery and radiation. and the cancer is successfully removed. he claims, again, he was told not to quit smoking or drinking. but based on the evidence you have heard, your common sense, your judgment, what all the doctors have told you, you know that mr. starbuck was again told by the doctors, "you need to stop smoking, and you need to 132 stop drinking." but once again mr. starbuck ignores the advice of his physicians and he does what he wants to do. now, because he lost most of his epiglottis in 1986, you know that mr. starbuck begins to have aspirations, aspirations where gastric contents go down the wrong pipe and into his lungs. as both dr. frazier and dr. amgott explained to you and the medical record and evidence show, mr. starbuck has repeated aspirations and repeated bouts of pneumonia beginning in 1986, all the way up to the point where he is diagnosed with cancer in 1994. if we could show that slide, please. these are simply excerpts from the medical record, ladies and gentlemen. they are all in evidence. they are part of a composite defense exhibit 647. we put all of the medical records in evidence. what you will see, i told you, we do not have records from '86, we do not have records from 1990, but we have lots of records later in time where mr. starbuck tells his doctors that he is having repeated aspirations and repeated bouts of pneumonia that date all the way back to when he had his epiglottectomy. that is the last one there. he has a history of epiglottectomy in 1988 -- i think the doctor got the date wrong -- which predisposes to aspiration. 133 the aspirations and pneumonias cause scarring in the lungs, and the evidence you heard is that this type of scarring is called pulmonary fibrosis. pulmonary fibrosis. mr. starbuck also told you sometime after 1986 he began to see a lung specialist, dr. jesup, and that dr. jesup treated him for the lung problems associated with the repeated aspirations and bouts of pneumonia. that is the evidence you heard, all right here. beginning in 1986. now, this brings us to the early 1990s, and we are almost up to 1995, which is when mr. starbuck quit smoking for good. so let me just take a step back for a moment. mr. starbuck told you during the course of this trial that he tried to quit between 50 to 100 times before 1995, but he just could not do it. he just could not do it. and as i told you in my opening statement, after hearing all the evidence you have heard in the last few weeks, you now have many reasons to question whether mr. starbuck ever made a sincere effort to quit before 1995. first, remember when mr. davis was asking him questions. mr. starbuck admitted that what he meant by those 50 to 100 quit attempts was there were several times where he woke up in the morning and said to himself, i'm not going to smoke cigarettes today, but before the end of the day, he would light up and have a cigarette. that is what he told you, ladies and gentlemen. he did not quit for a single day. not even 24 134 hours. all of the experts who testified, plaintiff experts and defense experts alike, said that if you were truly motivated to quit, you will make a plan. you will pick a date that you are going to quit. you remove your lighters, your ashtrays, your cigarettes, and you put that plan in action. mr. starbuck never did that at any point prior to 1995. second, mr. starbuck told you he tried to quit using nicorette gum and a nicotine patch. but then he told you a story, ladies and gentlemen, that he had never told before. remember again when mr. davis was cross examining him. mr. starbuck admitted that when he was first asked about the patch and the gum he said he used them in the 1960s and 1970s. and you now know, ladies and gentlemen, that neither one of those products were available in the of '60s and '70s. they did not become available until much hater. mr. starbuck also said he does not remember ever discussing his smoking with any of his doctors. and you know in order to get these products he would have needed a prescription and he would have had to have had a discussion with his doctors about his cigarette smoking. well, that is when mr. starbuck said, "well, you know" -- he told you the story that he got the nicorette gum in 1984 from this mysterious friend named susi. he said susi used the nicorette gum to quit smoking and then gave him some of the 135 gum. that is what mr. starbuck told you. he then told you that almost a decade later in 1992, that same mysterious friend, susi, gave him the nicotine patches. that is what mr. starbuck told you. but the story makes no sense, ladies and gentlemen. mr. starbuck told you that susi quit in 1984. so why would she be giving mr. starbuck nicotine patches in 1992? it just did not add up, ladies and gentlemen. the evidence you heard is that his wife, eddie starbuck, never saw mr. starbuck chewing nicorette gum or using the nicotine patch. mr. starbuck's explanation for why he never told his wife that he was using those products or why she never saw him use those products makes no sense. this is what he claimed -- this is what he said to you. he had he did not tell her about it because if he had told her that he was using the patch and the gum, she would have kept on after me day and night to keep on using them and made sure that i was using them right. he said, "she would have been on me like paint on a door." think about that, ladies and gentlemen. if mr. starbuck really wanted to quit, if he was really motivated to quit, do not you think it would have been a good thing for him to tell his wife, so she could be on him. she could say, "you know what? keep trying, be committed, you can do this. use these prescription medications as prescribed." that would have been 136 a good thing. that would have been a good thing. but of course you know that did not happen because they never called eddie starbuck to testify. in her deposition, which we read to you, eddie starbuck was asked whether her husband really wanted to quit smoking before 1994. she said, "you know, i cannot answer that. i do not know." but she also said, "i know that he never really wanted to quit -- or never was going to quit until he had to. not until he had to." ask yourself this, ladies and gentlemen: if mr. starbuck did not prove to his own wife that he wanted to quit smoking, has he proved to you in this courtroom that he really wanted to quit smoking? the person who knows him better than anybody in the world? that is the evidence you have heard in this case. so the bottom line is that mr. starbuck never made a sincere committed effort to quit at any point in time before he was diagnosed with lung cancer in 1994. mr. starbuck can tell you whatever he wants in his testimony, but the facts are what the facts are. and those are the facts. now that brings us to 1994. you know that in december of 1994 mr. starbuck was diagnosed with lung cancer. he had surgery on january 6 of 1995. the surgery itself was successful. there is no dispute about that among the doctors. all the cancer was removed and mr. starbuck has been 137 cancer-free for the last 20 years. and every single doctor did say that mr. starbuck, after having the lower lobe of his right lung removed, is cured of lung cancer. but three days after the surgery on january the 9th, mr. starbuck had another aspiration event, his heart stopped, and he went into cardiopulmonary arrest. and ladies and gentlemen, we told you all that on friday. dr. frazier told you all that on friday. and mr. byrd acknowledged that he was wrong and dr. frazier did tell you all of those things. we told you all those thing. dr. frazier told you mr. starbuck's heart stopped, he went into cardiopulmonary arrest, and he had to be resuscitated. now, mr. starbuck tried to tell you he was placed into that medically induced coma because he was experiencing extreme nicotine withdrawal. but every single one of the doctors, plaintiff and defense experts alike, told you that was preposterous. preposterous. dr. burns, all the other doctors, they told you they had never heard of anyone, anyone being put into a coma due to nicotine withdrawal. but that is what mr. starbuck tried to tell you happened to him. because of the aspiration and the cardiopulmonary arrest, mr. starbuck developed acute respiratory distress syndrome, or ards, which is what we have been calling it here in the courtroom. you heard that many people do not recover from an episode of ards but mr. starbuck did. 138 you heard the doctors debate what caused mr. starbuck's ards episode and the resulting pulmonary fibrosis. all the doctors agree it was most likely caused because mr. starbuck aspirated and then had respiratory arrest. the dispute, ladies and gentlemen, is whether the surgery somehow triggered the aspiration and the later events. we called dr. frazier. he testified here on friday morning. you had a chance to see him. through dr. frazier we put all of these medical records into evidence. we wanted you to see them and know the sequence of events. he told you there are many causes of ards and it is rare, very rare for ards to be caused by a lung surgery. now, the plaintiff has raised this notion, and you will see it in the instruction and in the verdict form, that because mr. starbuck was susceptible to aspirations, that somehow makes smoking responsible ultimately for his ards and his pulmonary fibrosis. but ladies and gentlemen, that is not the evidence you heard, and when you have a chance to look at the instructions yourself i think you will see that is not what the judge's instructions say either. mr. starbuck was susceptible to having ards because he had most of his epiglottis removed in 1986 and he had frequent episodes of aspiration and pneumonia from that point forward. that is undisputed in this case. you know that from the medical 139 records and from what dr. frazier told you. none of mr. starbuck's doctors ever suggested that he was susceptible to this ards event because of the cigarette smoking or his lung cancer. dr. frazier told you this ards event could have happened at any time, either before or after the surgery in 1995. now, mr. starbuck stopped smoking cigarettes before he went into the hospital for his surgery in january of 1995. but several months after he leaves the hospital you heard mr. starbuck tell you he was curious. he wanted to know if he was addicted to cigarettes. he wanted to know if he still wanted to smoke cigarettes. so he tried one cigarette. he took one puff. it tasted awful and he put it out. and ladies and gentlemen, i would submit to you that mr. starbuck's reaction to that one cigarette 8 or 9 months after he had surgery tells you everything you need to know about who was in control. mr. starbuck was in control. and you know he has not smoked a single cigarette in the last 20 years. in the last 20 years. mr. starbuck claims he was addicted back in 1995. and, frankly, ladies and gentlemen, he claims he is still addicted today. he told you he was still addicted today. so ask yourself, if that were really the case, why has not he resumed smoking? now, let us move forward, ladies and gentlemen. we told 140 you and all the doctors agree, mr. starbuck is cured of his cancer. but there is no question he certainly has health problems today. we are not denying that. but many of the health problems that he has have nothing to do with his cigarette smoking or the lung cancer surgery in 1995. you heard from dr. frazier and, frankly, from the other experts, cigarette smoking had nothing to do with his ards or his pulmonary fibrosis. mr. starbuck does have other health problems. he continues to experience episodes of aspiration that sometimes cause pneumonia that require him to be hospitalized even to this day. he has peripheral neuropathy you heard about that. mr. starbuck told you that is the reason why he needs to use his scooter. you heard that he had a bad automobile accident and has a permanent disability from that accident that dates back to 2005. and of course you heard that he has diabetes. so he does have health problems, no question, ladies and gentlemen. and that -- this is the story that you have seen and heard ladies and gentlemen, over the last two weeks. that is the story. now, i told you that this case was about two words, control and responsibility. but i think we can add a third word after what you have seen happen in this courtroom after the last two weeks, and that word is credibility. credibility. we are going to walk through the questions on the verdict form, but before i do that i want to talk about this issue of 141 credibility. the plaintiff bears the burden of proof on each of his claims in this case. and that burden of proof requires him to bring you not just evidence, but reliable, credible, believable, persuasive evidence. and, frankly, ladies and gentlemen, the plaintiff has failed to do that in this case. a famous us senator once said, "everyone is entitled to his own opinion but not to his own set of facts." think about that. the facts are what the facts are. the judge instructed you that it is your job to assess the credibility, the believability of the witnesses and that is your job and your job alone. and brian, if we can put that slide up again. this is the same slide i showed you at the very beginning of my presentation. i will not repeat all this. but it is your exclusive right to give the testimony you have heard the weight that you believe it deserves, and you are allowed to take all of these things into consideration in deciding whether you want to believe the testimony you have heard in this case. we have already talked about many of the things you heard from mr. starbuck when we walked through the timeline, but let me remind you of what mr. starbuck put in his verified 142 worksheet before the trial started in an effort to persuade you, ladies and gentlemen, that he was addicted and that his addiction was the legal cause of his disease legal cause). we showed you this verified worksheet during dr. cummings' testimony. this is what mr. starbuck said in this lawsuit about his smoking, knowing that he would need to prove to you that he was addicted and his addiction was the legal cause of his disease. "state to the best of your knowledge the basic facts upon which you rely to support your contention that you are or were addicted to cigarettes that contained nicotine." this is what mr. starbuck said under oath. "william starbuck smoked approximately three packs a day for about 43 years." three packs a day for 43 years. that is what he said a little less than a year ago in the context of this lawsuit. that means he would have been smoking three packs a day back in 1952 or 1953. that is what he said. that is not, ladies and gentlemen, what he said to his doctors. i'm going to just put this down here so you can see them both. you heard what mr. starbuck told his doctors. this is one of the records from dr. amgott. this is another record from dr. battaglini. mr. starbuck told all of his doctors that he smoked about one pack per day for 40 years, 42 years 43 years. this was in his own handwriting. he wrote, "smoking history: 143 started age 15, quit age 55, one pack per day 40 years." he told dr. battaglini, one to one and a half packs per day for 45 years. that is what he told his doctors in 2010. now let me be clear, ladies and gentlemen. i'm not trying to suggest that one or one and a half packs of cigarettes per day is not enough to cause lung cancer. i'm not suggesting that at all. but when you are claiming you are addicted and you are claiming that you could not stop smoking and that your addiction is the legal cause -- or a legal cause of your disease, this is a big discrepancy. so what was mr. starbuck's explanation for the discrepancy? he told you he lied to his doctors. that is what he told you from this witness stand. he lied to his doctors because he was ashamed that he smoked cigarettes and he was afraid that if he told the truth, his doctors would not treat him. but, ladies and gentlemen, think about that, he was not smoking cigarettes in 2010 when he made these statements to his doctors. he quit 15 years earlier in 1995. he is an intelligent man. his stepdaughter is a nurse. he was treated for cancer in 1986, 1990, and 1995. no doctor ever refused to treat mr. starbuck because he smoked cigarettes or because of the amount he smoke. he had no reason not to tell his doctors the truth. but mr. starbuck told you he lied, so you have to ask 144 yourself when was mr. starbuck telling the truth? was he telling the truth on the verified worksheet? which he prepared for this lawsuit and which he is now asked you to award him $10 million? or was he telling the truth when he spoke to his doctors? when he had no interest in anything other than telling his doctors the truth so that they could properly diagnosis and treat him? i would suggest, ladies and gentlemen, it will not take you long to figure that out. the bottom line is you get to decide which testimony you choose to believe in this case. let us go to the questions on the verdict form. the court: can we give everybody a stretch break? mr. geraghty: absolutely, your honor. the court: thank you. mr. geraghty: i'm on the home stretch here but -- the court: i'm sure everybody could use a break. mr. geraghty: all right, ladies and gentlemen, i'm going to power through this. i know it is been a long morning, and let me try to go through this. you have seen this question before, question number 1 on the verdict form, "has mr. starbuck proved by the greater weight of the evidence that he was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine on or before november 21, 1996? the plaintiff bears the burden of proof on this issue. if you 145 answer no, then the case is over." let me remind you considering this question, the court has not given you a definition or a set of criteria to use in order to determine whether mr. starbuck is addicted. so think about the evidence you have heard. the factual evidence presented by the plaintiff on his claim that he was heavily addicted came from mr. starbuck and only mr. starbuck. the evidence you heard from his wife, from his stepdaughter toni, and from his brother david was presented by us on friday afternoon. we cross-examined both dr. cummings and dr. burns to bring out the facts about what his family members said in their depositions when they did not tell you about those things during their direct examination. we then read the passages that we thought you needed to hear on friday afternoon. and as you learned, in their testimony, each of them contradicted key parts of mr. starbuck's story. ladies and gentlemen, these are the people that know mr. starbuck better than anyone. better than anyone. do not you think that if they were going to provide testimony that supports mr. starbuck's claim that he was addicted they would have been here and you would have seen them live and in person? of course you would have. of course you would have. dr. cummings and dr. burns, the two experts for the 146 plaintiff, they told you if you smoke cigarettes on a persistent, daily basis you were addicted. dr. cummings went so far as to say, "you smoke one cigarette per day, you are addicted." what kind of standard is that? what kind of standard is that? you get to decide whether you think that testimony from dr. cummings and burns is sufficient or if something more should be required in a court of law when the plaintiff is asking you to award millions of dollars. keep the following in mind, ladies and gentlemen. both dr. cummings and dr. burns testify in many cases just like this. you heard all about it. they try to help plaintiffs like mr. starbuck obtain verdicts against these same two defendants. and both doctors have been paid a lot of money to do that. combined, they have been paid between 5 and 6 million dollars. those are the experts you heard from the plaintiff. we brought you dr. ticknor, a psychiatrist and addiction expert. he is the only expert who actually interviewed mr. starbuck. you heard he conducted a three-and-a-half-hour interview of mr. starbuck. dr. ticknor provided you with a real set of medical criteria to determine if mr. starbuck was addicted. it was the dsm-5. he have showed you the factors up on the screen. he discussed them with mr. davis, and mr. byrd asked him questions about that. 147 that criteria asks important questions. like are you addicted if you can control when, where, and how much you smoke? are you truly addicted if you quit for 8 months, you try one cigarette, it tastes awful, and you have absolutely no desire to smoke another cigarette? question number 1 is where you get to decide, based on the mountain of evidence that we have now shown you over the last few weeks, whether mr. starbuck was addicted and whether he simply did what he enjoyed doing, what his own expert, dr. cummings, told you he loved to do. loved to do. so let us focus on mr. starbuck's testimony. he repeatedly claimed that he was addicted, that he tried to quit 50 to a hundred times, but on the other hand he could not describe for you one sincere effort to quit that lasts more than 24 hours. so when you evaluate mr. starbuck's testimony, that he was addicted, bear in mind it is the plaintiff who was telling you he is addicted, the same person who is asking you to award him $10 million in damages. he cannot remember or will not acknowledge things that your logic, judgment, and common sense tell you must be. and almost everything he told you about his so-called addiction was contradicted by three of the people who know him best in the whole world. ask yourself if that is sufficient in a court of law, 148 or do you believe actual objective evidence, tangible evidence from a source that does not have an interest in the outcome of the case is required. i think the answer should be obvious. mr. starbuck has not carried his burden to prove to you by the greater weight of the evidence that he was addicted, and your answer to this question should be no. should be no. let us move on to question number 2. question number 2 says, "has mr. starbuck proved by the greater weight of the evidence that his addiction was a legal cause of his lung cancer as explained in instruction number 6?" if you answer no to this question, ladies and gentlemen, your verdict is for the defendants and the case is over. this question shows that the plaintiff has to prove more than just that he was addicted. the plaintiff has to prove more than that. he must prove by the greater weight of the evidence that his addiction was a legal cause of his lung cancer. now, the court has given you instruction on the concept of legal cause and, frankly, ladies and gentlemen, it is a difficult instruction to follow, even if you are lawyer. so let me see if i can give you an analogy to help simplify things and help you distinguish between the concept of medical cause and legal cause. 149 imagine someone walks across the street and they get hit by a bus. the bus is the medical cause of why they were injured. but in order to know legal cause, you would need to know more than that. you would need to know things like well, did the person cross the street when the light was green or red? was the person paying attention when they crossed the street? or were they texting? were they listening to their ipod with earbuds in? did the person know that the bus came down that street every time at the same day and yet still walk across the street. you need to know all of those things to know legal cause. legal cause. and in a case like this, ladies and gentlemen, the issue of legal cause really boils down to the issue of quitting, quitting smoking. if you believe that mr. starbuck could have quit smoking anytime, anytime he was truly motivated to do so, then addiction is not the legal cause of his lung cancer. rather it is mr. starbuck's decision to smoke cigarettes for years in the face of many warnings, and his decision not to make a motivated committed effort to quit until after he was diagnosed with lung cancer in 1994. that is the one and only legal cause. and ladies and gentlemen, i would submit to you that that is the evidence you have heard in this case. 150 to answer this question you do not have to look any further than the testimony from the plaintiff's own experts, dr. cummings and dr. burns. what did they tell you? they told you anyone can quit smoking. anyone can quit smoking. despite everything you have heard during the course of this trial about cigarettes, nicotine, the increase in nicotine receptors in the brain, permanent brain changes, filtered, menthols, ph, all of those things, after all of that, what did dr. cummings and dr. burns tell you? brian, can you put the slide up there? this is what they told you. 60 million americans have quit smoking in this country. 60 million. dr. cummings and burns admitted to you that most would be considered heavily addicted according to the same standards that they discussed with you, ladies and gentlemen. they told you that most of those people experienced the same brain changes, the same increase in receptors that you heard about during this trial. and what else did they tell you? most of those people quit cold turkey, without any assistance whatsoever. this is from the plaintiffs' own experts. they say this despite everything they told you during their direct examination. the nicotine in cigarettes, ladies and gentlemen, did not prevent those 60 million americans from understanding 151 that cigarette smoking causes lung cancer and from exercising their free will and making a choice to quit. and during the course of the last few weeks, you have not heard any evidence that mr. starbuck was different. in fact, you heard he is independent. he is intelligent. he is strong willed. mr. starbuck was not some tortured smoker who was desperately trying to quit who hated smoking cigarettes but just could not do it. the truth is, that for most of his life, mr. starbuck loved smoking cigarettes, and he simply had no interest in quitting until 1994. and you know that because that is what mr. starbuck himself told you. when people encouraged him to quit, you already know, what did he say? "mind your own business. leave me alone own. i'm going to live my life the way i want to live it." this was how he chose to live his life. and we know that because that is was wife told us, the person who knows him better than anybody. i cannot tell you she said whether he really wanted to quit before 1994, but what she did know was "i knew -- i knew he was not going to do it until he had to." until he had to. mr. starbuck's attorneys presented a lot of evidence about nicotine, but the evidence shows that nicotine did not prevent mr. starbuck from appreciating that smoking is dangerous and from exercising his free will. mr. starbuck claims he was addicted, but his 152 addiction did not force him to smoke year after year, decade after decade. he smoked because it is what he wanted to do. it is what he wanted to do. and that, ladies and gentlemen, is what this second question is all about. you have heard all the evidence and you now know mr. starbuck was in control. not philip morris, not r.j. reynolds, not the nicotine and cigarettes. the answer to this question should be no. now, just a few more questions on the verdict form, and i will put it down and you will not hear from me any further. now, if you decide to answer "yes" to both question 1 and question 2, which i do not think you will based on the evidence you have heard, that would be a verdict for the plaintiff, and you are deciding that mr. starbuck may be entitled to receive some amount of money. so question 1 and 2 are the questions that determine the verdict for the defense versus the verdict for mr. starbuck. now, i do not think you will get this far on the verdict form, but i want to respond to some of the other questions because mr. starbuck and mr. byrd spent so much time on those things. the next series of questions on the verdict form, they will be in section ii of the verdict form, they ask you to determine who is responsible for mr. starbuck's cancer and damages. 153 and i think mr. byrd said the answer to the three questions is yes. and based on that evidence, i do not necessarily disagree. the fourth question in the section is question number 3b, and i believe this will appears on page 3. let me double-check. it is question 3b. it is called "allocation of fault." it appears at the top of page 3. that question asks you, "what are the percentages of the total fault for mr. starbuck's damages caused by each of the parties to the action?" then there is a line for mr. starbuck, a line for r.j. reynolds, and a line for philip morris. again, i do not think you get this far. but if you do, it is your job to decide what it means to take personal responsibility for the consequences of your actions. mr. byrd told you that mr. starbuck accepts some responsibility, but i thought i heard 13, 14, maybe twenty percent. mr. starbuck admits -- excuse me mr. byrd admits that mr. starbuck may be responsible, but he is not willing to say that he is one hundred percent responsible for the decisions that he made. mr. byrd: objection. commenting on counsel's argumentative. the court: overruled. mr. geraghty: so what does it mean to say we are 154 taking responsibility for the consequences of our decision. well, let me give you a example. i'm sure this has never happened to any of you, but we have all probably drank alcohol and we all may have had an occasion where maybe one day you drank a little too much and the next day you wake up and you have a hangover, your head hurts, your heart is pounding, cannot see straight, you feel terrible. you stumble into the bathroom, you wipe the cobwebs from your eyes and you look in the mirror, and how many people say, "i'm only twenty percent responsible for that hangover"? no one says that, ladies and gentlemen. no one says that. because we all know that we are in control and ultimately responsible for our own behavior. was there anyone else responsible for the decisions that mr. starbuck made? the answer is absolutely not. and that is the question you need to ask yourself if you get this far on the verdict form. the facts show that mr. starbuck got up every single day, he made his own decisions and no one made them for him. that is the way you know he has lived his life. and he told you that proudly from the witness stand during the course of this trial. now, again, ladies and gentlemen i do not think you are going to get that far, but i want to talk about just a few more questions on the verdict form. 155 these are questions -- this is under section 3, mr. starbuck's fraud claims, and i just put the two questions that i'm going to focus on here together, all right. first question says, "has mr. starbuck proved the remaining elements of his fraudulent concealment claim against either or both rjr and pm usa?" and then the court references you back to instruction number 10. the next question, question 2a says, "has mr. starbuck proved the remaining elements of his conspiracy, the fraudulently conceal claim, as that claimed is explained in instruction number 10?" i put these together because the questions go together. what these questions are basically asking you, and i think mr. byrd said the same thing is, "did mr. starbuck rely to his detriment on anything a cigarette company said or failed to say about the health risks or addictive nature of smoking?" that is basically what you are going to see when you go back to instruction number 10 and read that. let me make two quick points about these questions. first, if you answer yes to either one of these questions, 1a or 2a, if you answer yes, then that allocation of responsibility question we just talked about goes out the window and mr. starbuck gets to keep one hundred percent of any damages that you might decide to award. that prior question goes out the window. 156 second, these questions are very similar so let me see if i can very quickly kind of explain to you what the difference is. question number 1a is asking you specifically about rjr and philip morris usa, statements made by philip morris and rjr. this question is a little broader and it is referring to statements by any cigarette company or tobacco company. you have heard other companies like the tobacco industry research committee or the tobacco institute, so that is the real difference between the two. in answering these questions, ask yourself if william starbuck, based on the evidence you have heard, ever made any decision about cigarette smoking because of a statement made by a cigarette company. you heard mr. starbuck testify. if we could put the slide back up there again. this was mr. starbuck's testimony. we asked him, "you never relied on any advertisement from a cigarette company in making a decision to start smoking or to continue smoking?" his answer was, "correct." we then asked him, "before filing this lawsuit, you do not recall hearing, reading, or seeing any statement by philip morris usa that you claim misrepresented anything to you?" his answer was "no." and he was asked the same questions about r.j. reynolds, the tobacco institute, the tobacco industry -- tobacco industry research committee, and he gave the same answers. 157 he gave the same answers. you can take that down, brian. the evidence is undisputed in this case. mr. starbuck told you he never read, heard, or saw any statement by philip morris or any cigarette company that he claims millions represented information about cigarette smoking and health. that is his testimony. it is uncontradicted in this case. doctors cummings and dr. burns and dr. kyriakoudes spent days and days going through statements made by tobacco companies. most of which were from internal company documents. ladies and gentlemen, we are not running from those documents. but the evidence you have heard from mr. starbuck demonstrates that none of that information had any influence or would have had any influence on mr. starbuck and the decisions he made. how do we know that? well, we know that mr. starbuck knew that cigarette smoking caused lung cancer many years before he was diagnosed in 1994. you heard it from the surgeon general in 1964. he heard it from his wife. he heard it from his stepdaughter. it was on the cigarette pack itself. he heard it repeatedly from his own doctors. and what did he say? "i did not want to hear about it." this is what he told you about the tobacco companies. "i was not waiting for them to give me information." i was not 158 waiting for them to give me information. for many years, mr. starbuck did not listen to what anyone told him about cigarette smoking -- not his wife, not his stepdaughter, not his doctors -- so what make any of us in this courtroom believe that he would have paid attention to anything that cigarette companies would have said to him? that is not the man you have heard about over the last two weeks. and that is why -- that is why, ladies and gentlemen, that you should answer these questions no. your answer to question 1a should be no. your answer to question 2a should be no. mr. starbuck made his own decisions in life. he told you that. he is independent. intelligent and strong willed. he smoked for many years because he loved to smoke and he quit smoking when he decided it was time to quit. no one else, certainly not philip morris or r.j. reynolds, made those decisions for him. now, i just want to speak briefly about the damages issues then i'm going to wrap up and sit down. the next issue is compensatory damages. and i do not think you are going to get to this question, but again, mr. byrd talked about it. that question asks you to determine the amount of money that you feel should compensate mr. starbuck for his lung cancer. and i want to make sure everyone understands this. there is no claim in this case for medical expenses. there is no claim for lost wages or earnings. you 159 heard some references to the costs of some of the equipment that mr. starbuck needs because of his physical condition. there is not any claim for that in this case. and i would suggest the reason for that is because from a plaintiffs' perspective -- mr. byrd: objection, your honor. the court: sustained. mr. geraghty: the only claim for damages in this case is for the lung cancer, mr. starbuck's lung cancer, and the pain and suffering associated with that. and in asking you to award a certain amount of damage, mr. byrd has not given you any ability to evaluate that in a rational manner. now, when you get to this part of the verdict form, you will see -- this is going to be section -- i believe roman numeral iv, it starts on page 4, the first question, question 1a, actually asks you all about this ards episode. so let me very briefly talk about it. you heard from dr. frazier that the 1995 lung cancer surgery did not cause mr. starbuck's ards and subsequent pulmonary fibrosis. he told you that. he told you that. the plaintiff has all sorts of theories about this, but you heard no reliable evidence that the lung cancer or the surgery caused mr. starbuck to develop ards. and i think when you look at the instructions the judge has given you and read this question, you will see that he has not proved -- the 160 question asked you whether he proved that his bodily injury legally caused by defendant resulted in an aggravation of an existing disease or physical defect or activation of a latent disease or physical defect. it is a mouthful, no question about it. but the bottom line is you know that he had the ards episode because he aspirated and then he had cardiopulmonary arrest. and you know he was aspirating and he had bouts of aspiration going back to 1986, and you know he continued to have bouts of aspiration long after 1995. now, let me talk about the amount that was requested by plaintiffs' counsel. you heard mr. byrd ask you to award $10 million to mr. starbuck. i'm not even sure what to say about that number. what i can tell you is based on the evidence you have heard in this case, this is not a case in which millions of dollars or hundreds of thousands of dollars are warranted based on the evidence you have heard. i ask you, ladies and gentlemen, to use your common sense and good judgment. recall mr. starbuck's testimony under oath in this courtroom. remember the things he refused to acknowledge to you under oath. remember that his testimony was contradicted many, many times, not only by his former testimony, by his own medical records, by the testimony of his family members. think about how many times mr. starbuck told you "i do not remember, it was too long ago." 161 but when it comes to the aspects of this case in which he is asking you to award him $10 million, you better believe he tells it to you with crystal clarity. crystal clarity. we all make our own lifestyle choices. no debate about that, ladies and gentlemen. ultimately we are responsible for the consequences of those decisions. the final issue is punitive damages, and you are being asked to decide today whether or not punitive damages should be awarded in this case. you are not deciding the amount. if you were to say yes to this question, the punitive damages should be awarded, there will be another phase of the trial, there will be additional evidence and argument from the lawyers, and you will have a second round of deliberations. any punitive damages that you would decide to award would all go to mr. starbuck and only to mr. starbuck. the purpose of punitive damages is to punish and deter, not to compensate. if you decide that mr. starbuck is entitled to recover money damages, you can compensate him fully through an award of compensatory damages. punitive damages are an additional amount above and beyond compensatory damages. the court also instructed you that the plaintiff has a higher burden of proof on this particular question. this is question number 2a under the damages section. it is the next to last question on page 5. 162 the burden of proof is clear and convincing evidence. when you look at the instructions you will see what clear and convincing evidence means, but basically you have to be really, really, really convinced that punitive damages are appropriate. let me make one last point. punitive damages are only warranted based on conduct that you heard during this trial that specifically harmed mr. starbuck. this is mr. starbuck's case. mr. byrd: objection, your honor, that misstates the law entirely. the court: sustained. that is not what the jury instructions say. mr. geraghty: this is mr. starbuck's case. it is not a class action anymore. it is not about other people. as you heard, this case is about whether the conduct you heard specifically harmed mr. starbuck. specifically harmed mr. starbuck. and based on the evidence you have heard in this case, there is no basis to award punitive damages. you know, based on what you have heard over the last two weeks, that philip morris and r.j. reynolds had nothing to do with mr. starbuck's decisions about cigarette smoking. mr. starbuck lived his life -- has lived his life the way he wants to live it. there should be no question that punitive damages are inappropriate. so the answer to this question, if you get this far, should be "no." it should be 163 "no." now, ladies and gentlemen, i'm going to sit down in a moment. and after ms. baker has a chance to speak to you, mr. byrd will have one more opportunity to speak to you. and that is because the plaintiff bears the burden of proof in this case. and as you listen to what mr. byrd says -- he is probably going to talk a lot about philip morris and r.j. reynolds and the cigarette companies -- ask yourself, what does any of this have to do with mr. starbuck? what does it have to do with mr. starbuck? a man who you now know has lived his life the way he wants to live it. a man who did not listen to anyone -- what anyone had to say. now, during our presentation, during, i believe it was, the cross-examination of dr. david burns, we showed you a video. it was a video from the cbs news report from the 1964 surgeon general's report. it was harry reasoner. it was january the 12th of 1964. we showed you that clip during dr. burns' testimony. and harry reasoner looked out at the american public 50 years ago, and he said, "ladies and gentlemen, in this kind of a country, no one is going to forbid you from smoking cigarettes, but no one is going to tell you they are safe. the decision, and the health that may depend on it, is up to you." 164 it is up to you. harry reasoner said that 50 years ago. it was true then, and it is true today. it is true today. we enjoy a tremendous amount of freedom in this country. we have the right to make decisions that are not always in our best interests. and with that freedom comes the obligation to accept personal responsibility for the consequences, the full consequences, of those decisions. and frankly, ladies and gentlemen, at the end of the day, that is what this case is all about. are we going to hold philip morris and r.j. reynolds responsible, liable, for the decisions of an intelligent, independent, strong-willed man who told you he is lived his life exactly the way he wants to live it? based on the evidence you have heard over the last two weeks, the answer is clear. the evidence in this case supports one and only one true verdict. and that, ladies and gentlemen, is a verdict in favor of philip morris and r.j. reynolds. i want to thank you so much for being attentive and patient during my presentation here this morning and for all of your patience over the last two weeks. on behalf of myself and mr. davis, thank you very much. ms. baker: thank you, your honor. may it please the court, mr. starbuck, and counsel. during opening statement, i talked to you about the stubborn facts of this case. and now that you have heard all the evidence, there are really three facts, three stubborn facts, which give you almost all the information you need to decide the issues in this case. and those facts do not come from plaintiffs' experts. and they do not come from the documents you saw flashing up on the screen. the facts come from mr. starbuck himself. he is the one who told you these facts when he took the stand. fact no. 1, mr. starbuck has not smoked in nearly 20 years. no. 2, mr. starbuck ignored the warnings from family, friends, and doctors, on warning labels, and in newspapers and magazines. and fact no. 3, mr. starbuck did not rely on an 167 advertisement or any statement from a tobacco company in starting or continuing to smoke. now, at the beginning, i also told you this case was about choices, mr. starbuck's choices. and by now, you know that this case is not about other smokers. it is not about a class of smokers. it is not about whether cigarettes are or should be legal. that is not what this case is about. it is mr. starbuck's case. and so that is why we are talking about mr. starbuck's choices. so why did you have to listen to days of testimony, days and days of testimony that had nothing to do with mr. starbuck's choices? you had to listen to that testimony because mr. byrd wanted you to get angry, he wanted you to get angry at philip morris and reynolds. mr. byrd: objection, your honor. the court: overruled. ms. baker: pure and simple. he wanted you to get angry at the defendants and not think about how, if at all, anything they said or did not say, did or did not do, had any impact on mr. starbuck. but as my father always told me, keep your eye on the ball. focus on what matters. and in this case, what matters are the facts. mr. starbuck's stubborn facts. now, mr. geraghty already thoroughly walked you through the evidence and the verdict 168 form, and i'm not going to rehash that. but let me take just a moment to focus on these three stubborn facts and how they will help you answer some of the questions on the verdict form. fact no. 1, mr. starbuck has not smoked in nearly 20 year. now, if you get to question 2 in section i of the verdict form -- and mr. geraghty just spent a lot of time talking to you about that -- but if you get to that question, you will have to decide whether addiction, not smoking, but whether addiction was the legal cause of mr. starbuck's lung cancer, whether it directly, continuously, and substantially caused his lung cancer. but based on what mr. starbuck himself told us when he took the stand, based on what he told us, despite calling himself an addict, addiction cannot be the legal cause. mr. starbuck's choices, his choice to smoke and continue smoking for as long as he did, those were the legal cause of his lung cancer. now, this morning, mr. byrd told you that addiction does not have to be the only legal cause. but look at instruction 5 carefully. it requires that addiction be the substantial cause. that but for an addiction, mr. starbuck would not have gotten lung cancer. an addiction cannot be the substantial cause here, where mr. starbuck has not smoked for almost 20 years. it is that stubborn fact again. remember that i asked mr. starbuck about that, and i asked dr. cummings, and i asked dr. burns 169 too. was an addiction so substantial that it forced mr. starbuck, beyond his will, to go out and buy cigarettes and smoke them at any point over the last 20 years? has an addiction been so substantial that it forced him, beyond his control, beyond his control, to smoke at any point since he smoked that last cigarette nearly 20 years ago? you know the answer to those questions. the answer is no. mr. starbuck chooses to be a nonsmoker. you heard dr. burns tell you that very early in his testimony. mr. starbuck and his decisions, his choices, those choices and those decisions stand in between addiction and lung cancer. addiction cannot be the direct, continuous, substantial cause of his lung cancer. his choices stand in-between addiction and lung cancer. and they always did. so if you get to question 2 -- if you get to question 2 in section i of your verdict form, your answer must be "no." but if you get past this question -- and mr. geraghty talked to you about that. if you get past this question -- and i agree with mr. geraghty that you should not get past questions 1 or 2 in section i, but if you do, let me spend just a moment on questions 1a and 2a in section iii of your verdict 170 form. and that gets us to the stubborn -- stubborn fact number two. mr. starbuck ignored the warnings from family, friends, and doctors, on warning labels, and in newspapers and magazines. mr. starbuck's testimony was that he was independent. you have heard a lot about that. and i talked to you about that in opening statement. he is independent. he is stubborn. and he did not particularly care for people trying to tell him what to do. that was true in life, and it was true when it came to his smoking. he told you he was not going to be hassled about his smoking. and so he ignored the warnings, warnings from his mother, warnings all around him. warnings from his mother, warnings from his wife, eddie; his stepdaughter, toni. toni, the one who warned him that if he kept smoking, he was going to get cancer. warnings from his doctors. and warnings on every pack of cigarettes since 1966. and when it came to the stories about the dangers or addictive nature of smoking in newspapers and magazines, what did mr. starbuck tell you? what did he tell you? he told you that despite being an avid reader, he ignored those stories. he did not read the articles. he did not pay them any attention. but you cannot have it both ways, ladies and gentlemen. you cannot say that you ignored the warnings all around you because you claimed to be an addict and then say you had no idea -- no idea that smoking had health risks and could cause cancer or that it was addictive. you cannot have it both 171 ways. now, i'm not criticizing mr. starbuck. i told you that in opening statement. and that is true today. he had every right -- every right to live his life in the way that he wanted to live it and make whatever choices he wanted to make. he had that right. but you cannot dig your heels in when your loved ones warn you. you cannot dig your heels in and put your blinders on and tell your family and your friends and doctors to mind their own business, and then say you did not understand or you did not know. and that takes me to my third and final stubborn fact. mr. starbuck did not rely on an advertisement or any statement from a tobacco company in starting or continuing to smoke. now, i told you in opening statement that you were going to see a lot of ads. and you did. you even saw some ads when mr. starbuck testified. but there is no evidence -- no evidence that he started smoking because of advertising or that he continued smoking because of advertising. and this is not a question of whether mr. starbuck remembers ads or a specific ad or a slogan. that is not the question. this is about whether 172 ads mattered to him. and they did not. he himself told us that when he took the stand. he did not tell us that in direct examination, but when mr. davis stood up and cross-examined him, that is what he told you. he told us that he did not rely on ads in making a decision to start or continue smoking. and that is really all you needed to hear about ads. but that did not stop mr. byrd from calling dr. kyriakoudes to testify. we all remember dr. kyriakoudes. he was the last live witness that plaintiff called. and he was the expert who admitted that he did not know the first thing about mr. starbuck. he had no opinions about mr. starbuck whatsoever. and so despite all that time, despite dr. kyriakoudes' testimony and all the time spent on ads at trial, mr. starbuck himself put that issue to rest over a week ago, when he testified and said he did not rely on ads. now, you also saw lots of documents from philip morris and reynolds, made by people that are no longer at either company, 30, 40, 50 sometimes more -- mr. byrd: objection, your honor. there is no evidence in the record at all about whether these people are with the company or not. it is a statement -- ms. baker: it is an inference -- the court: the jury should trust their own judgment 173 about what evidence is in the record. ms. baker: those statements were made 30, 40, 50 -- 50 or more years ago. and i'm not going to defend all of those statements, but let me say this: mr. starbuck told you from that witness stand, he told you when he took the stand that he did not rely on any of those statements by tobacco companies in starting or continuing to smoke. he told you that. he told you that he was not waiting to hear something from a tobacco company when making decisions about his smoking. and we know that he was not, because he was already being warned by those that loved him and knew him best. and he was telling them to mind their own business. he had all the information he needed. he had the information he needed; he just chose to ignore it. mr. starbuck also admitted that he would not have changed -- he would not have changed his smoking habits even if a tobacco company had said that smoking because caused lung cancer. he would not have changed his habits even if a tobacco company told him that smoking caused lung cancer. ladies and gentlemen, there may be a smoker out there who would have changed his habits, but we know that was not mr. starbuck. he did what he wanted, and he did it when he wanted. he made his own choices. and no one, not his family, not his friends, not his mother, not his doctors, and certainly not a tobacco company, were going to tell him any differently. so these questions -- these questions on the verdict 174 form come down to this: did mr. starbuck rely on something that philip morris or reynolds did or did not do, said or did not say? and you need look no further than mr. starbuck's own testimony in answering "no" to both question 1a and 2a. now, i'm very close to wrapping up. but before i do, i want to briefly address two final issues. like mr. geraghty, i do not believe that you should get to this point on the verdict form. but if you do, this is my only chance to speak to you. so if you decide to return a verdict for mr. starbuck, you will have to decide the amount of damages. and this is difficult for me, because, obviously, i do not believe that mr. starbuck should be compensated for his choices. but we all feel compassion and we all wish mr. starbuck well. compassion and good wishes, however, are not reasons to exceed common sense and good judgment. mr. byrd this morning asked you for $10 million for mr. starbuck's choices. but the judge instructed you that any award you make should be fair and just in light of the evidence. so if you choose to make an award -- and i do not believe that you should -- but if you choose to do so and compensate mr. starbuck for only the choices that he could make, please do so based only on the evidence you heard using your common sense and good judgment. and if you get all the way through the verdict form, you will have to decide whether punitive damages are warranted. and, again, just like mr. geraghty, i do not believe that you should get that far on the verdict form. but if you do, you will have already fully compensated mr. starbuck for his lung 175 cancer. punitive damages are not about compensation; they are not about making someone whole. they are about more money. and that money can only go to mr. starbuck. so if you get that far, consider that even though drs. cummings and burns talked about previously secret documents, those documents are secrets no more. there is public website with tens of millions of documents available. anyone, not just plaintiffs' experts, anyone can go to that website and look at those documents. and if the companies' position on smoking and health and addiction throughout the years bothered you, consider that those positions changed over a decade ago, when they admitted that smoking caused cancer and disease and was addictive. plaintiff has not met his clear and convincing burden on this question. so if you get to question 2a in section iv, your answer should be "no" to both reynolds and philip morris. now, this is the last chance -- just like mr. geraghty described, this is the last chance that i'll get to speak with you. because mr. starbuck bears the burden in this case, his lawyers get an opportunity to respond to us. and because we cannot respond, i would ask that one of 176 you be our advocate in the jury room when you deliberate. you have seen how we have responded throughout this trial. and you know the stubborn facts. you know what the evidence has shown. i ask that you keep mr. starbuck's choices in mind and return a verdict in defendants' favor. ladies and gentlemen, thank you so much for your time and your attention. you have been extraordinarily patient throughout this trial. on behalf of mr. isasi and our client, i thank you for your service. and it is been a real honor and privilege to try this case in front of you. thank you so much. thank you, your honor.