closing argument mr. patacca: yes, your honor. thank you. may it please the court? the court: yes, sir. mr. patacca: and counsel? mr. reilly: uh-huh. mr. patacca: and members of the jury -excuse me -- good morning to you. as judge taylor indicated, we do thank you for giving us several weeks of your lives. we know it is a hardship and we appreciate the time you have given us. i'm not going to belabor my points here this morning. i'm going to get right to it and tell you what we think you need to know when you go back to assess your verdict. i'll tell you right now, bruce anderson, teresa starr blundell thank you for your time. i have to thank my assistant dayna and eric and cynthia who were in here helping us because, obviously, a lot of work went on behind the scenes to give you the testimony and the evidence. you are going to be deciding this morning the case of lucy mae starr. and the very first question you are going to be asked on the verdict form, as judge taylor described to you, is whether lucy mae starr was a engle class member. and to do that, you are going to have to decide whether she was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine and whether that was a legal cause of her death. and i'd like to talk to you right about that question right now very first before we talk about any other evidence you have heard. so, eric, if you can start, help me with the screen. let us go to number 2, please. you heard this language from judge taylor this morning. you will have to decide: did the plaintiffs prove that lucy mae starr was a member of the engle class. and to do so we have to prove by the greater weight of the evidence that she was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine and, if so, was such addiction a legal cause of her death. by just the greater weight of the evidence, the more convincing and persuasive force of the evidence. important to your consideration is -- next, eric -- the addiction does not have to be the only cause of her smoking and death. the court instructed you it has to be a legal cause. and it is a legal cause of death if it directly and in natural continuous sequence produced or contributes substantially to producing the death so it can be reasonably said that but for the addiction -- or an addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine her death would not have occurred. and one more instruction that goes with it, eric, on four. in order to be regarded as a legal cause, it need not be the only cause. as you heard in this courtroom from the very beginning when we were selecting jurors to opening statement and the evidence, there can be issues of choice. there can be issues of enjoyment. if the greater weight of the evidence from what you heard in this courtroom about lucy mae starr is that the addiction was a cause of her death so that it contributed substantially to producing her death, it is all right if you find that she also chose to smoke. if you find by the greater weight of the evidence that she was addicted to the nicotine and that was a substantial contributing cause to her smoking, it is still okay if you found there were times she enjoyed smoking. it does not have to be the only cause of her death to find her to be a member. so in answering that question, what evidence did we bring to you and what do we need to look at? and i would submit you need to hear -- rehear certain pieces of evidence that we heard. eric, number 5. in 2010, the office of the surgeon general of the united states put the world on notice, put america on notice and these parties on notice that nicotine addiction is the fundamental reason that individuals persist in using tobacco products, and this persistent tobacco use contributes to many diseases described in the report. the surgeon general put us on notice, the world and these tobacco defendants, that it is the fundamental reason that people smoke because that is the overwhelming scientific proof. another surgeon general report in 2010, you have heard about many of them in the past, but in 2010, the overwhelming evidence is that it is the fundamental reason that individuals persist. so we asked r.j. reynolds. for instance, you heard both corporate reps, but we asked r.j. reynolds publically, what do you think about that? eric, number 6. and they would not agree with the notice of the surgeon general. they will not agree that it is the persistent and fundamental reason people smoke. but they will at least admit publically under oath, r.j. reynolds, that it is one of the reasons why people smoke. as you heard in this trial -- number 22, eric -- what they say publically and under oath has always been different than what they have said privately behind closed doors. in 1972, confidentially off the typewriters in their offices behind closed doors, they were analyzing why people smoke. and they believed that nicotine satisfaction is the dominant desire as opposed to flavor and others. and then they told themselves confidentially that is the primary reason that smokers smoke, it is nicotine satisfaction. and i realize there is been a lot of evidence, we have gone many days with the testimony, but the reason you needed to hear that is what they say behind closed doors privately has always been different from what they have told the public and public health and the surgeon general, and what they told you through their corporate representative, dr. figlar, who was sworn in 2011 and played in 2013. go back to 6, eric. so we compare. they will at least admit under oath it is one of the reasons. if you read their documents, as you heard, it is the primary reason. so let us turn to this case with lucy starr. number 7, eric. was lucy starr addicted? we tried to present testimony to you and we ask: who says yes and who says no as to her addiction? no question, dr. werner said she was addicted. she went through the guidelines. she is reviewed all the evidence. they brought you mr. rosman who has reviewed the evidence and one of his opinions was she was addicted, and he said you would be reasonable in finding that she is addicted. and importantly, lucy mae starr, you heard testimony, she believed she was addicted by what she was telling people. the only person saying she was not addicted was dr. rosman when he would flop to the other side of the story. yes, she was addicted or no, she was not. the greater weight of the evidence in this case and in the deposition testimony you have heard is that lucy mae starr was addicted to nicotine. she loaded up before she went to bed at night with that last cigarette. sometimes in the middle of the night she would load up and wake up. first thing in the morning, she would have to load up for the withdrawals. when she learned she had cancer, she still could not kick it. she could reduce it. mr. lapointe told you she still had the irritability. going to number 8, let me review what people told you. dr. werner: lucy mae starr was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine. absolutely, she said. her addiction significantly contributed to her continued smoking. her addiction undermined her motivation, and it was no longer a free choice. and the addiction and choice is not an all or nothing proposition, and that is what they want you to believe here today, is that it is either a choice or it is either addiction. it is either enjoyment or it is either addiction, and that is just simply not the way dopamine works in a person's brain. that is simply not the way a disease works in a person. it is a mix. even dr. rosman said, "i would have to speculate." you cannot pull it apart. and both were working with lucy mae starr. could she quit? yes. was her motivation undermined by the addiction? yes. next one, eric. what did dr. rosman say? well, as i said, he said in one hand she is addicted. in one hand, she is not. but he does not believe that even if addicted, it ever plays a role in death because a person chooses to smoke. at least he would agree that it played some role in her enjoyment of smoking, that nicotine played some role. dr. rosman would not agree with the principle that rjr put in that 1972 document that says it is the primary reason that people smoke. he would not agree with the principle that the surgeon general has now put us on notice in 2010. let us go to number 10, eric. so what did lucy say? because dr. rosman said, "sometimes i do not know what she had going on in her mind." what was her intent when she could not cut back after hearing she had lung cancer? what was her intent when she got the patch from that clinic in the early '90s? what was her intent when she was smoking in the bar? well, we asked, frederick lapointe: did you ever hear mrs. starr say that she believed she was addicted to smoking? yes. what did she say? she said that she could not give them up, she felt like she was addicted to them. and mr. lapointe came and said there were times she enjoyed smoking, and that is okay from what we know. it is not an either/or proposition. you can enjoy them and you can also be addicted. they brought you vincent chamberlain who said he thought she enjoyed it. you may recall i only asked him a few questions at the end. and one of my questions was: did you ever hear her actually say she enjoyed cigarettes? no. did you ever hear her actually say she loved cigarettes? he said no. they brought you donna chamberlain who said we never had conversations about why we smoked, but we sure did smoke. 5:30 in the morning when we would get there mopping and setting up the bar. one of the very first things they were doing was smoking together. you heard debbie starr-allen's testimony. her mom used words like, "i'm having a nicotine fit." she had quit attempts. when she was not successful, she would be at the bar clenching her fists. she would throw her cigarettes out the window one time when they were driving together. she was tired of smoking and she wanted to be done. you heard from lance proctor. number 11, eric. lance proctor: "what did she say about nicotine in cigarettes?" "that nicotine is what keep -- was keeping us addicted to the cigarettes and that is why it was so hard to quit." "lucy told you that?" "yes." could there be a more direct statement by lucy to another individual about the fact that she was addicted and why it was she could not quit? she did not tell him, "it is because i enjoyed it, that is why i cannot quit or because the flavor keeps bringing me back." she said it is the nicotine. now, at the beginning of this case, counsel told you this legal cause question is going to -we are going to give you is so difficult that lawyers take three years of law school to learn it and it is still complicated, and judge taylor is going to give you in one instruction. it does not have to be the only cause. it can just be a cause. well, important to that -- number 12, eric, lance proctor, who you saw who knew lucy for eight to ten years, was with her every day, he summed it up perfectly with one conversation he had with lucy. he did not have the legal training. and here's what he said: "question: are you sure as you sit here that lucy made comments about the nicotine being the problem of trying to quit smoking? "answer: nicotine playing the biggest role, the biggest part of it, and that there were other_ things in cigarettes that contributed to the fact that we were not able to quit smoking." in one sentence, he told you what lucy told him, that the major part, the biggest part of quitting was the nicotine addiction. there should be no question in this case that by the greater weight of the evidence -- this is not a criminal case, not reasonable doubt. you heard about greater weight -- that she was addicted and that it was substantial contributing cause to her death. greater weight of the evidence is kind of -we use the analogy of lady justice. the evidence is tilting in favor. we think we have given you more. you can even have some doubts. it is not a criminal case. the greater weight of the evidence, the convincing force and effect of the evidence is they she was addicted, she said she was addicted, she could not quit, and it was the nicotine that kept coming back. and nicotine, the addiction, choice and enjoyment, it is not an either/or question. it is not just choice and it is not just addiction. so when you find that she is a member, the next question you are going to be asked is whether smoking those cigarettes was the cause of her death, and we believe that you would check or say "yes" to both questions because they have already admitted, and we have agreed, that smoking their cigarettes was the legal cause -- excuse me, we have agreed that smoking their -- all of their cigarettes was the cause of her lung cancer and death. in other words, they are not saying one cigarette was more than the other. when you find that she is a member, you are going to now be able to use the engle findings the judge said are binding on you. number 13, eric. and i'll -- smoking cigarettes causes lung cancer. number two, that the cigarettes containing nicotine are addictive or dependence producing. three, that philip morris and r.j. reynolds and other tobacco companies placed cigarettes on the market that were defective and unreasonably dangerous. number 14, eric. number 4, that philip morris, r.j. reynolds, and other tobacco companies concealed or omitted material information not otherwise known or available, knowing the material was false or misleading, or failed to disclose a material fact concerning or proving the health effects and/or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes. number 15, eric. number 5, that philip morris and r.j. reynolds entered into an agreement with others to conceal or omit information regarding the health effects of cigarette smoking or the addictive nature of smoking cigarettes with the intention that smokers and members of the public would rely to their detriment. and when you find she is a member, this will be a binding finding also. number 16, that philip morris and reynolds and other tobacco companies, they failed to exercise the degree of care which a reasonable cigarette manufacturer would exercise under like circumstances. they failed to do that. that would be binding on you. and when you find that she was addicted by the greater of the evidence and that it was a legal cause and these findings come together with the stipulations, you would say yes, each of their cigarettes caused her death. we are going to ask you -- number 17 eric. we talked about this right at the beginning with mr. anderson in the opening who talked a little bit about -- to all the jurors in voir dire. but we are going to ask you to measure and compare lucy's fault, which we agree she was partially at fault for her own death in combination with what they did because she did not quit hard enough, did not try hard enough. everybody who got on the jury said they could measure and compare corporate conduct and individual conduct. and we are going to ask you to compare lucy mae starr to philip morris and r.j. reynolds because, as you heard, corporations are persons under the law and they are going to be judged the same. and how would you do that? number 18, eric. we believe that you can be guided by these three questions every time you are comparing lucy with philip morris and rjr. each of the three of them: what did they know? when did they know it? and what did they do with what they knew? you can answer that for lucy, for r.j. reynolds, and philip morris, and that will allow you to measure and compare was she reasonable and when? so what did they know? number 19. again, you heard from corporate representative speaking on behalf of their company, dr. figlar said a manufacturer ought to know more about its product than its consumer or a consumer. number 20, eric. a manufacturer of tobacco companies should never conceal information regarding the health risks of its product. what we hope you have seen through all the testimony and the evidence we have given you is the tobacco industry and these two defendants have always known more than the public and certainly knew more than lucy. they have always known earlier. they have always concealed, and they always agreed to conceal the information regarding addiction and health. and they never came clean until everybody had already known in 2000. everybody. let us go to number 21, eric. so back in 1963, what did they know? they knew in an internal strictly private and confidential private closed-door document that nicotine is addictive. in 1963, they had determined it was addictive. they used the word "addictive" a year before the surgeon general would only call it habituated. remember the '64 report, not only said there were health concerns but it was habituated. they were calling it addictive in '63. they were calling it in '63, 25 years before the surgeon general in 1988 would actually use the word "addiction." they knew in 1963 it was addictive and they knew it was causing disease. this was the year before the surgeon general would issue that historic, as they tell you, report, the '64 surgeon general's report. what did they do with the information they knew in 1963? please 26, eric. you saw this evidence. and, again, all these are in the evidence you will see. for instance, this document will be p-237. it is plaintiff's composite exhibit number 3. this was the lawyer's outgoing cable talking about this report, this battelle hippo filter report that i just showed you. and they realized that the submission of those developments, the information they knew to the surgeon general would be undesirable. what did they know? when did they know it? and what did they do with what they knew? go back to 21, eric. thank you. up until 1963, the evidence you have heard about lucy starr and what she knew, she knew as a teenager when she first started smoking that cigarettes stunt your growth. that is the only evidence. that is a scientific fact that we have not heard from the surgeon general yet ironically, but that is what she knew. in 1963, they are admitting internally, privately, not publically, that it is addictive and it causes disease. number 22, eric, please. in 1972, what did they know? continuing on with the addiction theme, they knew that nicotine satisfaction is the dominant desire. this is the one i showed you a few minutes ago when we were talking about addiction and the causation question. they knew that nicotine satisfaction is the primary reason that smokers smoke. they did not admit that. they did not join with the surgeon general in 1964. again, what is privately said versus what is publically said, compare that. here's what they say privately. and publically, dr. figlar will not agree. publically, dr. rosman does not agree with that position, their expert on addiction. number 23, same document in 1972. they also knew that smokers compensate. give a smoker something with more filter and less tar and less nicotine and they will subconsciously take more. they will make up -- because of their addiction, they will take up and make up for what they are losing. they knew that and did not share that with the surgeon general back in '64. you heard dr. burns talk about that: "there was a time when we were saying if you are going to smoke, we need to encourage people to smoke low tar, low nicotine, thinking" -- "thinking at that time in the '80s, that it might help." and he said it did not help. it did not make it less risky. and they knew it and the surgeon general and the public health did not. what did they do with that information? they kept it. let us step forward a little further as we move along in history. 24, eric. on september 9th, 1980, the industry's concern. public health and an organization called nida, n-i-d-a. they want to use the term "addiction," quote/unquote, "addiction."_ now, these two executives realized, "we have been caught off guard. we were not monitoring the situation. we did not know they were going to come up with this position. we were asleep at the wheel." why are they worried? because they know internally they know nicotine is addicting. they have known that since the '63 document we have just talked about. they have always known. and they cannot allow this label to be placed on a smoker. to them, it is just a label. they know that because they cannot defend continued smoking as a, quote, free choice, unquote, when a person is addicted. in 1980, they were using the word "free choice." they knew about a term that dr. werner brought you in this courtroom and how addiction removes a person's free choice. they knew about it in the -- in 1980. before the surgeon general even used the word "addiction" in '88 they knew about that and they said it privately, and here publically they want to deny it. addiction robs a person of their free choice. number 25, eric. in 1982, continuing on with that theme, they realized that most people would like to stop if they could. they say many, but not most, of those who would like to stop smoking were able to do so. not most. and they cannot be comfortable selling a product which most of their customers would stop using if they could. these two documents were in 1980 and 1982. they are talking about a concept that our customers cannot stop, most of them cannot if they wanted to. this is the same time in history when lucy starr is with lance proctor at the bar. you remember the four way baby. they were pregnant in '80, '81. they are trying to quit. they are talking about quitting. lucy saying, "it is the nicotine that is bringing me back. i cannot quit." at the same time they are having this conversation the tobacco companies are having a conversation behind closed doors saying, "we know most people would like to quit and they cannot." that is what they knew. number 26 -- i'm sorry, you saw number 26 already. let us go to 27. so how did they deal with what they knew instead of revealing it and sharing and joining with public health together on the stage in 1964? did they come together and say, "yeah, we do realize it causes health problems. it is addictive"? no, they did not. senior executives at philip morris in 1964 apparently were very familiar with the very terms that mr. werner, once again, would bring you. they said they are going to have give their smokers a psychological crutch and a self-rationale to continue smoking. this is because the surgeon general report just came out. they have got to reach their customers of smokers and give them a psychological crutch. dr. werner told you, when you are addicted, you use denial, self-rationalization. there are psychological triggers. in 1964, these two executives at the top of the ladder of philip morris recognized what you would hear in 2013 from the expert, dr. werner. the same thing you would not hear from dr. rosman who they brought you. number 28, please. they were worried about the information, stepping back. what were they doing? in 1966, you may recall from the testimony of the corporate representatives back then in 1966, they were talking. they were doing their own mouse study during the three years before this, leading up around the time of the surgeon general report, trying to confirm the science that they kept telling the public was not done, needed more research. you saw the cable here -- or excuse me, the letter. do they want to come out and tell the word about the report? no, they want to slant the report. get out in front of it, put the spin, not reveal. again, this would be in keeping with the theme you heard from dr. burns, the public health, they misrepresented the science. they created the doubt and controversy. they suggested that more research was needed when, in fact, it was not. number 29. they are cigarettes companies but they have always recognized the doubt is their product. they need to establish controversy because they cannot win on the science, and they never could win on the science, and they knew they could not win on the science because they had more science than even the public did. they knew about carcinogens before smokers did. they knew about addiction before that term was even being used by the surgeon general in 1988. so they had to create a controversy, suggest that it is still open, suggest that the door is not closed, to tell people you need more information. doubt, self-rationalization and a crutch for every smoker to keep them smoking. number 30, eric. you have got to see philip morris' document in 1972. and this was kind of the retrospective, behind-the-scenes what we have been doing the past 20 years. they have been defending themselves through litigation, politics, and public opinion, and creating doubt about the health charge without actually denying it. that is what is made them successful through 1972, even though there is been the surgeon general report, even though the science is against them. ask yourselves continuously what did they know, when did they know it, and what did they do with the information they knew? did it stop in 1972? was this just a retrospective analysis? what have we done? how have we been successful? the evidence would suggest, no, it is compelling that it is not. number 31, eric. in 1984, r.j. reynolds continued with the open debate. cannot we still debate it? is not there still controversy? again, during the time when lucy mae starr is trying to quit with lance proctor and coming in with bud lapointe in the '80s, at a time when she is trying to quit the addiction, the nicotine that she knows has her, they are still asking for an open debate. number 32, eric. and in 1988, the surgeon general gets around to saying yes, it is addictive. and what is their response? it is not to wave around the report that they have known since 1963 and say, "yes, we admit it. yes, we have known it. we should have told you sooner." instead, they are going to deny, deny, deny. and then they go on the attack, it is a scare tactic. it is irresponsible of the surgeon general to be telling america that this product is addictive. 33, eric. they continued in their agreement to conceal. in 1994, they stood before congress and gave notice to the world that they still believe cigarettes and nicotine are not addictive. 1994, the year before lucy mae starr would die, they are still saying that message. they would not change that tune until 2000. so how did they reach america? they created doubt and controversy, but how did they reach them? what influence did they have? and what did they have on lucy? number 34. in 1967, the federal trade commission said, essentially, and gave them notice they believe that virtually all americans who can either read or understand the spoken word was being impacted by cigarette advertising and the messages they were putting out in ads, promotions, and their tv spokesmen. it was so pervasive, it was impossible for americans of almost any age to avoid tobacco. so we asked philip morris through dr. bonhomme, she was their corporate representative to speak for them, do you dispute that it was pervasive? and she said, "i could not and i cannot." and why is that? because it was true. number 35. she knew that even back in 1954, a decade earlier than the ftc report, that in the early days of tv -- this is 1954, black and white, three channels, tv did not run all night -- they were bragging to their shareholders how they were reaching 41 million people a week with i love lucy. the tobacco industry was sponsoring -- they were sponsoring that show amongst many. you heard about all of them. that was back in '54. they reached -- they could put out 3.2 billion messages a year of advertising. that was philip morris alone in 1954. number 36, please. in 1968, philip morris decided to ride the wave of women smokers. they went with virginia slims and they bragged that they were reaching with their advertising 96 percent of all women in america with their ads and their messages. you saw their commercials. but they were reaching out to women. and why is that? because as you heard from dr. burns, women made their business in those decades leading up to it. and it is not just from dr. burns you need to hear that from, you heard it from rjr. number 37, please. in 1984, they analyzed the past half century. younger adult females have been a driving force behind industry growth during the last half century as they have become more likely to smoke at age 18 and over time spread importance with older age brackets. that is lucy mae starr. the half century before, starting at a young age and continuing on. and they looked at the brands that were successful getting young smokers in women: pall mall, winston, marlboro, kool, and newport. four of those brands lucy mae starr smoked. she was the person they were talking about in this document. not specifically, but she was one of those women. she was the reason their business boomed. they were reaching out to her and you heard evidence that they reached her. she heard the message. number 38. lucy was listening. now, we have gave you some ads of course to show you what they were saying. and how did that relate to lucy and why is that important? she was one of the americans that were being bombarded by the messages, but she specifically reacted. lucky strike, you heard testimony, she knew the jingle of lsmft, "lucky strike means fine tobacco," and she would say it. it was not just a jungle. she would say it while she was running around with her mom's lucky strikes. she would say it when she smoked their product. she loved the christmastime jingles that came out. you heard that from them. she smoked the pall mall that were longer because they gave you more smoke and a longer filter. she smoked kools. she smoked those menthols, she smoked various menthols when she had a cold. those were the messages that were being broadcast in those decades. the world has certainly changed now. she watched the flinstones, amongst many other shows, and she loved winston. that was probably her primary brand, you heard. and she would say the jingle: "winston tastes good like a cigarette should." she said that. she loved the marlboro man. she wanted to go to marlboro country and said she would follow that man anywhere. but she also recognized that marlboro was not just made for a man, it was made for a woman. she smoked it too. and she caught on with the women's movement. she smoked virginia slims. she must have seen an ad and must have seen a promotion because she picked it up and sent her money in with her carton tops and said, "i want the sweater," and she got the sweater "you have come a long way, baby." they spoke to a woman like her who came from nothing and built a business. she was listening. she sent in coupons for other brands, but she was listening. and why is that important? because in 19 -- in the mid-1960s debbie told -- that when the debate was coming out, surgeon general came out and they were debating, they were saying no to the surgeon general, she told her daughter that that is a bunch of malarkey, that she would have to prove it to me. she did not make that up herself. there is no evidence she had a team of scientists working on her behalf. the only one that was spouting that message across the airwaves was the tobacco industry and these two defendants. she heard it because she was listening and she believed it. and their corporate representatives would say that it would be reasonable for her and others like her to rely on that statement that they were shown in the '60s, in '50s, in '70s, in the '80s and the '90s. "it would be reasonable for someone to believe our message that it was still not dangerous." you heard from dr. burns who is told you about what the industry did for decades in response to what they were doing. for decades they knew, for decades they concealed, and they did that to get them smoking and they did it to keep them smoking, while they knew how deadly their product was and addictive. dr. burns told you that over 400,000 people die a year for the past few decades, and lucy starr is one of them. dr. burns told you that that frank statement -- which i will not put up, you have seen it -- back in 1954, they did not live up to that representation, their frank statement. in fact, he said they misstated science. they suggested that the science was still open when it was not. they misrepresented what was known. they funded research to suggest that there were other causes of lung cancer. members of the jury, the evidence that you have seeing would show by clear and convincing evidence that what they have done in the decades, these two defendants and others, is reprehensible. you will have the jury instructions, but they had a conscious indifference to others. it was reprehensible. they knew. they knew what the result would be, and they did it. they kept selling it without disclosing. and they countered the public health safety message. why? for profit. that is reprehensible. that needs to be acknowledged. and the evidence would support you finding that they acted reprehensibly and it led and caused lucy mae starr's death because she was addicted and kept smoking their product for decades before they ever, ever admitted it in 2000. she never saw the day where they admitted it. their corporate representatives universally said nothing changed from 1954 or 1964 in that report, or in 1988 on the addiction report, nothing changed from those periods of time until 2000 when they finally said, "okay, we want to make sure there is a unified message. we agree it is dangerous, it is addictive." nothing had changed. they just finally decided to agree. and now 2010, the surgeon general report that addiction is the fundamental reason that people smoke and that leads to disease, they still deny it. and you heard the testimony and the questions asked of their corporate representatives: "will it take another 50 years like it did back in 1954 for you to finally agree that addiction is the fundamental reason? will it take that long for you to agree in a courtroom of law that that is the case what overwhelmingly science knows?" and this is absolutely important to your consideration. because today is the only day that teresa starr blundell has in this courtroom with you for her mother. the law does not allow her to bring this jury back in 50 years when they finally admit that addiction does cause the disease and it is the fundamental reason that people smoke. they have shown repeatedly over the decades they do not admit to the science until the last breath is done and they are forced to, and they are still persisting in this courtroom in 2013 on that very point of addiction/causation. and that is why we are here, that. that needs to be understood by this jury as you review the evidence of what they have done with what they knew even though they had all that is known. would not it have been a different story in public health had they joined the surgeon general in 1964 on that stage? joined, not pushed back. and number 39, please. lucy mae starr was 58 years old when she died of lung cancer caused by smoking the defendants' cigarettes. she had been addicted to cigarettes for decades and it did not change until the day she died. the mortality table, we had to give you statistics that say that on her death in that time she would likely be expected to live 24 and a half more years if it had not been for the lung cancer. she and her daughter teresa would have had 24 and a half more years. that is 18 years in the past, she would be alive today, statistically speaking, and she would still have six more years with her mom. we are going to ask you to compensate teresa starr blundell for losing her mother 24 and a half years too early because of what they have done. she is lost her parental companionship, instruction, and guidance, pain and suffering for losing her mother. it does not matter how old you are. your mother is always your mother. you are always their child. teresa told me that plain and clear. even though the relationship never changed, they were in different stages together. and this was probably the best stage. teresa's kids were getting older. she was now allowed -- she now had the opportunity to have her mom be there with her at her daughter's track meets. her mom and her proudly cheering on the granddaughter. bingo. teresa still takes her bingo set with her. she would rather take her mother. for 18 years she is held onto a bottle of perfume because every now and then the scent reminds her of who it was. she would rather have her mother. when you look back at lucy starr's life -- and you did not hear anybody say to the contrary -- you really looked and heard about an amazing woman. it is not often in nowadays in 2013, we talked about how the world has changed, but you would not really hear about a 13-year-old dropout who gets married and has two kids before she is even 18, who successfully raises a family and works full-time, goes on to establish a very successful business. such a loving woman that patrons like lance proctor called her the town mom. that is an unlikely story given what she faced as a young teen with no formal education or very little. the evidence is uncontroverted that she and her daughter teresa had a wonderful relationship. you heard that from teresa, but more importantly, you heard that from people like mr. proctor. she was such a good mom to this lady, you could see it because she treated others like she was their mother. this is a story that you really would not hear about a 13 dropout nowadays, and lucy made good on it. she did the best she could with what she had. and teresa just wanted those years with her. and this was the time they were going to share the most. so we are going to ask you to compensate her fairly and justly based on that evidence. and that, members of the jury, is up to you. you are the finders of the facts and you are experts in that regard. i would suggest that if you compensated her a million dollars, some may say that is not enough. if you compensate her $3 million for her total loss, some may say that would be too much, others would say that is enough. either one would be just. either one would be fair. either one would also be supported by the evidence in this case. and we would ask you to compensate her in that way. number 40. i could go on a little longer, but i'm not. i'm going to try to be done. you heard all the evidence but this case was about a woman you are seeing here does not even -- she looks far older than 58 years because what the lung cancer has done to her. it is about a woman who was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine. addicted to products that they have known for decades caused addiction, that undermined motivation to quit. and they knew for decades it was dangerous. and today, they have to come in and try to convince you she was not addicted through dr. rosman with one of his flip-flopping opinions or convince you that the addiction did not play any role. why? because they cannot dispute she smoked their cigarettes and they cannot dispute, because they agree, their cigarettes is what caused her lung cancer and death. and they know if they can convince you that choice is always paramount to addiction, they do not go hand in hand, they can escape what they were saying back then. they cannot defend, quote, free choice for persons addicted. you have heard it. it is not either/or. it is not all or nothing. you can be addicted even if you enjoy it. you can be addicted and choose -and they can contribute substantially to your smoking, and that is what happened here. and that is why we have asked you to measure and compare what lucy knew, when she knew it, and what she did with it to what they knew, when they knew it, and what they did with it. thank you very much for your attention. we appreciate it and we know you will review the evidence. mr. patacca: may it please the court? the court: yes, sir. mr. patacca: and, counsel. and, members of the jury, for the last time. i will also strive to be brief, to just touch on a few things that you heard from both of the defense lawyers in their closing statements. mr. reilly came up here for philip morris and he mentioned the time line. i did not feel it was necessary to give you our time line again. you heard it. but once again, they refuse to put themselves on the time line. they have failed to include them in lucy starr and public health's time line. and it was interesting that when he was reading to you the instruction on concurrent cause, legal cause, they always forget to mention to you -- he forgot to read to you, in order to be regarded as a legal cause of death, addiction need not be the only cause. it may be a legal cause of death even though it operates in combination with the act of another or some other cause, if the addiction contributes substantially to producing the death. that means her disease of addiction can operate in conjunction with their actions and her own actions and her choices. they do not do that because they only want to talk about one mirror, lucy starr's mirror. they do not want to let you focus on the mirror that they looked into for decades. what were they doing? what were they failing to do? philip morris says when you look at who has control, then you know who has responsibility. well, again, that is why we are asking you to compare and measure. we agree. philip morris and r. j. reynolds tobacco company, for decades, had control and made choices. they are responsible for the choices they made. they had choices and control on what to conceal and what to release to the public, what to hide and when to cooperate. and their failure to cooperate and their failure to reveal was not because of some compulsion or disease. it was not affected by that. it was mainly to sel more cigarettes, keep smokers smoking and profits. you were told that lucy starr did nothing to rely on the defendants. debbie starr made it clear, in the mid '60s, during the debates on tv, that lucy said it was malarkey; you would have to prove it to her. that was during the ’60s when they were competing with the message of the surgeon general, when the warning on the pack only said it "may be hazardous to your health." what was so unreasonable about lucy mae starr believing the message that they were spilling into the airways, into the newspapers, magazines and talk shows? not everybody believed it but many believed that message they were spilling. and their corporate representatives told you it would be reasonable for someone to rely on those messages that we were putting out for decades, even beyond the ’60s. you saw some evidence in this case that when -you definitely saw that lucy at one point smoked vantage, rjr’s product. you saw one of the advertisements in the newspaper from 1976; vantage was promoted as a health -- or for the health-conscious cigarette smoker. in 2013, it sounds ludicrous to hear that there would be such a thing as a health-conscious smoker. in the ’60s and ’70s, that was such a term. you saw evidence earlier than that where doctors were promoting the smoking, that it’s good for your throat, ents, doctors in the middle of the night on their commercials. those were concepts that were readily available in america, not in 2013, but back when lucy starr was smoking. they tell you that nothing they did could have caused lucy starr to rely. well, mr. reilly said that actions often speak louder than words. she uttered those words, malarkey, you have to prove it to me. those were the words in the ’60s because she didn’t believe it. those words came from them in the actions they put into the media. but later what did she do? in the ’70s through the ’90s, she was smoking cigarettes that had that low-tar, low-nicotine and light message. she smoked merits, vantage, marlboro lights and even winston lights. those were her actions. and they want to make a big deal that lucy starr could have quit in the ’40s and ’50s. certainly she was addicted then. why would she need to quit in the ’50s, if they had not told the american public it was dangerous? certainly lucy starr, by the time the ’80s came, when she was dealing with mr. proctor, started believing there was a danger, and that is why she wanted to quit. that’s why she tried to quit. but just because there was competing information out on the marketplace doesn’t mean they didn’t have a duty to reveal what they know. eric, r1, please. rjr’s own corporate representative conceded under oath that they had an obligation not to conceal information about the health hazards of their products, whether or not it’s publicly available and not just the generic term that it may be dangerous or it may be hazardous, specifics, where they have done studies, where they know about carcinogens. they knew more than she did, they knew before she did and they did not disclose. they had an obligation, regardless of what was in the media. r2, please. but they will come into court and suggest that willie nelson, the three stooges, larry hagman all relieved them of their -- their obligation, that somehow this information relieved them from telling america and lucy starr what they knew. now, larry hagman you saw just a few minutes ago from rjr, talking about the -- the public service announcement that once you quit, your lungs go back -back to normal. you didn’t hear any testimony about that in this case. you heard dr. burns say you reduce your risk compared to if you continue smoking, but there is no testimony that your lungs repair. smoking is for good. if they had a doctor that would come -- that would tell that your lungs repair after you stop, they would have brought him. they want to be relieved of their obligation because of a commercial. you reduce your risk but you still have a greater risk than a never smoker. that’s what dr. burns told us. and dr. burns made it clear to their lawyer, who kept peppering him; you don’t have any information about this smoker. he was not opining or giving an opinion on lucy mae starr and when she would have quit and what the effects would have been. certainly -- certainly quitting earlier reduces the risks. no question. and that’s why time was being lost every day when they concealed, every day when they refused to give up what they knew. i think you just heard a few moments ago that no one disputes that cigarettes have been -- are dangerous and addictive by nature. we tried to blend it in with what you’ve known over history, with articles in the reader’s digest. well, there was a dispute and there is a dispute. they disputed they were addictive and dangerous until 2000. five years after lucy starr died, there was a dispute; there is a dispute. and for them to come in here in 2013 and act like everybody knew and we all agreed is just downright false. you’ve seen the evidence. members of the jury, over the last three weeks, you have arguably seen more evidence about tobacco and health in the united states than anybody living in this county, other than the lawyers and the judge who have been also with you. you know far more and have seen far more than lucy starr was ever given the opportunity by these companies. so for them to suggest on her death bed with bud lapointe that she did not somehow think that this is my last thing i need to mention before i die is that somehow i blame the tobacco companies, when she did not have the opportunity to read documents that you have seen about what they know, that is ludicrous and unfair. that is why the law allows the personal representative, teresa starr blundell, to -mr. reilly: objection, your honor. mr. patacca: -- come in and bring suit. the court: overruled. mr. patacca: that is why the courts allow a plaintiff, a daughter like teresa starr blundell, to say, we now know and i can bring this lawsuit on her behalf. and they suggested to you, because teresa starr blundell never asked her mom to quit, that somehow they want you really to blame her, and that would not be the law. you will never see in the instructions that because she did not have that conversation that somehow we have not met our burden. the law that judge taylor's going to read you talks about what lucy starr did and what she knew and what the defendants knew and what they did. that is where we are comparing the measure. anything else would be not -- against the law. one of the other things that mr. reilly mentioned to you in his portion was you are allowed to use your common sense, and the law does allow you to use your common sense. and he was talking about when you are comparing the fault in -- in this case. but that does not mean you can substitute your beliefs in this case. do you recall, when we were looking for disinterested jurors, everyone agreed they would set aside their own personal beliefs and decisions about smoking and only judge this case on the law and the facts? and everyone who swore in this case to be jurors said they could do that. you have heard that dr. horn -- you have seen it time and time again -- said you could get on the top of a roof -- scream from the top of a roof -- rooftop, and you would not be telling anyone they did not hear -excuse me -- you could scream from the top of a rooftop about the dangers of cigarettes, and you would not be telling anyone anything they did not hear. well, first of all, you probably could have screamed that from the top of philip morris's headquarters and r. j. reynolds, and apparently they would not have known that that was true. we know it was. but what they did not tell you or they do not want to highlight is the rest of that article, dr. horn said, is that is not enough. telling people it is dangerous is not enough because of the addictive nature of cigarettes and because the tobacco industry is countering our message. that is the rest of the story. tobacco, for decades, has given you one side of the story, has only given you one time line, has only given you one mirror for you to look in. they have never wanted to read the other part of the concurring cause instruction. they have never wanted the focus to come back to this table here or the spotlight saying, you were part of history, you influenced that woman and others like her and you did it for profit. bud lapointe. yes, you are the judges of the facts, and you will have to decide how to reconcile the testimony. but as dr. rosman said, i do not know how to reconcile it. perhaps he was wrong when lucy quit. maybe it was not just the '80s. maybe it was in '91 when she was on the patch. we know for sure she was on the patch -number 7, please. -- because that is what she filled out on her blue cross/blue shield form. she had a habitrol patch. so maybe it was in the '90s. maybe mr. lapointe was just wrong about when they were trying to quit together, but he was very explicit about what happened when they quit. she was irritable. she could not do it. she did not want to do it again. in fact, when he asked her, do you want to try to quit again, they gave you the quote, she said, "no thank you." they did not put it in the context of do you want to give it another try? she did not want to do that again. does that mean mr. lapointe made this up? no. perhaps, just like many witnesses, he is doing his best to recall 18, 20 years ago. thank you, eric. as you heard from mr. lapointe and debbie and teresa never -- testimony, there was no love lost between mr. lapointe and them. why would mr. lapointe come in here -- or in -- through his testimony, sworn testimony, and say something he did not believe was true? perhaps he got a little bit mixed up, but he was very clear on the quit attempt. i do not want to have to mention it but the kma, because we have heard about it, a sarcastic comment by her daughter debbie, go ahead, mom, keep smoking, while she is coughing. she got a sarcastic response back, kma. did you see that response with others? no. mr. proctor, when they had a real discussion, two friends really talking about it, it was an open discussion of i'm trying. i cannot do it. it is the nicotine. do not let them let you think that she is telling the world to kma just because people are suggesting stop smoking. she was trying to quit. she was trying to break the grip of the nicotine addiction, and she was able to do it for about a month or two, and, no, there was no nicotine left in her. the withdrawals were gone. she did not come back because of the nicotine. she came back because of the addiction to nicotine. dr. werner told you the psychological triggers affect an addict for life. so even though the physical withdrawals are gone, those cues still bring you back. lucy starr was trying to quit in the '80s. yes, we recognize she -- she started to understand the dangers and was trying to break it. and that is why she is also partially at fault, along with them, for her own death. she should have tried harder. but by 1980, she was 44 years old and had been smoking 32 years, at that point, at least two packs of cigarettes a day. bud lapointe told you she was going to the indian reservation to get two cartons a week, 20 cartons [sic] a week, almost three packs a day, in their relationship. there are many things that humans enjoy and -- to do -- in doing and dopamines release. but there -- i would argue, there is nothing in the human experience, nothing, not food, not sex, not playing with your kids, that you can do 40 and 60 times a day like a two-to-three-pack-a-day smoker. you do not do that for enjoyment. you do it because it is work. you do it because it is a disease. that is why lucy smoked -smoked the way she did. nothing else in the human experience measures up to the addiction of those cigarettes. no one can keep up that pace every day for that many years at that rate unless there is an addiction at work. and i'll close with this. and i apologize, i've gone a few more minutes than i meant to. but they are never going to agree that she was addicted, and they are never going to agree that the addiction played a substantial role in her death. and no matter what evidence we provide, it would not be enough. if she had not tried to quit, they would have had dr. rosman to come in and say, no serious -- mr. reilly: objection, your honor. the court: sustained. do not go outside the evidence at this time, mr. patacca. mr. patacca: okay. lucy quit for two months and they say that is a serious attempt, but. when she goes back, she was not serious enough. she could not win. for decades, they have always said there is not enough evidence. the science is not enough. but do not worry, when we figure it out, we will tell you. and that is what they told smokers like lucy starr. you want to talk about the fabric of life? that was their fabric of their corporate life, doubt, controversy and put off the issue for another day, except their fabric -- there is was not moving in; it was a cloak that they had bought it. thank you very much.