mr. byrd: thank you, your honor. may it please the court, ladies and gentlemen of the jury. this will be our last time to talk to you before you begin your deliberations. so the first thing i want to do is, on behalf of mr. starbuck, thank you for being here and for the time you have taken in this case. i cannot promise you that every bit of evidence you heard was invigorating and exciting, and sometimes you had to hear a lot more stuff than maybe, you thought, we are getting the point; you do not need to keep going on and on. but this did stem from another case, and we did try our best to try to compact the information best we could to make sure you have it. what is going to be great about this process is that, although i've tried to build this timeline from what our experts said and mr. starbuck said, this will not be able to go back with you to the jury room. but you are going to have the actual documents, the actual evidence that they referenced to look at. i encourage you to do that and to take all the time you need with doing that. it really is an amazing thing. the judge talked about it when we first started this process, that, you know, we 47 have disputes. people have disputes with people or companies or whatever in this country. and you know there is eight people. there are eight people here that are going to go into a room and be the voice of the community and come in and decide, you know, what is wrong, what is right. and that is how our process works. it comes down to eight people making that decision in this country. it is not some -- you know, the president does not decide that; the judge does not decide that. you are the people that are going to make this decision. you are the only people anywhere that will make this decision. and so it is important. it is a very important case to the parties. it is extremely important. and we appreciate your time in doing that. i will point out, just as the judge said, i'm going to speak to you for a few minutes; then mr. walburg is going to come up here and handle the first question on the verdict form that you are going to deal with; then you are going to have to suffer me. i'm going to come back and talk some more. i'm going to break it up so you do not get totally bored of me throughout the entire time. but i do want to harken back a little bit to when we first did this process. you remember, you know, you all were sitting up here and everybody sitting back there, and we all were asking these questions that the judge talked about voir dire, to speak the truth. and we appreciate your answers in 48 that. and in that process there were a lot of questions that the judge went over. and i hope you remember them. when you are back in the jury room, if they come up, i hope you remember that there were a lot of biases and questions about potential bias. not just against us, but to philip morris and r.j. reynolds as well. there were questions to make sure that, you know, you do not just disagree with lawsuits like this. you do not think it is wrong for people to sue. you do not think it is improper for mr. starbuck to bring this claim in the first place. you do not think it is wrong to award the type of damages that, you know, we are seeking. those kind of things, everybody took an oath and swore and said they do not have preconceived biases on those topics. so we appreciate that. but we want to make sure, you know, when you get back in the jury deliberation room and you go over these, you know, just look at the instructions that the judge gave you. i mean, anytime, if you have a question, you just go back to those instructions that he is given you and base everything on the evidence and the facts that you have heard and the jury instructions that the judge gave you. and if somebody tries to start bringing in, "yeah, i just do not believe in things like this; i think it is wrong to do x" -- mr. geraghty: i object to the commentary to the 49 jury's deliberation process. the court: overruled. mr. byrd: -- do not be afraid to say, you know, "remember, we are supposed to just follow the jury instructions. we are not supposed to have these biases." and the judge will tell you the process. if you need to send a note to the judge, you can do that as well. you are going to hear a lot about freedom to choose in this country and choices. and i suspect, when the defendants get up here, there is going to be a lot of discussion about mr. starbuck and his choices. i tried to build a timeline. i suspect you are going to see a timeline from mr. starbuck's life and things that were going on. and i tried to build a timeline that includes -- the green ones have mr. starbuck's information on it, but also information what the cigarette companies industry was doing at the same time. you are going to get to the question of comparative fault if we find ourselves -- if we have shown -- we have put ourselves in engle class. i'll get to that later. but as you weigh the conduct of the parties, just remember, you know, the jury instructions are going to say that a corporation should be treated equally and like people. they need to be treated like people. so if mr. starbuck has -- makes choices and then has 50 to be held accountable for the choices he makes, the flip side of that is that cigarette companies make choices, and they have to be held accountable for the choices they make. it goes both ways. it is two sides of the same coin. so when you look at these -- i said this at the beginning, but i hope you will look at the choices that both sides made and their age and sophistication when they made it. you are going to hear -- i presume you will hear arguments about what mr. starbuck knew or believed when he was 14. but i want you to think about the fact, when you weigh that, about him being a 14-year-old versus the sophistication of companies that, i think we showed you over those decades, became the most powerful countries in the world. i mean, the amount of money they could spend, the amount of, you know, influence, that they had in the culture. they were everywhere. we showed you the ftc report. nobody could have avoided their messages that were all over the place. that is what the ftc report found. so i want you to remember that. and also remember, i mean, we -- coming into this case, it is an extension of the prior case which, you know, i do think it helps to, you know, have some bases for why we are here. you know, i do think that mr. starbuck -- i think that we submit, the plaintiff submits, that, you know, there are some things that corporations just should not engage in. 51 and i think when they violate them, they should be accountable, and i think they violated them here. i do not think they should engage in needlessly endangering the public. mr. geraghty: objection. not in evidence, your honor. the court: overruled. mr. byrd: we submit that that is one thing a company should not do, needlessly endanger the public. we submit that companies should not lie about dangers that it knows in its own product. companies should not do that. when they do things like that and they profit off it, they need to be held accountable. they should market their products in responsible ways. i do not think that is too much to ask for in this country, to be responsible in how you market if you want to be treated like a person when you come into court. and, you know, i think a final reason is, i think that something that -- an expectation is if you have a dangerous product, do not target that product to children and underage, especially when it is addictive, especially when you know that it is so hard to quit, it is addictive. you know, i tried to think of, like, an analogy. i told you that we have to take you back in time. and i think we tried to do that. you saw a lot of old tv clips and things like that, to understand, you know, the 1950s, from that 1953 52 date, when the conspiracy started that dr. burns talked about, all the way up to 1999. to understand that history, you really have to go back and understand how different the culture was. the only analogy i've ever been able to come up with is like imagine, you know, everybody uses cell phones today. they are all over the culture. everybody uses them. and, you know, they are marketed everywhere. they are advertised everywhere. everybody has them. you constantly put them up to your head and all that. but i'm sure -- you know, people have heard -- every now and then, you have heard reports, there is reports out there, those cell phones cause brain cancer. now, nobody -- i mean, i do not know what people believe about it, but it is out there. you have heard; right? i mean, it is in news reports. but people keep using the cell phones. and imagine if, you know, the cell phone company that made the product, the apple and blackberry and all these companies, whatever they are, the people that make the cell phone, what if they came out right now and said, "you know what? it is true. these things we are making, we have studied it, and they cause brain cancer. okay? if you keep using them, you are going to get brain cancer." imagine the impact that would be if the manufacturer said it, instead of just some news report somewhere or whenever. then imagine if we find out 30, 40 years from now, 53 okay, we take this 1953 line, push it forward, 2030, 2050. we look back and, lo and behold, documents finally come out from the manufacturers of these cell phones. and we find out they knew. they knew for decades and did not tell us. they had done all the research. they had done the studies. they had done brain studies, brainwave studies. they had done all this stuff and did not tell us. and then what if that industry tried to come in and say, "but you knew. had not you read about it? had not you read about it in the newspaper? had not you heard?" even though that was not the same type of modern science, today -- you know, we have not seen the same type of this modern scientific consensus reached and studies done. what if they just said, "you read about it in the florida times-union. do not say we did not tell you something you did not know." but they hid it for years. and then what if the government, for these 40 years, tries to start warning people, "quit using your cell phones. it is a problem." and the cell phone industry is over there going, "do not believe them. that had not been proven. that is not true." get together and they form a conspiracy to sit there and tell everybody, "keep using your phones." you know? and then when you get -- and then, worse, try to come back and 54 rewrite history. rewrite history. and 30 or 40 years from now, tries to come back and tell you that in 2014, people were not -- mr. geraghty: you are not allowed to comment on the defense of the case. the court: overruled. mr. byrd: people were not using cell phones back in 2014 to this degree. they all knew what they were doing when they were putting their cell phones to their head. they all knew. and rewrite history. you know, everybody running around scared. that is what was going on in 2014. everybody was -- you know, anybody who had any sense was putting their cell phone way far away and never used it. but the people that did not know what they were doing, they were doing this. the story we have tried to tell, okay, is a story -- it is taken some time because it is such a long period of time that they did this. it is a story from 1953 on that -- it is the type of conduct, hiding and concealing information, actively telling customers that the science is not right and science is not wrong. it was over and over and over. it was a campaign of doubt. that is their words. it was a campaign of doubt that they continued on and on. and what is worse, they got into the -- you know, this '82 year is important, as the judge has instructed you. okay? and the importance of that is it is a year the judge will decide 55 something about. keep in mind, this '82 year is important about what they did before and what they did after. and in '82, we showed you this exhibit 72. and, again, you are not going to have this board back there with you. but i encourage you to read these exhibits yourself. take the time to do it. exhibit 72 is a 1982 document, december of 1982. and in it, the industry is saying to themselves that we cannot be -- one of the things they say is we cannot be comfortable selling our product. we cannot ever be comfortable selling a product which most of our customers would stop if they could. this is in '82. they know people are going to stop. "if the exit gates were ever opened, we would be out of business overnight." that is in their own document. what happens after '82? we start seeing things like -- there is, like, a new thing that starts happening. and if you look at some of the evidence, i think you will see this. in their marketing and their efforts, the great american smoker's kit we showed you. there comes this new language that you start hearing from philip morris and r.j. reynolds. and i do not mean to -- you know, everybody in this country has a right to -- you know, companies have a right to make money, advertise, profit. no one suggests otherwise. every company has a right to do all those things. we are not suggesting you cannot do that stuff. that is 56 good, but it should be done appropriately. but, you know, there is starting to be -- this terminology starts coming into the lexicon. and i think you will see it that, you know, america -- you know, in america, you can choose. and in america, you have a right to be an american and tell people, "quit telling me to quit. i'm a smoker. i'm a great american smoker." and there is this concept that, you know, everyone's flooding away. and that '82 line dr. kyriakoudes showed you, the sales of cigarettes finally starting to decline in '82. there is a desperate attempt by the industry to intercede on things like dow chemical and nicorette gum marketing, to great american smoker's kit. they ramp up their -- anybody, the american cancer society trying to warn people. they ramp up this american message, that in america you have a right to choose. and, therefore, it is all on you. it is all on you, smoker. and the end of that sentence is, it is all on you. but it is done in this sort of draping -- kind of draping themselves in the flag a little bit. and i think if you look at the marketing and advertising, you will see that. now, the instructions will tell you about the burden of proof you need to meet. mr. walburg is going to come up in a second and talk about the first question on that form, which is whether he is addicted or not. okay? that we have to prove that he was addicted and that addiction caused the lung cancer to get anywhere in this case. that is the initial elements of 57 the case. the judge, i think, can show us the burden of proof issue. the question is by the greater weight of the evidence. that is what the judge has instructed you. and if you can pull this up, the judge tells you what greater weight of the evidence means. it is proof that, in fact, it is more likely true than not. we talked about that. proof that -- we just have to slightly tilt the scales. i think the court had mentioned that, you know, we do not have to prove beyond a reasonable doubt. but if we tip the scales and say that it is more likely true than not that he was addicted and that his addiction caused the disease, that is our burden of proof. and so make sure, when somebody says, "well, i have some doubt. you know, i do not know. there is some things we heard from dr. ticknor or dr. frazier or whoever you want to reference that they brought in here." it is okay to have doubt. you can have doubt. this is not a criminal case, a reasonable doubt issue. you can have doubt. the question is, taking all the evidence, what is more likely true than not? and the first question that mr. walburg is going to come up here and address is whether mr. starbuck was addicted. he is going to take 10 or 15 minutes. then i'm going to come back and walk you through the rest of the questions. but i want you to listen to mr. walburg for a few minutes on that issue, the first question you are going to deal with. mr. walburg: thank you, mr. byrd. your honor, we are going to have a powerpoint. so, roger, if you would not mind dimming the lights a little bit. okay. looks good. thank you all very much, ladies and gentlemen, for your patience in listening to this evidence. i know it is been a long couple weeks, and we appreciate your attention. so addiction is what i'm here to talk to you about. it is the first question that you are going to be asked on the verdict form. and i contend that the answer is easy. think back to what you have heard about mr. starbuck. 40 years of nicotine use, multiple quit attempts, he survived cancer twice and then went back to smoking again. it was not until he was put into a medically induced coma that he was finally able to wean himself off the nicotine and quit. this is an important question, so we are going to go through it carefully. first, we are going to look at the jury instruction from judge bennett. this is no. 6. it deals with addiction as part of the first elements. it says, "in order to assert his claims, mr. starbuck must first prove both of the following 59 initial elements by the greater weight of the evidence." and as mr. byrd just told you, "greater weight of the evidence" means more likely true than not. so, like he said, it is not like a criminal case, where it is the more strict standard. so no. 1 is what i'm dealing with. "mr. starbuck was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine on or before november 21, 1996." and that is a date that is just important for legal reasons. and i think here it will be easy, because we know that mr. starbuck smoked up until 1995. so then your first question on the verdict form, this is what the verdict form looks like, and it is a simple question. "addiction. has mr. starbuck proved by the greater weight of the evidence that he was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine on or before november 21, 1996, as explained in instruction no. 6?" this is the first question, and we ask that you check "yes" here. so in looking at addiction, it is helpful to determine what the definition of addiction is. and you heard from dr. cummings and dr. burns about the appropriate definition of addiction. and that is from the national institute on drug abuse. we will call it nida. that is a federal agency that put forth this definition. 60 it says, "addiction is defined as a chronic, relapsing brain disease" -- and "relapsing" means going back to the -- going back to the drug, back to smoking -- "that is characterized by compulsive drug-seeking and use, despite harmful consequences, consequences like cancer, pneumonia. it is considered a brain disease because drugs change the brain." we heard about that. the nicotine receptors. they change its structure and how it works. and here's a -- some diagrams of how nicotine gets from the cigarette to the brain. because, as i said, nicotine is a brain disease. as you heard from dr. cummings and dr. burns, once you puff on that cigarette, it only take 7 to 10 seconds to deliver the nicotine from the cigarette to your brain after it goes into your lungs and then up into your brain. and that is something that the company studied and perfected, the speed of delivery. and once it is in your brain, it changes permanently the nicotine receptors in your brain. so that is why nida refers to this nicotine addiction as a brain disease. we also looked at the key characteristics of addicted smokers. and some of the primary features are persistent daily use. and we have that with mr. starbuck because we know that he smokes every day for 40 years. time to first cigarette. that is when you start smoking each day. and for mr. starbuck, he started smoking first thing 61 in the morning. he had an ashtray right next to his bed. and then the amount smoked per day. mr. starbuck started out with a lower amount, went to a half a pack, then a pack, pack and a half, two packs. and then at the height of his smoking, he went all the way up to three packs a day. and that is a lot. other features are early age of initiation. and we will talk about that. difficulty refraining from smoking. that is frequent nicotine dosing. that is the eight doses per cigarette, the doses of nicotine that get to the brain. and failed quit attempts. and mr. starbuck told us about how he tried many times to quit and could not do it. some of those were of short duration, like it says right here. and then withdrawal symptoms and craving upon quitting. we heard about how mr. starbuck got irritable and his family did not want to be around him. that is withdrawal. and cravings. he craved that dose of nicotine. and then the final feature is use despite knowledge of harms or actual harms. well, here that is pretty obvious because he had cancer twice and he continued to smoke because the nicotine pulled him back in. moving on. mr. starbuck was clearly an addicted smoker. and we have -- we heard from dr. david burns, the pulmonologist who has worked with the surgeon general and been in public 62 health for decades. he said for mr. starbuck, yes, he was addicted to nicotine. then we heard from dr. michael cummings, the researcher and behavioral scientist who has studied the issue of addiction for decades. he says, "he was addicted, heavily addicted. i do not think there is any doubt, in my professional opinion, about that." and then from mr. starbuck himself, "i was an addict." he admits that. so in the key features we talked about early age of initiation. and some of the expert witnesses talked to you about that. it is important in this case because mr. starbuck was just a little teenaged boy when he started. so dr. david burns stated, "if nicotine is presented during adolescence, when the brain is developing and changing very rapidly, that brain is much more likely to become addicted, and that addiction is likely to be more powerful." that is dr. burns. dr. cummings, "age of initiation is important because the earlier the human brain gets exposed to nicotine, the more likely it is that the smoker is going to struggle as an adult to quit because the changes in the brain are more profound with earlier exposure." and we know from the testimony that mr. starbuck started very young. he did try a few cigarettes when he was even 63 younger. but for our purposes here -- you know, we have heard about how he took a cigarette from his aunt and so forth. but he really started smoking at age 13 to 14. and he became a regular smoker at age 14. and that is young. and he smoked all the way until age 55. so the evidence showed that mr. starbuck was addicted from age 15 to age 55. and that is the 40 years we are talking about. that is a long time. that is about how long i've been alive. and, again, going back in time, like mr. byrd referenced, here is a school picture when mr. starbuck was a teenager. here he is in the corner. and this -- this is mr. starbuck from that picture when he was around age 14 or 15, but probably more likely he was about 14 here. and by that time, this little boy was already a regular smoker. and his brain at that time was still developing and forming. and that early smoking had a permanent impact on his ability to quit as an adult. we next looked at the heaviness of smoking index. the first question there was, "how soon after you wake up do you smoke your first cigarette?" for mr. starbuck, it was within five minutes. that is a 3, the highest. because we know he smoked first thing in the morning when he got out of bed. he had an ashtray right next to his bed. then the next question, "how many cigarettes do you smoke?" that is how many per day. 64 and here he scored the highest number again, no. 3, 31 or more. 31 would be a pack and a half. and we know that he smoked at least a pack and a half, all the way up to three packs per day at some times. so when you add up the 3 from the first question and the 3 from the bottom question, he rates as a 6. and down here at the bottom, you see 5 to 6, high dependence. so mr. starbuck was at the top of the scale. mr. starbuck made many quit attempts. he tried to quit smoking. there are times that he did not want to smoke, but he kept doing it. here's some of the methods that he tried. the great american smokeout. you heard about that. that is the annual day when people try to quit for just one day. one day at a time. and you heard about how he stopped for short periods of time. we know that his wife and his stepdaughter urged him to quit. he tried to quit, and he could not do it. there is testimony where he told them that he just could not do it. he tried the nicorette gum. that did not work. he tried the nicotine patch. and he also tried eating candy and life savers, which sounds strange, but that is a common thing that we see smokers trying to do to try to replace -- you know, it is something in their mouth orally. also chewing gum, the same concept. in addition, he was hospitalized several times for the 65 two different cancers. and he stopped when he was in the hospital, but then his addiction brought him back to smoking even after the serious medical conditions. and when he did make these quit attempts, he suffered withdrawal. and here's a quote -- here's something that was said during the trial. he reported, when he refrained from smoking, feeling nervous, upset, aggressive, disagreeable, having strange bodily feelings, hand tremors, a little lightheadedness, and that when he went back to smoking again, he felt mild euphoria. those are all classic withdrawal symptoms. and that also explains the concept that the defense may raise about, "oh, he enjoyed smoking." well, he enjoyed smoking because he wanted to get rid of the withdrawal and get that euphoria that he could get when he went back to smoking. that is not really enjoying smoking. so the defendants did not bring any of their scientists or company representatives to talk about addiction. they did bring dr. ticknor. this is him from his website. and the dsm-5, very, very controversial. we know from dr. ticknor's cross-examination by mr. byrd, in his view, almost no one that he sees is addicted, which is totally -- goes totally against the statistics from the surgeon general. yet he prescribes dangerous drugs like chantix to his patients. ms. baker: objection, your honor. 403. 66 the court: overruled. mr. walburg: he prescribes these dangerous drugs to his patients, even when he does not think they are addicted. so that just does not make sense. then we went through the 11 factors on the dsm-5. and dr. ticknor gave mr. starbuck 5 out of 11 factors. but then when we went through the rest of the factors with him, he had to admit that several of those factors from the dsm do not even apply really to smoking. and, actually, the dsm-5 says only 2 out of 11 are required. but then dr. ticknor explained that still, even though mr. starbuck had 5 out of 11, he is still not addicted. so dsm, like i said, it is controversial. it is only used by psychiatrists. it is used for billing insurance companies. and nida that we talked about before is used by primary care doctors and pulmonologists who see smokers in their daily practices. they are the ones who see the smokers on the front lines. moreover, nida is a federal -- a united states federal agency. and they properly defined addiction like we said before, a chronic, relapsing brain disease that is characterized by compulsive drug-seeking behavior and use despite harmful consequences. that is mr. starbuck. and then we have the surgeon general. 1988, the surgeon general's report which focused on the subject of 67 nicotine addiction. it was a groundbreaking report. this is the time of the famous surgeon general, dr. c. everett koop, who you can see here. the conclusion of the 1988 surgeon general's report was as follows: "after carefully examining the available evidence, this report concludes that cigarettes and other forms of tobacco are addicting. nicotine is the drug in tobacco that causes addiction. the pharmacologic and behavioral processes that determine tobacco addiction are similar to those that determine addiction to drugs such as heroin and cocaine." in the meanwhile -- so this is what the surgeon general said in '88. but meanwhile, the cigarette companies were secretly studying nicotine addiction going back many years. and here's some of the quotes that i showed you before. 1962. "as a result of these various researches, we now possess a knowledge of the effects of nicotine far more extensive than exists in public scientific literature." 1966. "a cigarette that does not deliver nicotine cannot satisfy the habituated smoker and cannot lead to habituation and therefore would almost certainly fail. health claims alone without flavor of nicotine cannot sell cigarettes. most smokers would rather quit than switch." the bottom line is from 1974. that was from the study where the cigarette companies were looking at hyperkinetic children as possible future cigarette smokers. 68 and they were focusing in on those children as a subgroup. they said, "it would be good to show that smoking is an advantage to at least one subgroup of the population." and, you know, there is further evidence of them studying addiction. we talked about the -- we saw the document with the analogy of the rat pressing the lever. consider the smoking -- smoking is the lever press. the effect of the fact upon his person is the reward. they talk about the rat pushing the lever just like the smoker takes his dose of nicotine. they acknowledge that very few consumers are aware of the effects of nicotine, its addictive nature, and that nicotine is a poison. and there is evidence that they knew they were selling an addictive product. here's from a couple internal documents that we showed you before. "moreover, nicotine is addictive. we are then in the business of selling nicotine, an addictive drug effective in the release of stress mechanisms." and they went on. "the tobacco product is, in essence, a vehicle for delivery of nicotine, designed to deliver the nicotine in generally acceptable and attractive form." and they manipulated those nicotine levels to keep people hooked. there is evidence from that in the documents. here's one. "the physiological requirements of the smoker with respect to nicotine can be met by the application 69 of the optimum amount of nicotine to the extracted tobacco." we saw videos about how they genetically modify. in '63, they said, "i think we can say even now that we can regulate fairly precisely the nicotine and sugar levels to almost any desired level management might require. of this, i am confident." and they talked about how the cigarette is a system of nicotine delivery. so, in summary, when you look to answer the final question here, the primary -- the primary reason, or one of the primary reasons, either way, that mr. starbuck smoked was because he was addicted to nicotine. his addiction was obvious. he had over 40 years of nicotine use. he smoked first thing in the morning. he had numerous quit attempts. he had withdrawal symptoms. he smoked when he had pneumonia. and that is not to be confused with aspiration pneumonia. he beat cancer twice and still returned to smoking. he always needed that next dose of nicotine. and only a medically induced coma allowed mr. starbuck to free himself from his nicotine addiction. so zeroing in on the verdict form, we have showed that he started smoking on a regular basis in 1953, he had lung cancer surgery in '95. and he stopped smoking in 1995. so he clearly meets the requirement of being addicted on or before november 21, 1996. 70 and for these reasons, we submit that you should check "yes" to the first question. thank you very much. mr. byrd: i'm back. i'll try to be quick. we have a lot to go through on the verdict form. the second question you are going to be asked is whether addiction caused the lung cancer. and, jeff, you can pop that -- we do not really need -- you guys have the verdict form and instructions. so i do not want to keep popping stuff up on the screen and take time. but the second question is whether addiction caused the lung cancer. and you are going to get a definition of what legal cause is. and the defendants are going to talk to you a lot about legal cause as well. let us put up that one instruction. it goes on for two pages about, you know, "it must have directly in a natural, continuous sequence produced or contributed substantially to producing the injury." i do not think there is any doubt that addiction -- i think we showed from several witnesses. dr. amgott talked about it. dr. burns talked about it. even dr. frazier conceded as well that smoking, the repeated exposure to cigarette smoke, caused the lung cancer. it is not something that happens overnight by some lightning strike; it is 71 repeated -- dr. burns went through it and explained why it is repeated exposure to those cells over time. jeff, can you pull up -- the last part of this instruction talks about it does not have to be -- can you pull that up bigger. yes. it does not have to be the only cause of the lung cancer. something may have been a legal cause of the injury, even though it operated in combination with the act of another, some natural cause, or some other cause if it contributed substantially to producing the injury. okay? so i think the defendants are going to try to explain to you, "well, there is other reasons he did not" -- you know, he had his others reasons why -- it was not just addiction; it was also because he did not try enough, that he did not quit. and to the extent -- you know, there is no question in here that says, did he try to quit or how hard he tried to quit. the questions about whether he tried to quit, we submit, belong in the comparative fault instructions. i mean -- mr. geraghty: i object, your honor. the court: overruled. mr. byrd: if you think mr. starbuck did not try to quit hard enough or early enough or did not do all the things he should have done to try to help himself quit, you may very well think that. but we would submit that goes in the comparative fault. and i'll talk to you about that in a second, about where you put percentage of fault on different people. that is 72 it. but without a doubt, addiction was one of the reasons, was a legal cause. because every -- virtually every witness agreed that smoking, the repeated exposure to cigarette smoking -- every witness did agree that the repeated exposure to cigarette smoking caused the lung cancer. and, you know, you can believe there is some other reasons. well, i think it is also because he enjoyed it, or i think it is because he did not quit early enough, even though he did not quit early enough partly because of his addiction. you know, an analogy is like -- there can be -- you can put that down, jeff -- but there can be more than one cause. try to think of it like a baseball game. let us assume a pitcher has a no-hitter, you know, against another baseball team. so the other team does not score, does not do anything. and the team wins the game. okay? well, was the pitcher the substantial contributing cause? of course it was. he pitched a no-hitter. he was the cause of the win. but, you know, there is fielders who stopped the ball from -- you know, the base hits from happening, anybody getting on base. they also contributed to the injury, to the cause. and, do not forget, somebody on his team had to hit maybe a home run or circle the bases and score or they would 73 have never won. so they all worked together to be a legal cause of the injury, even though, sure, the pitcher was kind of like addiction. in my mind, the major cause of it, you know, biggest cause of it. but there is also other big causes that if you did not have it would not have happened. if somebody had not scored the run, they would not have won. so that is why we say, you know, each one of these, you are going to be asked. and i will not go back into that again. each one of these claims, you are going to have the strict liability, the negligence. but then you have the intentional tort, the fraud, fraudulent concealment, and the conspiracy claim. they can all operate together to be a legal cause of what happened. does not need to just be, you know, which one of those. all of them operate together, much like a baseball analogy, to cause the situation. and so we think there is no question that the addiction is what caused the lung cancer. because what causes repeated exposure to cigarette smoke? addiction. and so that question, we submit, is it more likely right than wrong? of course. because why do you keep smoking? and then there is a couple follow-up questions of which cigarette brands caused it. i will not go into that in detail, but i think we showed -- the only evidence in the case comes from dr. burns, dr. amgott, i believe as well, is that all the cigarettes contributed to the disease, each and every 74 one. so the early ones, the lucky strikes and camels and pall malls that he smoked early, they were the ones that initially got him hooked and addicted. they began the addiction. but they also started doing the cell damage one by one. each one of those cigarettes froze the cilia and damaged cells over time. and so it was philip morris brands as well as the r.j. reynolds brands, because they all worked together over 40 years to create this lung cancer. so when you get to those questions, i want you to mark "yes" to philip morris and r.j. reynolds causing the injury. now, they are going to get to a question about whether the defendants have showed that mr. starbuck's own conduct caused his injury. you certainly are well within your bounds to say that, you know, really, it was just the addiction; it was not mr. starbuck. i mean, remember, this is not like -- you know, this is -- of course he could have -- of course he could have quit early. we wish he had quit early. but, you know, addiction was constraining his so-called free choice that they want to talk about. so if you find -- they will talk to you about their burden of proof, whether they met their burden of proof to show that he also was a cause, in addition to their own cigarettes. 75 and if you find yes, then you are going to do a comparative fault percentage analysis. if you find no, then frankly it is all one hundred percent, we would submit equally divided between philip morris and r.j. reynolds. anytime you do anything here on percentage, we would submit it is equal between philip morris and r.j. reynolds for cause. sure, he smoked philip morris brands for a lot longer, but those early brands when you are a teenager are really also very, very important because they are what got you going, got you hooked. so let us look at the comparative fault question. if you get to the comparative fault, then you are going to assign it to everybody, not just the cigarette companies. let me submit to you just briefly some options here, suggestions of what i think is appropriate. when you weigh the conduct of the parties, just remember, you know, again, to weigh what mr. starbuck was doing you have to go back and start in 1953 when he is 14 years old. and remember, the first cigarette warnings did not even happen till '66. the first time the warning ever said that it caused lung cancer, ever, first time the warning ever said that was '85. so you are talking, like, 32 years out of his 42-year history, there was no warning on the pack that said it caused lung cancer. that is, like, three-quarters of his smoking history. 76 and just remember, when you are weighing the conduct of the parties, you will note the cigarette companies had all the knowledge and all the power. you know, you heard mr. walburg talk about all the things they were doing they were doing with addiction that they knew that they did not release. they did not tell people about filters not working. they did not tell people about manipulating ph levels. the did not say that they were doing brain waves studies and all this stuff. they did not do all that. versus, you know, mr. starbuck's knowledge when he was 14 years old. how low is that? now then, as he tries to get knowledge over time, sure the government and people are warning him, but the cigarette industry is doing everything they can through their conspiracy to try to keep his knowledge as little as possible. i would suggest that, look, you know, if you are going to put any blame on mr. starbuck, and i've known mr. starbuck for quite a while -- mr. geraghty: your honor, i would object to that comment. it is an inappropriate personal comment. the court: overruled. mr. byrd: i've known mr. starbuck for quite a while and, you know, it may be that we put some blame on a smoker, of course. but when we go back to -- when we look at that blame, i think we need to look at, you know, a 14-year-old. we need to think about what we do with 14-year-old kids when they see 77 everybody else in their neighborhood and community and their teachers and their doctors doing it, and they are going to vending machines and they are getting -- everybody's doing this thing to get kool, like pennies back, and they are seeing all these -- everywhere that the entire culture does it, they are seeing military -- wanting to go into the military and seeing glamorous visions of the people in the military, that this is what you do, this is how you get older, this is what you do. i do not think, i submit, that in -- that the eight people, and we are going to come out of our community and sit down together and make a decision. i think that needs to be taken into consideration about a 14-year-old and where that is. i would submit to you if you find him at fault at all, that you put the blame where it actually belongs, maybe 13, 14 percent. he was 13 or 14 years old when he started. and that you do not go any higher than 25 percent, because three-quarters of his time smoking, all the way up to 85, did not tell him anything other than -- mr. geraghty: i would object, that is preemption, your honor. barred by preemption. the court: overruled. mr. byrd: and do not forget he was trying to quit all that time too. is there any evidence -- look at the evidence in the record to see were the cigarette companies trying to quit what they were doing, or were they ramping it up? were 78 they increasing their money? look at 365:1. now, i've never figured out the percentage of that. but the evidence is that 365:1 was the advantage that the cigarette industry in their marketing and advertising had over the public health authorities what they could spend in one day. right? the cigarette industry spent in one day what the public health authorities had spent in a year trying to warn people. and remember the people that are trying to warn people, the american cancer society and all those people, what was the cigarette industry saying at the same time? when they did it, they said, "they are wrong. they are crazy." okay. they tell two different stories. they tell one story back when mr. starbuck was smoking and when people were not looking. and then they tell a different story when they are being held to account and people are looking. now, so we -- that is the percentage. you know, 14 percent i would suggest is appropriate, if anything, on mr. starbuck, somewhere between the 14 to twenty percent. and that is for your decision. you-all decide that. that is your type of decision. you need to get in there and weigh the evidence, look at everything, and that is what we want to hear from you of what you say. then you get to the intentional torts. okay? and i'm going to take the intentional torts together. there is a fraud claim and a conspiracy claim. basically the fraud 79 claim -- you will see the instructions -- the fraud claim talks about did mr. starbuck rely to his detriment on statements they made. okay? now, they will tell you what reliance means and what detriment means. but, of course, mr. starbuck, i think there is plenty of evidence on the record that mr. starbuck relied to his detriment. he relied to his detriment because he got a lung cancer. he kept smoking over and over. every time he opened this pack -- he went to filtered cigarettes hoping that it would keep the nicotine away. well, if it keeps the nicotine away from your lips, guess what you are saying too, that it keeps it out of your lungs. and so, of course, he relied to his detriment on their statements and frankly their concealments, what they did not say. none of their advertisements that you look at back in this time told him he should quit smoking. not once did the cigarette industry ever tell him he should quit smoking. then you are going to be asked -- you know, i think you saw the evidence that virtually every american -- you know, you could not avoid the advertising that was going on at that time. jeff, can you show the 2010 surgeon general report. the 2010 surgeon general report did an analysis from 1940 -- it is not exactly perfect -- it goes from 1940 to 2005, but that covers a good bit of time that mr. starbuck would have been alive or looking at advertisements and smoking. and what 80 they concluded was that the cigarettes -- right there in the middle, "cigarettes remain one of the most heavily marketed products in the united states with more than $250 billion expended between 1940 to 2005." mr. geraghty: objection as previously stated. the court: overruled. mr. byrd: $250 billion. now, one has to ask ourselves, would an industry really spend $250 billion if it did not work? if it was not working, were they just throwing money away? no, because they know advertising works. and we will not go into it because i do want to hurry up on my time. this exhibit, the 2010 surgeon general report, is going to be in evidence. portions of it you can read; not the whole thing, portions of it. it is exhibit 237. look at the chapter on nicotine addiction. the 2012 surgeon general report -- i do not have a hard copy of that -- it is exhibit 1302, 1-3-0-2. read that and see what it says about how marketing influences children to take up smoking. we did not show you that in trial but it is in evidence, and read it. and, you know, just to be clear, these surgeon general reports we have gone over and over, this side, mr. starbuck. okay? and on this side and out, we stand with the surgeon general of the united states. okay? we agree with the science and the science that has happened over the years in 81 the surgeon general reports, and the peer-reviewed, hyper peer-reviewed articles that come out of here and then the modern science that they represent. okay? all -- 1964 forward. where does the cigarette industry stand? the evidence you saw there was attack the surgeon general every time they come out. attack the surgeon general before they read the report to say it is wrong. and in 1988 when the surgeon general came out and said that they were addictive, that cigarettes are addictive, they came out with a press release that same day saying, "how dare you scare children. how dare you scare the youth in this country and scare them trying to claim that cigarettes are like heroin and cocaine. what a disservice to children." ask yourself -- this '82 line, ask yourself why in 1988 -- this is late, folks. this is not the '40s and '50s. 1988 the surgeon general called cigarettes addictive and said nicotine addiction is the reason people are smoking. why in their first statements out of their mouth are they worried about the impact on children? why? they could have just said, we disagree, we do not think it is addictive. read their press release. why did they insert children into that debate? and the reason is because they know that the only replacement smokers are youth and children. they know that. they know that ninety percent of regular daily smokers. okay? 82 they know, start when they are teenagers. ninety percent. so look at their conduct as well, both before and after '82. you are going to have the questions. and the same as with the conspiracy. the conspiracy questions are the same. did he rely on the conspiracy? of course he did. was it a legal cause? sure, it was a legal cause. it was like the fielding team. you know, you have the fielding team, the batters have to score the run, the pitchers did their job, they all worked together because, from 1953 when the conspiracy started at the plaza hotel through 1999, they agreed on a message and they executed it. they sent out truth squad members to go to television and say, "it is not true. it is not true. it has not been proven." now, remember, today the argument is from philip morris and r.j. reynolds, "well, mr. starbuck should have known." you know, there is reader's digest articles out there. he said things like coffin nails. and you hear this other evidence, "well, you know, he drank alcohol." ask yourself, there is no evidence in this record what -- why are they talking about a time in 1960s when he was in alaska serving our country and in college? you want to look at the credibility of witnesses, mr. starbuck is not up here giving you canned, prepared speeches. this guy puts the truth with the bark on it out there. he just comes right out and says, "this is it. 83 this is what i did. i lied to the doctors." he is telling you the truth. you have every reason to -- he could have fashioned some answers in a lot better ways, trust me. but he is telling you what is going on. so, yeah, he drank some in the 1960s. what does that have to do with anything? are we just going to try to put in your head out there, even though all the other medical records said he drinks 1 or 2 once a day. it is not an issue. dr. amgott, his treating doctor, said it is not an issue. there is no problem with that. it did not do anything. why is that trying to be inserted in a case like this? with no evidence to back up anything other than just conjecture. so the conspiracy -- you know, the question is on the conspiracy claim, of course they all contribute because they all work together to have the same message to attack the surgeon generals in the same way, to have their campaign of doubt. two, you heard evidence to get the american medical association. remember that? let us buy off the american medical association. that is what they did. now, i do not know what the argument is going to be. they did not bring any corporate representatives in here to explain their conduct -- mr. geraghty: your honor, i object. we have shown that. mr. byrd: -- during this time. 84 the court: overruled. mr. byrd: we did not hear from any witnesses from the cigarette industry that they brought you to explain this type of conduct over this time. but, you know, buying off the american medical association to make sure they are not standing with the surgeon general in 1964, mr. starbuck, age whatever he was in '64, was he buying off anybody? i mean, what is that? now, we brought you mr. jupe and mr. gentry because they were -- and you can take their credibility and what they had to say as well into account. but this concept of, you know, what mr. starbuck's life and what he did, do not forget, every time they talk about the choices mr. starbuck made to ask what choices were they making at the same time. now, did it happen before 1982 and after 1982? of course. here's the line of '82. okay? we showed you. the lies continued. they went to congress in 1994. end of story right there. in congress in 1994, held up their hand and said, "smoking's addictive -- smoking is not addictive. we do not believe cigarettes are addictive." in 1994. so what? so mr. starbuck should have known? you know, i'm an executive of philip morris and r.j. reynolds and i'm going to tell congress, lie to congress, say that i do not think cigarettes are addictive despite all this knowledge. but you know what? mr. starbuck should have known. it is on him? 85 so the answer to those questions, you will see, was it before or after, and we submit that you need to check both, that it is both before and after. okay? we need to show that they did it in both times, both before '82 and after '82. and of course they continued to lie. the conspiracy went all the way through at least 1999 here, or 2000 when they finally admit it is addictive and finally that it caused disease. it was not until 2000 when they admitted that cigarettes caused any disease whatsoever. after mr. starbuck is suffering from lung cancer. now, they were not -- you get to damages then, would be the next section. and damages, you are going to see some instructions and i'll talk about this in a minute. there is no question that the repeated exposure to the cigarette smoke and smoking causes the lung cancer. nobody is going to tell you otherwise up here. i do not think -- they are not going to dispute that either. cigarette smoking caused the lung cancer. and there is a question on damages, where this issue with dr. frazier and he and i went back and forth, and i did give him a hard time on not saying the heart stops, and he did say the heart stops, so i got that wrong. but we went back and forth on an issue that is going to only come up in damages, which is, do we also get damages for his ards and his pulmonary fibrosis that he continues to suffer from? 86 but, of course, he gets the damages for his lung cancer and surgery, which was horrible, and the fact that he has lost a lung that he will never get back. the fact that he has the back injury and issues of falling -- the fact that he has a back injury from when his rib cage was opened, of course he gets all those damages. so i'll address the ards issue in a minute, but i think -- that is -- there is no question that the lung cancer damages and the surgery, that he gets those. i think the question that the defense is going to try to raise, and the only reason dr. frazier was here, because he agreed with us on virtually everything else, was what caused, then, his ards. and all i'll tell you is -- and i will not lie on it for too long, but dr. amgott, the treating doctor. okay? only testified one other time, not even in a tobacco case. this is his first tobacco case he is ever testified. and he does not even treat mr. starbuck anymore. he came in here just because he had treated him during some relevant time periods with mr. starbuck. he came in here, no bias, no anything, and said, "i have no doubt in my mind that it was the lung cancer surgery that led to the large-volume aspiration." okay? i mean, it is in the records. he had this huge aspiration two or three days after the surgery, and that is what led to the ards, which is what led to the pulmonary fibrosis. there is no doubt in my mind. and i asked him questions like, "oh, what about the alcohol? what about the whatever?" 87 well, let us look at the instruction, jeff, on the damages section. you know where i'm talking about, jeff? it is page 25. 24, 25. got it. yeah, that -- but go on down. right here. i'm sorry. the next page. here's the deal. when you read the instructions, make sure you read these instructions closely. because the cigarette company -- does not really matter what dr. frazier says. okay? the cigarette company is -- if you find the defendant liable for damages on one or more of mr. starbuck's claims, the defendant is responsible for all of the elements of damages that its conduct legally caused. this is the important part. and make sure, you know, that this is looked at when you are making this determination. even if some of mr. starbuck's injuries were not foreseeable to that defendant or arose because he was unusually susceptible to being injured. so, okay, their argument is that he had neck cancer before. okay. too bad. he is unusually susceptible to this then. i guess that is their argument. but they are still on the hook for that. their argument is -- mr. geraghty: i object, your honor. inconsistent with your instructions. the court: overruled. mr. byrd: their argument is that, okay, he drank 88 some alcohol from time to time. or he -- i do not know, they raised -- any other things they are going to raise about what he had in the past. fine. that made him unusually susceptible to having aspirations, then they are responsible for it. and then the instruction goes on to talk about this same concept. "if you find that the defendant legally caused a bodily injury and that the injury resulted in aggravation of an existing disease or physical defect" -- okay, not having part of an epiglottis -- "of a latent disease or physical defect, then you should award any damages that are proved for the aggravation or activation as well as for the lung cancer surgery." so all the parties agree. dr. frazier agrees. you know, even if you do not take dr. amgott at his word and dr. burns and all the medical records that tied the ards issue and the aspiration to his lung cancer surgery, even if you do not believe that and you believe well, he was already at higher risk -- remember, i asked dr. frazier, "you mean he was more susceptible to it?" he said, "yeah, he is more susceptible to these aspirations." if he is more susceptible to it, then those two instructions mean they are still responsible. mr. geraghty: i object to the argument. that is not what the instructions say. the court: sustained. it is unusually susceptible. mr. byrd: if he is unusually susceptible, which all 89 those events, that is exactly what you can take from dr. frazier's testimony, then they are still responsible. so it is lot of hubbub about nothing, frankly. because whether the lung cancer surgery did it or whether he was just at a high risk, they are still responsible for all the damage. ms. baker: objection, your honor. mr. geraghty: same objection, your honor. inconsistent with your honor's instructions. the court: sustained. mr. byrd: when we look at the amount of damages, okay, is the next thing you are going to look at, you know, it is hard -- i said at the beginning of trial that we would be asking for a significant number and that i would suggest a number to you in closing, and it is not really an easy thing to do to put a number on harms like this, okay. i mean, if somebody had some sort of injury or car accident or whatever and like hurt their leg, and could not use their leg for a little while and they are out of commission for a little bit, but then they fully recovered and it was -- you know, they got back, needed maybe a little bit of rehabilitation but they got back fully, made a full one hundred percent recovery, and so it is a smaller injury and a shorter amount of time that you are impaired, then i would be in here asking for, you know, thousands, or tens of thousands of dollars, depending on all of that. 90 but if you start getting injuries that are more severe and deeper, lifelong, you know, and the harms last longer and your impairment lasts longer, then i've got to start asking for more dollars and more money. and, you know, let us say mr. starbuck took his -- had a big injury on his leg or car accident or something that took out a leg, you know, his leg was going to be, you know -- he was not going to get full use of his leg ever again, he had to go through lengthy, lengthy rehabilitation and he could just walk a little bit and hobble around, then maybe i'd be asking for -- mr. geraghty: improper argument again. the court: overruled. mr. byrd: -- then maybe i would be asking for hundreds of thousands of dollars. okay? but when you take the severity of what mr. starbuck went through, okay, damage over time, every cigarette reached the cilia, damaging the cells, one by one by one, over 40 years. mr. geraghty: that is not the claim in this case, your honor. i object to the damage -- the court: overruled. mr. byrd: when you take that kind of damage, over and over until it causes the ultimate damage here of lung cancer, and then you lose a part of your lung that you never 91 grow back, okay, you are not cured from lung cancer, any more than an amputee would be cured of whatever leg infection created -- left that. the lung is gone. it is not going to grow back. that is not cured. and then the fact that he has -- that he does not have part of his lung, regardless of what you think about the ards and all that stuff, dr. amgott told you it effects his ability to breathe forever. it will effect it forever until he dies. and you heard him talk about he cannot fall, it is a death sentence. he cannot catch stuff from other people, it could be a death sentence for him. he lives in that fear all the time. okay. then i have to start asking in the millions. because this is lifelong, fatal stuff. he is tied -- you know, the rest of his pulmonary diseases that we believe stems entirely from the lung cancer surgery has left him with an oxygen tank that he is tethered to 24 hours a day. that is the kind of harm that you have to ask for a significant amount of money. and in this case, i think -- you know, we have talked about puffs per cigarette and how many puffs he had. even if you take one and a half packs of cigarettes a day, okay, then it is somewhere between, you know, depending if you call it 10 puffs per cigarette, we are talking about around 4 million or so puffs of a cigarette over time. each one leading to slow damages to the cells that led to the cancer. if you take it at two packs 92 per day, we are up to, like, 6 million puffs of a cigarette. okay? so what i would submit to you is that there is this concept that you have of the pain and suffering that you can consider and the past harms that occurred in the past, and then in the future. and i would submit that everything he suffered up to today is somewhere around $5 million. that is just -- it might be a little bit more. you might find more than that. okay? you might find a little bit less. but that is your decision to make. you are supposed to do what is fair and just. and i would submit that that kind of number is the right amount. now, for future pain, for the future harms and loss of enjoyment of his life in the future, i would suggest i think that is another 5 million. he is going to suffer this till the day he dies. so i think it would be 5 million and 5 million. or maybe it is a little bit -- you know, in total, maybe it is a little bit more, maybe it is a little bit less. but that is the number that you decide and that you work together as a community to decide. now, the last question is going to be on whether punitive damages are warranted. and we submit that they are. okay? there is different -- i will not go through the instructions because it takes time to put everything up. but 93 please read the instructions carefully. there is the intentional conduct that you can consider, and then there is the reckless indifference. two different pathways to determine are punitive damages warranted. and in this case, we have to prove it by clear and convincing evidence. okay? and that is a higher standard. and we think that we have met that. there is no doubt that this conspiracy was formed in 1953 and continued on all the way through mr. starbuck's smoking history and his lung cancer. and what you are going to see at the beginning of the punitive damages instruction, though, is that punitive damages -- jeff, can you just -- let us do bring up that, the first two bullet points on page 28. punitive damages are justified -- those two bullets points, thanks -- for two reasons, really. i mean, this is the broad category of why punitive damages happen. as punishment for each defendant you find liable on the fraud, fraudulent concealment claims and conspiracy, and as a deterrent to others. to others. to other companies as a deterrent to -- not just cigarette companies, to other companies. a deterrent. it is a place where you say, "we need to deter and stop this behavior." now, when you look at what the cigarette industry did and whether it needs to be deterred, i've given you the evidence on 94 the years. and i think you should look at it. look -- i mean, they were surveying and studying kids way back when. and then they were targeting and marketing their products to kids. and read exhibit 1302 about how effective that was. and the reason they were doing it is because today -- what they had was, "today's teenager is tomorrow's regular customer." that is what they said when nobody was looking. when the files were sealed and it was all secret, that is what they said in 1981 when nobody was looking. "today's teenager is tomorrow's regular customer." i want you to also look at after '82 as well, before and after '82, what happens when those cigarette sales start to fall? what happens when the exit gates start to open. look at what they did when nicorette gum -- i mean, they are -- the philip morris and r.j. reynolds argument is, throughout all this time, it is mr. starbuck's choice. it is america. you have a free choice to do this. anybody can quit. all you have to do is just put them down. it is cold turkey. you know, you can quit. well, then, why were they so concerned about nicorette gum hitting the market if it was so easy? it is because they knew it was not. why did they go to dow chemical and strongarm them to say, "listen, if you are going to put this nicorette gum out, i'll tell you what. you are only going to give it out to sick people." 95 now, when you think about punitive damages and do we need to deter conduct, please consider this evidence. we will let you market nicorette gum, but only to people after it is too late, after they are sick. they were doing this in the early '80s. imagine what life would have been like if the marketing had gone to everybody. mr. geraghty: i'll object, your honor. it is improper argument. the court: overruled. mr. byrd: what if everyone had just stood up -- what if the manufacturer of a product in the early 1980s stood up and said, "you know what? it is right. it is addictive. it causes all this stuff." did not fight with the surgeon general's office, did not fight with any of them. stood up and said, "it is right. it causes this. nicorette gum needs to go everywhere if you want to quit. and, by the way, start taking the stuff now before you are sick." what would the difference have been? so we think that we have shown that punitive damages are warranted in this case. and i will get back and do any rebuttal that i need to in a few minutes. but, you know, as you look at whether -- mr. starbuck is proud to have submitted this case to you. and you eight were carefully selected by both sides after you answered the questions that said you could be bias-free and come in here and look at the evidence and see 96 what is more likely true than not, and that you can award damages if we prove our case. and, you know, we are not suggesting that the cigarette companies do not have a right to make a product, sell it, and advertise it. okay? they have every right to do that. they can, you know -- but when you look at some of this conduct, you know, starting a conspiracy in 1953, going to the american medical association. you know? mr. starbuck is 14 years old. okay? here's what he is facing. an industry that has no qualms about marketing to him and creating this culture through their advertisement, spending billions of dollars on advertising. as he grows up, he goes and serves in the military, in the air force. what are they doing? they are buying off the american medical association. they are starting a conspiracy. they are engaging in a campaign of doubt. okay? he gets older and older, 20s and 30s. what do they do? they start targeting the kids. they are redesigning the product to make it more addictive. how can we affect ph levels? how can we make this thing more addictive? how can we put additives in, vent holes. they are doing all this stuff. and you heard from mr. gentry; right? addiction does not cause -- you know, they have these word games. addition does not cause disease -- mr. geraghty: i would object to this. objection, 97 your honor. the court: overruled. mr. byrd: addiction does not cause disease. it is the smoke. it is all the carcinogens and the smoke. well, yeah. but they have known forever that they cannot take those out. so what do they do? they put filters on them. what kind of statement is that? i mean, i think i told you at the beginning of this case that you are probably going to get to see a lot and learn a lot that a lot of people did not know. and i'll tell you what. you know, the fact that filters are no safer for you is a new thing. mr. starbuck did not understand it. and when you put a white filter on the thing, and then you are telling everybody that we can take the bad stuff out if it is bad, that can work together to make a guy like mr. starbuck, and certainly people in this time period, maybe people now, to say, "this is -- this filter is better. if i'm going to smoke, i'm going to smoke filtered. it must be helping me. it must be a little bit safer. you know, it is recessed. it is even better." so they can do all this stuff. okay? and they can continue to do it. they get into the '80s. the can continue -- dow chemical. okay? companies have a right -- strongarm other companies that are trying to find a way to help people get to the exit gates, while mr. starbuck is starting to 98 have his first cancers. all this stuff, mr. starbuck faced. but all -- but what is great about this system, it is amazing, is that all that can happen, philip morris and r.j. reynolds can do all those things, but they still have to come here, and eight people get to say it is wrong. i'll wait for my rebuttal, your honor. mr. byrd: ladies and gentlemen of the jury, i'm going to pop around from a couple topics that i heard. so it will be a little bit -- will be even more disjointed than my original closing, but i'll try to be as together as i can. thank you, mr. spragens. you just heard -- and so i'm going to cross off -- i've taken notes as i've gone through. so that is why it will not be necessarily in some order, but in response to some things that i've heard. you just heard ms. baker say that the cigarette companies' position changed over a decade ago. she made that argument. she said the people are not around that did these things. but you heard from mr. jupe and gentry. they are still 177 around. what do they say about addiction? did they acknowledge a chain of causation? you know? we talked about the chain -- mr. jupe did not even want to acknowledge what a chain of causation was. so, sure, they now, as ms. baker said, now, today, well after mr. starbuck's cancer, okay, in 1999 or later, they acknowledged that smoking causes a disease and that cigarettes can be addictive. but what they do not admit is that it is the addiction that is causing the disease. why? because that is their business. if they ever -- if they ever end addiction, then the exit gates are open. you know, they talked about, well, but if you are addicted to, like, a patch, or the gum that is not a problem because there is no risk. but cigarettes do have risk. what if you are addicted to something that does have risk? they do not want addiction to be a problem because they know the only reason that people continue to smoke in their business, like the ninety percent of them or more -- dr. ticknor knows it too -- is because of addiction. that is why people keep smoking. most smokers want to quit. that is what they have said. most smokers want to quit. do you remember this document here as well? do you remember they -- this one right here. exhibit 94. that is the 178 one to read. that is a good one to read when you are back at the evidence room -- the evidence comes back to you. okay? "the lawyers remind us we cannot defend smoking as free choice if the smoker was addicted." they said that in 1980. they know what the problem is if they admit addiction. they know what the problem is. i mean, yeah, sure, in america -- you heard a lot about it. i thought you would. you cannot use the concept of freedom in america. of course we value freedom of choice and personal choice in america. nobody disputes that. of course we value that. that does not mean companies get to go off and do whatever they want. that is not american. there is nothing american about he has to have responsibility for his actions but they do not have to have responsibility for their actions. that is not the freedom that is america that they are talking about. and they can drape themselves in the flag all they want. but just because we have free choice in america does not mean they get to go, you know, "do not look at us. do not look at our actions. only look at mr. starbuck." i mean, did you hear some of the -- i wrote this down. okay. so florida banned cigarettes for a couple years because of the temperance movement. long time ago. for, like, two years. that is one of their defenses. so therefore, it is 179 not -- they get to do whatever they want after that because florida banned it for a couple years in the early 1900s. therefore, they had cart blanche to do all this. and it is all on mr. starbuck because he should have known florida banned it for two years. i mean, reader's digest -- a couple reader's digest articles came out. coffin nails are being talked about. let me ask you about that. did the cigarette company executives just not subscribe to reader's digest? did they go like -- so they get to go, like, mr. starbuck should have heard it all. but the executives sitting in their boardroom got to just cover up their eyes and their ears and not hear any of that? i mean, if it was so darned obvious to everybody out here in this time, why were they lying to congress in 1994? why? if all they had to do was open up a reader's digest article, then what were they doing over here, in '94, lying to congress? you know the arguments that they are making -- and i want to use one example. but the arguments they are making -- i want to you think about this -- could be used against any person, any smoker in any of these cases. they could use this same argument against everyone. okay? they try to say that this is unique to bill starbuck, but the arguments they are making -- ms. baker: objection, your honor. assumes facts not 180 in evidence. the court: overruled. mr. byrd: and i'll give an example. mr. geraghty said you should answer "no" to question no. 2 because any smoker can quit. we do not dispute that. they are trying to put questions on your verdict form that are not there. mr. geraghty: i would object to that comment. the court: overruled. mr. byrd: they are trying to put questions on your verdict form that are not there. no one disagrees that everyone can quit. but mr. geraghty's argument was since -- because any smoker can quit -- you heard it from burns and cummings -- then it cannot be the legal cause. guess what, folks? take that to the logical conclusion. that means no one ever could ever prove no. 2. any smoker in any setting at all. you heard ms. baker talk about there might be other cases. there might be another smoker, but that is not mr. starbuck. not under these arguments. these arguments could go -- the arguments they are making could go to anybody who smoked during this generation, during these generations, the world war ii era, from 1940s, 50s, starting to pick up cigarettes, and on. because what are you going to do? of course they are going to say he cannot point to an advertisement that he relied 181 on. and they are very creative. i mean, they spent a lengthy deposition, they told you, with mr. starbuck. they asked him, for hours and hours and hours, questions. and of course you can find some answers like, "oh, i did not rely" -- and, by the way, some of the stuff that was put up here on these things, this is what mr. starbuck said, it was what counsel said. and then mr. starbuck either said yes or no. okay? but what counsel says is not evidence. but this -- like -- for an example, he was not waiting on information from the tobacco companies to make a choice. think about that. i mean, that is a big -- he flashed it up on the screen. it is a big argument. think about that. he is just answering the truth honestly about back when he was smoking was he waiting for more information? and he is was being honest, saying, "no, i was not waiting for information from the tobacco companies." it is a clever question. does not really make much of a point. is anybody waiting on cell phone companies to tell us more before we use our cell phone? no. we are not sitting here waiting on it. but if there is information, by god, we want to know about it. let us know. but down the road, if you ask me, of course i'm going to be truthful and say, "no, at the time, i was not waiting on information. hell, i did not know it was out there." you know, there is a -- they point to this instruction 182 in the jury instructions, about -- you know, on the part that they have to prove, the affirmative defense on him, whether his actions were voluntary and deliberate. and i want to make this point for a second. okay. free choice, i will meet them on the field here of free choice in america. okay? i am happy to take it on with them and i'm happy to debate it. and if i need to take a few minutes with it, i'm sorry for extending your time. i am happy to take free choice on against the cigarette companies as long as they will take their choice and responsibility with it. and, you know, this is not like true voluntary actions. like, if you find out all the sudden red cars are more dangerous than blue cars. okay? and you find that information out. it is really easy to buy a blue car and stop buying the red car. that is true voluntary free choice. okay? i mean, no one questions that. that is a free choice in the marketplace. that is choosing. blue cars are safer; red cars are not. i'm going to go with blue. there is nothing restricting you or constraining you. but here, we have let -- philip morris and r.j. reynolds have created a culture in which they bring in dr. ticknor -- and free choice has become, like -- you know, i pay $115 an hour to dr. ticknor. who has to pay $115 an hour to go choose a blue car over a red car? i got to go see a psychiatrist. he is going to probably prescribe me chantix or 183 prescribe me these other things that are available now. oh, but they are still not addicted. they still have free choice. is that what free choice has come down to? it is like your greatest accomplishment you have ever had? i mean, yes, free choice is not the same as the hardest thing i've ever done. that is not free choice. that is constraint. that is not true voluntary choice, like we see in other products on the marketplace. this is constrained choice. okay. i heard this. so, now, mr. geraghty pointed to the '64 surgeon general report and all the warnings? so, now, philip morris and r.j. reynolds is going to hold up the surgeon general of the united states? really? is that what they did in 1964? is that what they did every other time the surgeon general came out with a report? no. they attacked them. they said they are wrong. they said they are dead wrong. mr. heimann, you heard him on the videotape. remember, he is the guy who says, "i know better than doctors about whether cigarettes cause disease. they do not cause disease." you know what else he talked about was advertisements. we would not spend money on if it did not work. i mean, they would have you -- who could actually go back and point to -- all of us are confronted with advertisements throughout from the culture. it is all over tv. it is all over media. do we really think that all this money is 184 being spent on super bowl advertising and all this stuff because it does not work? nevertheless, can you really point? i mean, mr. starbuck is not a -- can you really point to a specific advertisement that made you do it? probably not. i do not think a lot of people do that. but does that mean that it is not effective in getting people to do things as a whole? like mr. starbuck was just the one guy that it did not have an impact on? and let us go back to the comparative fault question. okay. the comparative fault question. oh, they read to you some statements -- you know, they said that they read the depositions the other day. you know, they had to bring -- read the depositions of the family members and we did not bring them. well, there is all sorts of reasons we did not bring family members. and you do not need to -- that is not something -- you do not have the evidence on reasons why we did not bring family members. it is something you do not need to consider. jurors -- so they read you portions of those transcripts. there were other portions too that were read yesterday at the end of the day. for example, "do you think that an ad influenced you to smoke parliament?" mr. starbuck had said, "yeah." "why do you think that?" "because it kept the nicotine away from your lips." 185 so in that instance -- there are other instances you can find in those hours and hours of depositions where he said, "yeah, i do think it influenced me. i bought them because i liked the look of those ads," and things like that. and then, sure, you can find their conclusory sort of statement later. eddie starbuck, you know. they talked to you about a portion of what they read. but the rest of what was read the other day, "did bill smoke while he was working?" "yes." "did he smoke during breaks, or was he able to actually smoke while doing the glass work?" her answer was, "both." they also read that testimony to you, not just the snippets that they are trying to get you to read and think about now. they also asked her before -- bill -- you know, they said he had not proved to his wife that he wanted to quit. well, here's some more testimony that was read to you that they did not mention in their closing. "before bill quit smoking for good, were there any other times bill chose to quit smoking for any period of time even for a day?" answer, "yes." from his wife. "he would try, but he would just have to go right back." "how many instances do you recall?" "quite a few." so there is more evidence in the record than you are hearing 186 right here. mr. geraghty -- i mean, mr. geraghty talked about the fact that he should -- i mean, he -- forget this 14 years old, mr. geraghty went all the way back to 10-year-old bill starbuck. so here's the deal now. so if you do not listen to your mom and your dad when you are 10 years old, then we get to do whatever we want. philip morris, r.j. reynolds, we can do whatever we want and it is all on you, 10-year-old. that is their argument. their argument was by 10, he knew. well, what do they mean by that? is that where we are? is that what we are going to do? when we get down to eight people left, we are just going to say, "he knew when he was 10. tough cookies." that is not the end of the analysis here. it is not. that is why i said look at the age when people made decisions. we do not just blame 10-year-olds in america. not when sophisticated corporations and companies are targeting them, marketing to them. they know that ninety percent of their business comes from them. they said he has a right to make a choice, you know, that they do not criticize him for the choices that he made. but they want you to put a hundred percent down. i call that 187 criticizing his choices. you know, a lot of people certainly have -- you know, his wife, his kids, mr. starbuck himself. a lot of people have the ability and should be running around saying he should have quit, he should have quit, he should have quit. but it strikes me as completely hypocritical for the one group of people that should not be telling him he should have quit. mr. geraghty: object to the comment, your honor. the court: overruled. mr. byrd: you know, the one group of people that should not be able to now tell mr. starbuck, you should have quit earlier, are the people that were saying "smoke, smoke, smoke, smoke," in every advertisement, $250 billion worth, 365 times to one of the warnings. that is what their advertisements did. so in the relevant time period, they were telling him to smoke. they were not telling him to quit or he should have quit. they never did that. today is the first time they did that with regards to mr. starbuck. let me ask you about this -- well, i think i've covered a good bit. the ards, the issue -- and you are going to get to answer that question. jeff, can you bring up the slide we have from medical records. okay. 188 let me just say this: we do not need to get in a heated debate about this dr. frazier issue of ards, because read the jury instructions. read the jury instructions and you decide what they say. but we -- the damages that flow from his lung cancer surgery and the complications are damages that we submit you should award. and if he was at a higher risk or unusually susceptible to any of these aspirations, and he was, okay, that is what the evidence was, then we also get the damages. read the instructions yourself. but they are trying to contradict -- dr. frazier is trying to contradict the medical doctors that were there at the time, that wrote this stuff at the time. "the patient has a history of pulmonary fibrosis secondary to ards after a lung cancer surgery a number of years ago." there is another reference, a separate one. "mr. starbuck, 65-year-old white man, who is very well-known to me from extremely complex hospitalization that he had following a right lower lobectomy for squamous cell carcinoma. he had prolonged postoperative respiratory insufficient and, really, on a number of occasions, we did not think he was going to make it at all. he has been left with fairly severe pulmonary disease to the extent that he uses oxygen almost" -- they tied it to his lung cancer surgery. the treating doctors there at the time did. what about this last 189 one? in the mid '90s, he had a squamous cell carcinoma removed from his right lung. this then precipitated an episode of ards. they are making the tie. dr. amgott says there is no doubt in his mind. dr. burns says there is no doubt in his mind. they brought you dr. frazier. that is all -- you know, dr. frazier, who wants you to believe that every time bacteria goes down your throat that that is technically an aspiration. and that is not. the records in the past talked about pneumonias. he certainly had pneumonias. those are caused by smoking, according to dr. frazier. they damage the epiglottis. the cigarette smoking damages your airways and the epiglottis. he had to acknowledge that. it is all linked. you know, they talked to you about dr. cummings and dr. burns about -- you know, and dr. kyriakoudes that, you know, they got paid for their time. so did the defense experts. by the way, dr. ticknor, who you have heard, their addiction expert, he agreed that the nida definition was totally valid for medical doctors to use. he all but endorsed the nida definition that medical doctors use. that endorses dr. burns' opinion. that endorses dr. cummings' opinion. but this idea that they get paid. yeah, because there is only a few people who have been able to go pile through all this stuff. dr. cummings is one of them. dr. burns is another. but is there any suggestion that just because they have had to do so many cases, so, therefore, they made money over time. is there any indication that these documents do not say 190 what they say? where is the representative from the cigarette companies to testify to question any of this? they are talking we did not bring family witnesses. where is philip morris and r.j. reynolds -- ms. baker: objection, your honor. the court: overruled. mr. byrd: -- saying that these documents say something different? where is philip morris and r.j. reynolds executives in here saying -- i mean, do you think, if dr. cummings has been paid to say something that is wrong or untrue, do not you think they would have had somebody waltz in here and show it to you? the -- when you look at the different conducts of the company, when you weigh the comparative fault of each party here, you remember they said one thing you have to do when you try to quit is you got to pick a date to quit; right? that is one thing you should do, you should pick a date and quit. oh, yeah, like maybe -- i do not know -- the great american smokeout. that is a date. so when you are comparing fault -- and, by the way, a 191 lot of this stuff they asked you to look at, these questions that i submit to you are not on the verdict form, if they are anywhere, i think they are in the comparative fault section. it you want to blame -- they are not questioning whether he was addicted or whether addiction caused disease. if you want to blame mr. starbuck, fine. do it. put the blame at the level you think. i think it is low; they think it is high. but that is where a lot of those questions and their argument is about. you know, should have quit, did not quit, should have quit harder. that goes in the comparative fault section. but what were they doing at the same time? so mr. starbuck is trying to do the great american smokeout, picking a date to quit, as they say you should do. what do they do? exhibit 1501. they send out to all the customers, "do not nag me. i'm a great american smoker." this is in the mid 1980s. this is what -- this is -- when you pick a date to quit, this is what they do with that date. they target it too, and tell you, "do not stop smoking. and here's how to tell people, like your wife that is trying to warn you to quit, here's how you respond: do not nag me." that was their conduct. that is the conduct you have to consider too at the same time. now, real quick. just about three more things. the 192 fraudulent concealment findings, the engle findings for the intentional tort. if you find that mr. starbuck is a member of the engle class, okay, there are certain findings that apply that are binding. okay? now, despite what mr. geraghty says, they do inform the decisions that you are going to have to make because you cannot question them, you have to accept them as if you found them yourself. and the judge has instructed you on that. and if you find that he is member of the class, then it has been decided, okay, that cigarettes are addictive or dependence-producing, that smoking cigarettes causes lung cancer, okay, and that r.j. reynolds and philip morris usa, and the other coconspirators, did the following. this has already been determined. you must accept it as true if you answer "yes" on the first two questions. "that philip morris and r.j. reynolds concealed or omitted material information not otherwise known or available about the health effects and/or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes or failed to disclose a material fact concerning the proven health effects or addictive nature of smoking, or both" -- or they did both -- "knowing that the incomplete disclosure was false and misleading." that has been determined and found. and it cannot be questioned. and that they conspired. they entered into an 193 agreement to conceal or omit information regarding the health effects and/or the addictive nature of smoking cigarettes. with the intention -- this has been found already, if we are an engle class member -- that smokers and members of the public relied to their detriment. so of course these findings apply. you have to apply them. you are going to be told by the judge to apply them. take that down, jeff. two more things. the truck analogy. mr. geraghty talked about how, you know, we do not know who is wrong. if somebody gets hit by a truck in the middle of the road, we need to know more information about whether that is the legal cause or not. and his analogy was, you know, if you are walking into the street, we need to know, were you on your phone, maybe you were texting, you did not pay attention. we need to look at all that. but you also need to look at the information that the driver had or what the driver was doing. you know it becomes a little bit of a different analogy when you see that the cigarette industry understood that ninety percent of their smokers are coming from teenagers. they are making it look glamorous and popular. they are denying any health risks during this whole time period at all, from 1950 -- in the early 1950s to 1999. and then they are marketing and targeting the youth to take up smoking. it is a little bit more like a truck driver sitting there seeing somebody about to step into the road and deciding 194 whether you are going to push the gas or not -- mr. geraghty: objection, your honor. mr. byrd: -- looking at them and going, "come on" -- the court: overruled. mr. byrd: -- "cross the road. you will be safe. it will be safe over here." on the -- the last thing, on punitive damages. i told you that -- at the very beginning of this case, i mentioned that there is an american tragedy. i'm trying to draw the line. no lung cancer. no consumption of cigarettes. and how they followed and tracked each other. you know, i cannot -- all these documents are going to be back in the jury room for you to review and see. but, you know, by 19 -- and i believe there will be -- the videos -- and any of the videos you want to see, that can be accommodated as well. but in 1983, there is a document, exhibit 210. it is after '82. and you have to understand, when you add all this stuff up, how they have already figured out how to set the optimum levels of nicotine in cigarettes, set it at just the right amount, not too high, not too low to sustain addiction, manipulate people. they have done all the -- by the time they get to 1983, and you read this exhibit 210 document, they are at 195 a research conference. and all their scientists are together. and they are, like, lauding how they have perfected the design of the cigarette. and they are basically high-fiving by 1983. they are getting, like, poetic about it. they start quoting authors, shakespearean era type of authors. they are excited about how far they have come to engineer this product. and what they say is, you know, the only problem we are going to ever have is getting a big enough bag to carry all the money to the bank. that is what they are doing in '83. that is how proud they are of how far they have gotten in 1983. meanwhile, at the same time, you heard -- you saw these lines. we drew the lines. the evidence is in. and they know it. mr. gentry and mr. jupe testified to it too. over 400,000 -- cigarettes kill over 400,000 people each year. 20 million premature deaths. those are real people. and, you know, during this whole time, they read you some quotes that mr. starbuck said during his smoking time. i want to read a couple back to you. mr. starbuck's quotes that they read to you, i want to read them back to you and see if they apply to the cigarette companies during this time, too. "mind your own business. leave me alone. i do not want to hear it." i think some of those statements are, in effect, a lot of the same of what the cigarette industry was telling the public, health community, during that same time. "mind your 196 own business." they certainly minded their business. "leave me alone. do not interfere with what i'm doing." that line goes on and on and on. and people that smoke -- you know, the 480,000 number, i think you see, most of those people, or ninety percent, according to the numbers, would have started when they were teenagers. when you look at this case, this case, it is true, is it about one person. and one of those -- do we have the picture? one of those kids that started smoking in early 1950s was this guy: bill starbuck. that is 14. it may look incredible, but that is what it was in the 1950s. that is 14 years old. do we need to deter others -- other companies from doing this type of conduct that they did from 1953 through mr. starbuck's lung cancer? yes. you bet. that needs to be stopped. and we appreciate your time. and there is this talk too about, you know, just check a box, and you go home. just check no. 2 and you can go home. if you award any punitive damages, you know, we got to come back. if we come back for punitive damages, it is, like, less than half a day testimony. and you know how to multiple that by lawyers. it is like less than half a day. you are a better jury than that, than to check a box and go home. mr. geraghty: object to the argument. the court: overruled. mr. byrd: take the time you need to read the 197 evidence. read all the jury instructions. each decision you make, apply each jury instruction. you are a better jury than just checking a box to go home. nobody else is ever going to do this. we are sorry. nobody wants you here. i know they commented on the days and days of testimony the plaintiff put you through. you have to hear it. nobody else is going to hear it. you are it. thank you, your honor.