mr. scarola: ladies and gentlemen, i want to begin by making absolutely certain that when i do run out of time at the conclusion of this case, and i will run out of time at the conclusion of this case before i have said everything that i want to say, that i have not taken the time to say thank you. you folks have made an extraordinary sacrifice. you have been with us with amazing patience. you have given us your undivided attention throughout this very difficult ordeal. and on behalf of joseph surico, on behalf of darryl and laurie, and i am sure in this regard i speak on behalf of every lawyer in the courtroom, we are extremely indebted to you for your sacrifice and we thank you. if we think back three weeks, you will remember that we went through a pretty difficult jury selection process. it was long, it was tedious, and it was a selection process that demonstrated that there were a lot of 5684 people that had very strong feelings about -- mr. stern: objection. the voir dire is not evidence in the case. the court: very strong feelings about cases like this. you remember that a lot of people were asked to stand up if they thought that they could not be fair and impartial -- mr. stern: same objection. the court: -- and were unable to follow the court's instructions to base their verdict solely and exclusively upon the evidence elicited during the course of this trial and the court's instructions on the law. those people were excused. you remained. and you remained because you made a commitment and swore to keep that commitment. a commitment to base your verdict on the evidence in this case, to use your good, sound, common sense, and most significantly, at this stage of the trial, you made a commitment to follow the law. and you have already heard some 5685 indications about some things that are going to be difficult for you to do in following the law. and i want to call your attention during the course of these instructions to some of those things that will, we acknowledge, be difficult, but which you are obliged to do what you have sworn an oath to do, and which if not done will frustrate this entire process and produce an unjust result instead of the justice that we are here to seek through this lengthy proceeding. what do i mean? you folks had an opportunity to ask questions during the course of the trial, and you asked some excellent questions, some reasonable questions. and many of those questions focused on the concern about what joe surico did to stop his wife from smoking. there were a lot of questions about that. how much support did you give? why did not you give support? what did you do and what did not you do? and as a lay person, it is understandable that those would be concerns. how much responsibility does joe bear for the ultimate death of his wife because phyllis surico 5686 continued to smoke? but what is the law going to tell you about that? somewhere i have the law. mr. lewis: over there, mr. scarola, on the machine. mr. scarola: thank you very much. mr. lewis: yes, sir. technician: you want me to turn it on? mr. scarola: if you would, please. thank you very much, robert. you heard this instruction in the middle of trial, in the middle of trial you were given an instruction, and i suggest to you the reason was because there was a perception that you had begun to think in a direction that the law says you ought not to think about, that the law says is not relevant to the performance of your tasks. and this is what the court told you: "evidence has been admitted regarding whether phyllis surico's family members attempted to intervene in her smoking behavior. however, a family member has no legal duty to take action to stop another person from smoking. therefore, the evidence may not be considered 5687 to conclude that any member of phyllis surico's family is legally at fault." and when you get your verdict form, the responsibility that you will have as jurors, and we are going to go through the verdict form, the responsibility that you will have will be to apportion fault, not between phyllis surico and joe surico, not between phyllis surico and her daughters, not between phyllis surico and her mother and father or siblings, but to apportion fault between only two identified persons or entities, between phyllis surico and philip morris usa incorporated. and when you apportion that fault, the numbers have to add up to a hundred percent. so what i am suggesting to you is while the thought process that you were going through was reasonable, it was not an irrational concern for any of you to have about what those surrounding circumstances were. as a matter of law, all of those concerns are improper concerns. mr. stern: objection, your honor. the court: and when you get back into 5688 the jury room, if somebody starts saying, well, joe surico never did anything to stop his wife from smoking, your responsibility as jurors in this case are to say, now, wait a second, stop. let us go to page number 18 of the jury instructions, and this is the law we are sworn to follow. that is an improper consideration. that is not something we should be talking about. that is not part of the job we swore an oath to do. mr. stern: objection, your honor. the court: because we swore an oath to follow the law. now, that is one example, but let me give you another. "during the trial" -- and i'm down at the bottom -- "you have heard evidence regarding joseph surico's remarriage. the court instructs you that this evidence may not be considered by you in mitigation of damages for loss of mrs. surico's companionship and protection and for his" -- meaning joseph surico's -- "mental pain and suffering." mitigation means reduction of the damage, repair of the damage. 5689 the law recognizes that one spouse can no more replace another spouse than if you lose a child, having another child replaces that child. they may be twins, they may be identical twins, but the fact that you still have something like what you had before the law says may not be considered as reducing the loss that you have suffered. that is a tough instruction to follow. the thought is, he is moved on with his life, he is got another wife. he is got a wife who he says is in many respects like the wife he had, and how fortunate for joe surico that he has found that source of solace. but the law says it is no replacement for phyllis surico. and if you get back in the jury room and you are talking about damages and what a fair and reasonable amount of damages are for the loss that joe surico has sustained, for the pain and suffering of the loss of his soulmate, which mr. lewis is going to be talking about in a little while, if somebody starts talking about that, you say, now, wait a minute, let us go to page 20, and let us see what the court says about that. let us take a look at the oath 5690 that we swore to follow as jurors in applying the law. that is not something that we can consider. that is not something that we can consider. so while it may seem natural to take it into consideration, it is not lawful to take it into consideration. following these instructions is not an easy task, but you were chosen because you were willing to swear an oath to say that you would take on that responsibility when others stood up and said, no, i'm not going to do that. and the only way that justice can be done in this courtroom is by doing what the court is going to tell you repeatedly you must do. "you may use reason and common sense to reach conclusions, you may draw reasonable inferences from the evidence, but you should not guess about things that were not covered here, and you must always apply the law as i have explained it to you." that is one of the first instructions you are going to hear, and it is also one of the last instructions you are going to hear. after the court has finished telling you 5691 what the law is, what her honor is going to say is "that is the law you must follow in deciding this case." you will all have your own copies of it. you can refer back it as much as you need to to make sure that you are fulfilling your oaths as jurors. and i've done something that i hope might be helpful for you. and i certainly recognize the fact that just listening to me is an added burden for you, and i do not want -- i do not want to waste your time. and i have tried to structure the comments that i am going to make to you in a way that will help to make your job easier and make up for the time that i'm taking from your getting to do your job. so one of the things i did was i have written down the specific jury instructions that relate to each of the seven questions that you will be called upon to answer in the verdict form. and my suggestion to you is that it may be helpful for you to make a notation of this, because you do not get to take my notes back into the jury room with you, wish you 5692 could, but you are not going to get to do that. and so what this is, is a summary of the instructions that are applicable when you get to each of the questions on the verdict form. i will tell you that there are preliminary instructions that relate to all -- mr. stern: objection, your honor. mr. scarola: -- of the questions on the verdict form. and you need to -- mr. stern: excuse me, your honor. the court will instruct which instructions are applicable. the court: you need to take into consideration all of the instructions. and one of the first things you may want to do when you get back there, because the court's instructions on the law are going to be separated by a lot of lawyer talk from your performance of your duties, so it might make sense that the first thing you do together as a group is you go through the legal instructions. make sure you understand the task that you are going to be called upon to perform. then you are going to have the verdict 5693 form in this case. this is the verdict form. and it asks questions and gives you directions as to what you need to do after you have addressed each question. it is important that you take these questions in order, because under some circumstances, the answer to your question will tell you whether you need to answer the next question or not. and those instructions are all included on the verdict form. so you have gone through the jury instructions. you have the verdict form in front of you. my suggestion is then before you answer question number one, go to pages six, eight and nine. those are the instructions that relate specifically to question number one. so now you have narrowed your focus, you are looking at what does the law tell us we need to know in order to answer the first question. you will note that i have put pages two and 23 for every one of these questions, because those are the instructions that say, you must follow the law. okay. so they are clearly extremely important instructions with regard to every question that is asked. 5694 when you go to question two, it is pages four, eight, nine and 12 that relate directly to answering that question, and so on down the line. those are the numbers of the pages that relate to the questions, and i think it will make your job easier if you take it in pieces like that, after you have looked at the whole, and made sure that you reorient yourself as to specific instructions that need to be followed in order to properly answer those questions. so, that is an overview of the law. i also did something that i hope will be of some assistance to you in your review of the evidence. because the task is to apply the law to the facts as you find them. and what i have done in that regard is i have broken down some of the more important exhibits that relate to various questions on the verdict form. and what appears there is a very brief summary of the highlights of those documents. we are going to get to some of them, we are sure not going to get to all of them. if you are not frightened enough already, about how long i might talk, these are the powerpoint slides that i have the unrealistic 5695 aspiration of being able to get to. we are not going to get there. no way. and it would probably also be of some relief to you to know that there are time limits that are set on how long we can speak to you. the total limitation involved is two hours per side. as her honor told you a long time ago, because the plaintiff has the burden of proof, we go first, and we have the opportunity to go last as well. we have divided up our time, i'm going to try to speak to you for about 45 minutes. mr. lewis is then going to speak to you for about 15 minutes. i'm probably going to run over on that front end. we want to save about an hour to respond to whatever the defense arguments may be. we will wind up spending less time than that, i suspect. but so you know what is coming. that is what, unfortunately, we are in store for for the balance of the afternoon. so what i have done here is i've given you some exhibit numbers. and again, these are broken down as they relate to particular questions on the verdict form. the first 5696 question is the question of addiction, and these are the some documents that i suggest you might want to look at with regard to addiction. pt02061 -- and you probably only need to take down those last four digits. 2044, 4791, 1809, 02203, 2184, and 1820. the next question on the verdict form relates to disease causation. and the documents that i suggest to you may be most significant for review with regard to disease causation are 3608, 3289, 2378, 3709, and 3615. the next category has to do with really two questions that are closely related. there is a claim for fraud and a claim for conspiracy to commit fraud. the legal instructions will distinguish between those two things, but they are closely related issues, and so i have combined them here. documents 1608, 1933, 2027, 2130, 1941, 719, 2050, and 2268. this case presents itself to you in an unusual procedural posture. and it was a matter that also understandably was of concern to you as jurors. how does it happen that phyllis surico dies in 1993, and we are here in this courtroom in 2014 trying a lawsuit 5697 relating to a death that occurred more than 20 years ago? well, the jury instructions answer that question. they tell you about a lawsuit that began in 1994, and continued through i think 2006 or 2007, the engle case, e-n-g-l-e. and the engle case was brought, the instructions tell you, as a class action. it was bought on behalf of a defined group of florida residents, including phyllis surico, we contend, that is, phyllis was a member of the engle class. she is a member of the engle class if we establish two basic things -- three. we need to prove that she was a resident of florida at the time, but that is a stipulated fact so that is not an issue that you need to be concerned about. but we need to demonstrate that she was addicted to nicotine in cigarettes, and that her addiction was a substantial contributing cause, a legal cause, a legal cause of her cancer and her death. if that is established, that phyllis surico was a member of the engle class, then all of these jury findings resulting from that proceeding that began in 1996, and lasted through 2004, 5698 all of the findings by a prior jury in that case, become binding upon you and must be accepted. so, as difficult as your task is, a large portion of what otherwise would have been your responsibility has been carried out by another group of florida citizens who also did not stand up when they were asked -- mr. stern: objection, your honor. that is not in evidence at all. the court: i'll sustain. mr. scarola: i'm sorry, your honor. the court: sustained. mr. scarola: another group of florida residents -- mr. stern: objection, your honor. sustained. mr. scarola: -- who also were willing to take on -- the court: -- who also were willing -- mr. stern: i disagree with -- the court: i overruled; did you not hear me? mr. stern: i thought you said sustained, 5699 your honor? the court: i sustained on the first, i overruled on the second. he rephrased it. mr. scarola: who also were willing to raise their hands and swear to fulfill the responsibilities to apply the law in that case to the facts as they found them to exist. and these are the results of their hard labor. we will talk about the significance of that in just a moment. but let us focus some attention, briefly, if we could, on some of the evidence in this case. and i want to begin with some evidence the defense presented. it was a video clip of a very highly respected newsman by the name of harry reasoner. and it followed the publication of the surgeon general's report that clearly and unequivocally recognized the link between smoking and cancer. and mr. reasoner, at the end of his newscast on that particular night, looked into the camera and spoke about his own personal journey with cigarettes. he told his audience that night: "it is like being told that an old friend has betrayed you. and in that circumstance, you 5700 give that old friend every chance. you search for reasons to disbelieve, to disbelieve that you have been betrayed." i do not know if any of you happen to be simon and garfunkel fans, but i'm a simon and garfunkel fan and there is a song that simon and garfunkel sing that is called "the boxer," written by paul simon. and it is the story of a young man who is attracted to the glamor of new york city, and he is heard a lot of terrible things about new york city, but he is heard a lot of really good things as well. and the verse in that song is: "all lies and jest, until the man hears what he wants to hear, and disregards the rest. lie-la-lie, lie-la-lie, lie-la-lie. all lies and jest until the man hears what he wants to hear and he disregards the rest." and mr. reasoner was talking about the same thing. i do not want to believe that these are bad for me. i do not want to believe that i'm addicted to cigarettes. i want to believe everything that they have been telling me about there being no link. mr. stern: objection, your honor, that is 5701 not what mr. reasoner said. the court: i want to believe everything that the cigarette industry has been telling me about there being no proof. and i want to give my cigarette every chance i can, and then even more before i will believe that i have been betrayed and i have to give them up. and harry reasoner, we know, died of lung cancer. mr. stern: objection, your honor, there is absolutely no evidence of that. the court: sustained. i do not believe there is any evidence. mr. scarola: your honor, there -- respectfully, there was. the court: okay. i will allow it, then. mr. scarola: thank you. phyllis surico was a victim of the same natural, reasonable desire not to hear what you do not want to hear, cognitive dissonance. we heard about that, two ideas existing in your mind and you have got to get rid of the conflict and so you throw away any information that conflicts with what you want to believe, a psychological crutch, a psychological crutch. 5702 and the cigarette companies knew exactly, exactly how smokers would react if they were successful in creating a false controversy. the longer we can keep the controversy alive, the more we will enable smokers to justify their continued use of the substance to which they are addicted because they do not want to have to give it up. they do not want to go through, whether it is psychological pain, whether it is physiological pain, they do not want to go through the painful process of withdrawal if there is not any reason to. and as long as there is no scientific proof that links smoking and cancer. and as long as there is a controversy. as long as they are promising me in this statement that gets repeated over and over again, that if there is ever anything found that is dangerous in cigarettes, we will take it out. we will go out of business before we continue to sell a product that kills people. over and over again. that is the promise they made. and while there may be some concern in your minds about some matters about which you have heard during the course of this trial, there are some things 5703 that i suggest to you absolutely no reasonable person can doubt. before you even get to these findings, which you are obliged to accept, there can be no reasonable doubt in the minds -- mr. stern: objection, your honor, that is an incomplete statement of law. the court: overruled. this is argument, sir. mr. scarola: there can be no doubt in the mind of any reasonable person today that nicotine in cigarettes is highly addictive. that cigarettes, after hearing the evidence that you have heard, unrebutted in this courtroom, absolutely unrebutted, that cigarettes are intentionally designed to maximize their addictive properties. they are designed so that the nicotine is free-based. they are designed by taking out the nicotine and putting it back in at levels that are intended to be sure that smokers remain addicted. there can be no doubt because the evidence is absolutely unrebutted, no doubt that today's cigarettes, with their filters and their low tar and nicotine claims, and their 5704 light claims -- mr. stern: objection, your honor. objection with respect to low tar. the court: well, skip the low tar. mr. scarola: there can be no doubt that the claims about filtered cigarettes being a safer alternative are a lie. they are absolutely unquestionably false. they are not only not safer, they are more dangerous. you have to seen the scientific statistics that prove that adenocarcinoma -- adenocarcinoma is on the dramatic increase as a consequence of filtered cigarettes gaining prevalence in the market. if it is ever proven that our product is dangerous, we will take out whatever is dangerous, as soon as it is identified, or we will go out of business. you saw the philip morris internal documents. 300-some-odd congressmen on their side -- i think that was the number, do not hold me to that, the document is there -- a majority of the u.s. congress supporting tobacco, a majority of the senate supporting tobacco. it is legal to manufacture, to sell and to 5705 advertise cigarettes, now with some restrictions on the advertising part. congress has not acted to ban this substance. it is legal to manufacture, to sell and to advertise cigarettes. it is not and never has been legal to place cigarettes on the market that were defective and unreasonably dangerous. it is not and it never has been legal to place a product on the market that is negligently designed. and so, if the defense gets up here and they suggest to you, it is legal for us to do what we are doing, it is not legal to kill almost half a million people every year. to know that you are killing them through your defective product and to continue to do it. and nobody else has acted, but you have the opportunity in this case -- mr. stern: objection, your honor. the court: -- to hold philip morris responsible for the damage that it has knowingly and intentionally been doing for over half a century, and continues to do today. that is an awesome power and an awesome 5706 responsibility. and we have taken a tremendous amount of time to provide you with as much help as we possibly could to assist you in fulfilling that responsibility. who did we bring to you? we brought dr. michael cummings. we pay dr. cummings a significant amount of money to share his unique knowledge with you. there is no one, not only in this country but in this world who is better qualified to speak to those issues than dr. cummings spoke to. and that unique qualification has been recognized not only by us, but has been recognized by the federal government, by state attorney generals, over and over again because there is no one better. dr. burns. dr. david burns, harvard-educated pulmonologist. involved in the writing, a senior editor of virtually every surgeon general's report over the course of the last 30 years. there is -- there is no one better qualified in the world to address those issues about which dr. burns spoke than dr. david burns. and joseph surico and phyllis surico deserve nothing less than the best in this, 5707 their one day in court. and we brought you the best we could find. and we presented them to you methodically, probably in the perception of some of you, painstakingly methodically. but we wanted to be absolutely certain that you understood the significance of the documents that dr. cummings was presenting. and the significance of the medical evidence and the surgeon general's findings. and now they are all laid out before you, like the pieces of a jigsaw puzzle, there for you to piece together, to show you the picture that i suggest compels a verdict in favor of joseph surico as a consequence of the needless loss of his soulmate, of the love of his life that he has sustained. what if the defendants had told phyllis surico, and everyone with influence over phyllis surico, everyone in a position to try to help her with her addiction? what if they had told the truth in 1953, '54, '55, throughout the '50s and the '60s and the '70s and the '80s and the '90s? what if long before they were forced to put a surgeon general's cautionary statement on cigarettes, that 5708 cigarettes may be hazardous to your health? what if philip morris said, you know, we really do have a corporate responsibility. we really do have an obligation to tell the truth. we know what the truth is, our own internal documents demonstrate that nicotine is addictive. our own research demonstrates, confirms what all the other scientists are saying. we acknowledge it in our papers internally. cigarette smoking causes cancer. what if they did what the frank statement pledged that they would do and began cooperating with public health officials to get the message out? what would have happened? well, we know what would have happened. we know what would have happened because we know what did happen when the message began to get out. we saw the significant drop in cigarette sales. we saw cigarettes stock prices begin to fall through the floor. and then we saw a telegram that gets sent out saying, we have got a really big problem on our hands, and we are going to interrupt our christmas vacation, we these big executives of all of these cigarette companies, we are going 5709 to go to the plaza hotel in new york and we are going to do something about this because we are in big trouble. and what do they decide to do? philip morris agreed to conceal or omit information regarding the health effects of cigarettes, or their addictive nature, with the intention that smokers and the public would rely on this information to their detriment. and then they concealed or omitted material information, not otherwise known or available, knowing that the material was false or misleading, or failed to disclose a material fact concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes, or both. that is what they did. that is the unrebutted testimony. you did not hear anything -- may we approach the bench for just a moment, your honor? the court: you may. mr. scarola: thank you. [#deleted sidebar#] the court: okay. members of the jury, plaintiff always has the burden of proof in a case and the defense does not have the burden of proof, they do not have to present any evidence in a case; it is the plaintiff that has the burden of proof. okay? mr. scarola: ask yourselves, if there were some explanation, some innocent justification for that plaza hotel meeting in 1953, for all of the concealment, the misleading conduct that has gone on for decades since then, would not some -- somebody from 5713 philip morris be here to talk to you about that? be willing to sit up on that witness stand and at the conclusion of his testimony answer the questions that you would have for him or her? where is that person? where is that person? and instead of cooperating with public health officials, instead of acknowledging the responsibility that it had, philip morris gives away free samples of their addictive product to soldiers. they buy the endorsements of sports heros, tv and movie stars and other celebrities. they spend a billion dollars a year promoting the sex appeal, power, sophistication of a product philip morris knew to be addictive and lethal. they create a false controversy about the health risks of smoking to discredit the science that proves the product is lethal. they deny addiction. they demean the public health officials, including the surgeon general, who are trying to educate the smoking public. they manipulate the nicotine levels of cigarettes to increase their addiction levels. they addict children when their brains are most susceptible. 5714 stern: objection, your honor, may we approach. the court: overruled. no. mr. scarola: to the physiological changes that promote the strongest addictions. they promote filtered cigarettes as a safe alternative to quitting while concealing knowledge that filters do not work. they promote low tar and nicotine cigarettes -- mr. stern: objection, your honor, there is no evidence in this case about lights or ultra lights. the court: exclude the low tar. mr. scarola: so what are we going to do with evidence like that? first question: was phyllis surico addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine and, if so, was this addiction a legal cause of her cancer and death? we know that by far more than the greater weight of the evidence phyllis surico was, in fact, addicted and to create doubt, to create a false controversy about phyllis surico's addiction, what does the defense present to us? dr. rosman. and the testimony -- 5715 stern: objection to the reference of litigation, your honor. the court: he testified. mr. stern: your honor -- the court: he was called as a witness. mr. stern: understand, your honor, but it is the prefatory comment. the court: and the testimony of two very nice ladies who had a casual acquaintance for a short period of time with phyllis surico, decades ago, who said, everybody was smoking back then, i do not know whether phyllis surico was smoking or not, everybody smoked. you are asking me 46 years later to try to remember that? i just cannot tell you. anything to attempt to create a false controversy. mr. stern: objection, your honor. the court: and on the other hand, we have dr. michael cummings, dr. david burns, dr. teufel, dr. yuvienco, joe surico, madeline surico, joanne surico, and the medical records. the entries in the medical records long before 5716 anybody was talking about contemplating, thinking about in any way anything having to do with a lawsuit, telling us that phyllis surico was a pack-and-a-half-a-day smoker for over 40 years. her treating physicians, who are not being paid experts by anybody, have told us, phyllis surico was addicted. she was addicted. false controversy. was phyllis surico nicotine; and, if so, was this addiction a legal cause of her cancer and death? the answer to that question is yes. note something of significant here. question number one asks: was phyllis surico addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine? it does not say anything about what brand she smoked. it does not matter. does not matter what brand she smoked. was she addicted to nicotine in cigarettes? that is all we need to know, to answer question number one, yes. mr. stern: objection, your honor. the court: overruled. mr. stern: your honor, may we approach? the court: no. 5717 scarola: question number two: was smoking cigarettes manufactured by philip morris usa, a legal cause of phyllis surico's cancer and death? now we need to relate phyllis surico's smoking to a particular brand. any particular brand manufactured by philip morris. and there is an instruction, i'm not going to take the time to pull it out right now, that tells you the brands that are philip morris brands and, for purposes of this case, the significant ones are philip morris and parliament. and we know, from the unrebutted testimony, that those were phyllis' primary brands. we know from the testimony that every cigarette phyllis smoked contributed to her addiction and to her disease process. but in order for smoking philip morris cigarettes to be a legal cause of phyllis surico's cancer and death, they need to be a substantial contributing cause. i'm not going to have the opportunity to pull out that instruction for you right now, but the instruction tells you that smoking philip morris cigarettes need not be the only 5718 cause. it can act in combination with other causes. a genetic predisposition to cancer. it can act in combination with smoking other brands of cigarettes when she went to the store and something else was on sale. but as long philip morris usa manufactured cigarettes were not the substantial contributing cause, but a substantial contributing cause, if they were one of the substantial causes, the answer to this question must be yes. was the concealment or omission by philip morris usa of material information about the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes or both a legal cause of surico's cancer and death? the court in its instructions defines for you what "material" means. it means information that would make a difference in someone's decision-making process. i'm paraphrasing that. the exact wording is in the instruction. material is referenced in two different places. in that list of instructions i give you, both of those places are referenced. so you will be able to go to 5719 the pages and look specifically at what "material" means. but note this: philip morris concealed or omitted material information. they concealed or omitted information that made a difference. so you do not need to ask yourself, would it have made a difference to phyllis surico if she knew these things? we know that because -- mr. stern: objection, your honor. the court: overruled. he can make the argument. you will have your opportunity. mr. scarola: because it has already been determined that philip morris concealed or omitted information that would have made a difference to all of those smokers from whom it was concealed. mr. stern: same objection, your honor. the court: the answer to this question is yes. was the agreement to conceal or omit material information about the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes or both a legal cause of phyllis surico's cancer and death? 5720 and you ask yourself here, well, what is the difference between number three and number four? number three relates specifically to the actions of philip morris. number four relates to the actions of philip morris and all of the other people who participated in the conspiracy with philip morris. and that whole group is listed for you in the jury instructions. and we know from the evidence who those people were that were at that meeting in 1953 and then continued to work together for half a century in fulfillment of their commitment to one another to create a false controversy, to engage in this filter fraud, to conceal information that was material to the smoking public, and they did it for one reason and one reason only, because they put profit over the lives of half a million people a year. technician: 55 minutes used. mr. scarola: thank you. the answer to this question is yes. for the first time you are now called upon to consider, because up until now it has not mattered, does not matter when we are talking 5721 about addiction, you cannot get back there and talk about, well, how much of this addiction was phyllis' fault and how much was philip morris' fault or somebody else's fault? that does not make any difference. the only question is was she addicted, not how much fault -- not how many quit attempts she made. not how hard she tried. not whether she ever tried at all. the only question to answer in question number one is, was she addicted? but now, now we begin to focus on apportioning fault between phyllis surico and philip morris. and when you come to the point of doing that, what you are asked to determine is whether phyllis surico acted reasonably under the circumstances, and did philip morris act reasonably under the circumstances, and compare the conduct of phyllis surico with the conduct of philip morris. we have come into this courtroom admitting from the outset of this legal proceeding that phyllis surico bears some degree of fault. she was negligent to some extent. but i suggest to you that if we look at phyllis surico's conduct in the light of the circumstances that existed 5722 when she engaged in that conduct, that phyllis surico's degree of fault, when compared to the intentional, malicious, 50-year history of the defendants, is minimal. i suggest to you a number that at the absolute maximum should not exceed ten percent. ten percent phyllis surico, ninety percent or more for philip morris. i'm going to put 10 and 90 -- technician: you -- mr. lewis: the other way. mr. scarola: excuse me. thank you all for paying attention. you will then be asked to fill in a number for the total amount of the damages. you do not -- you do not do the percentage reduction. the court takes care of that for you. the court will apply the appropriate law as necessary in order to take into account the finding that you make with regard to question number five. you are then going to be asked, and mr. lewis is going to speak to you just for a little while about filling in that next blank with the number, you are then going to be asked 5723 under the circumstances of this case whether you find by clear and convincing evidence, we are no longer talking about just 51 percent. when we talk about punishment, we have an increased burden. we must demonstrate, not beyond a reasonable doubt, but by clear and convincing evidence, clear and convincing evidence, that punishment in this case is appropriate. and i suggest to you that there cannot be a clearer case in the context of the civil law warranting the imposition of punitive damages than in a case where a corporate defendant knowingly engages in conduct that is killing almost half a million a people a year and continues to engage in that conduct, not only that, but knowingly, knowingly increases the danger of the product that is killing all those people. no one else, no one else is going to stop them. but you have the power to punish and deter by answering that question yes. technician: one hour used. mr. scarola: thank you for coming with me this far on this journey. i do so very much 5724 appreciate it. closing statement mr. lewis: thank you very much. may it please the court. good afternoon. the panel: good afternoon. mr. lewis: you know, the question is often asked, who are we? and what i would say to that is we are an issue of an ancestry who have offered a legacy. and by their deeds and declarations, the people in mr. surico's generation have caused our nation to pause and to ponder and ask, what manner of people were they? they were hard working-people. our grandmothers, parents, great-grandparents, they grew up in a generation, and i asked you when i got to stand up here at the beginning of this case, to understand it, you had to come back with me in a time machine and look at this case from the eyes of someone who grew up and was born in 1930, 1931, lived in the '40s, '50s and 5730 '60s, because if you did not, you would not have the same context that they had at that time. so members of the jury, in a little while you are going to go back into that little room and you are going to have three jobs. and one of your jobs, as mr. scarola has explained to you, is to take that verdict form and fill out the answers to the questions that the court asked. and your second job, members of the jury, as mr. scarola pointed out also, is for you to follow the law that the judge gives you. because everybody, every citizen, every entity, has a right to have their case decided under the law, and nothing else. and your third job is to reason together and explain to each other why you feel the way you feel under the law. not for any other personal reasons or this type of feeling, no. it is under the law. so now for the next few minutes, i want to discuss with you the part of that form, that verdict form, that verdict means to speak the truth under the law, that talks about the amount of money, if you get to that point, that 5731 it will take to compensate, to equalize, to balance the harm that was caused to mr. surico in this case. and so number six on the verdict form is a pretty simple question. it says: "what is the total amount of any damages sustained by joseph surico for the loss of his wife's companionship and protection and for his pain and suffering as a result of phyllis surico's death?" it is going to go on to further say that: "in determining the total amount of damages, you should not make any reduction because of the responsibility that you charge to phyllis surico, and the court will make any reductions that is appropriate based upon the facts that you find." i'm not going to go back over what the instruction was that mr. scarola gave to you about the evidence with respect to the fact that mr. surico is married to gail surico at the present time. you have to follow the law. so what your job is, members of the jury, is to equalize. it is to compensate. it is to balance. and so the question that is raised to you, how do you equalize, how do you compensate 5732 and balance for what i would submit to you is the greatest harm. you cannot be harmed any more than to contribute to the death, not an injury, to the death, the ultimate harm of his wife. i cannot think of a greater harm. now, in this particular case, members of the jury, it is your call to action. it is your call to action to determine what you believe is fair and what is appropriate and what is reasonable under that circumstance for the ultimate loss that a human being can suffer. now, the evidence in this case, as mr. scarola has pointed out, has not only shown that we believe more likely than not, but beyond and to the exclusion of any reasonable doubt that these cigarette companies, this cigarette company, philip morris, and the other cigarette companies and legal entities, these co-conspirators, knowingly and blatantly devalued human life. so when they get up and tell you that the numbers that we suggest are inappropriate, we know how the company -- they have a right to defined themselves, but we know how the companies value human life. because they asked 5733 the question, how are we going to distract the public from their concern about health and keep our sales growing? so we know what is important to them and how much money they are willing to spend on what they believe is important to them. and those numbers were astronomical. mr. stern: improper compensatory argument, your honor. the court: overruled. mr. lewis: and so the evidence in this case is clear: there was an obligation, there was a duty, there is a mandate to be truthful. you got to tell the truth. you cannot just knowingly lie and not tell the truth, and then request a gold star be pinned on your chest for that conduct. they got to equalize the harm in this case. so members of the jury -- mr. stern: objection. improper compensatory argument. the court: i'll sustain on that. mr. lewis: equalize the harm with respect to the loss of mr. surico in this case. and so members of the jury, it is not done 5734 in this case like politicians do, we hear them all the time on television spinning facts. you can spin a fact. we expect that. we expect spin. but not someone to know something is true, and in their formerly secret documents tell you, for instance, that we want to create doubt. the illusion of filtration is as important as filtration, when they knew it was an illusion, they knew it was a lie. you got to equalize mr. surico's harm, members of the jury. now, i say these things to you so that you can understand that what mr. surico lost, what was the evidence on who mrs. surico was? and the reason i tell you this is so you will have some understanding of what it was that he lost. mr. surico took the stand. we heard his two daughters take the stand. we heard these two nice women on video. and were some of the things that they said? mrs. surico, she was a friendly woman. she was an intelligent woman. she was a nice woman. she was a good friend. she had a positive attitude. she was happy. she was 5735 intelligent. she was a hard worker. she enjoyed her family and they enjoyed her company. and she was easy to talk to and they had a nice family. she was a little quiet. she was italian. she was very pleasant. joe and phyllis did not squabble like most of the people were doing. they had a good relationship. they sent me christmas cards for years even after i never seen them. these are good people. she was a wonderful woman, she was a wonderful mother, and she was wonderful wife. and so members of the jury, i say to you that watching phyllis die for joe was very painful. as he testified, it was one of the worst weeks of his life. at times he would be at the hospital, he said he sat alone agonizing over the fact that his wife of 39 years at that time was suffering. he would go back to that hospital, and when he had to tell his daughters that she was gone, he said that was the worst day of his life. and mr. surico said that the last gift he ever got from his wife was when his wife, who 5736 is dying a slow, agonizing and painful death from cancer, asked their daughters to buy him a christmas gift because "i cannot get out and go shopping." so the kids went out and got him a chain. and that chain is something that mr. surico carries in his heart to this day. that is important to mr. surico. that is a loss that can never be replaced for mr. surico. as mr. scarola said, it is like if you lose a child, you say you can replace a child, that does not mean that you do not suffer and have pain and suffering as a result of having another child [sic.]. members of the jury, that is the ultimate harm in this case. so i ask you in this case that if you want to understand the case, and for them to take the full responsibility to pay the full harm to joe surico, then all you have to do from their perspective is follow their money trail. and when you follow their money trail to see what is important -- mr. stern: objection, your honor, improper compensatory argument. the court: sustained. 5737 stern: i would like to make a motion. the court: he wants to make a motion. mr. stern: your honor -- the court: you want to come up to the bench? mr. stern: yes, your honor. (thereupon, out of the presence of the jury:) mr. stern: your honor, we move for a mistrial. he repeatedly made the same improper argument even after the objection was sustained. that is all i have to say. the court: okay. on your amount of damages, you talk about the -- mr. stern: i move for a mistrial, your honor. the court: okay. i hear you. i'll -- mr. stern: i just wanted to make sure -- the court: how many we got now? 18 maybe? mr. stern: i've lost track. i do not know, your honor. the court: okay. you can talk about the implication of the punitive damages on the verdict form. that is not what we are talking 5738 about now. we are not talking about punitive damages. when you are talking about compensatory, you do not relate it to the wealth of the defendants. mr. lewis: yes, ma'am. the court: you talk about the law and what is compensable under the law -- on the loss. mr. lewis: yes, ma'am. i was not -- i was going to relate it back to mr. surico, but i did not get to before he stood up. but i'll move on -- the court: you said, "follow the money trail." mr. lewis: i know, but i was going to explain how and relate it to what they thought was fair and reasonable and the amounts that they paid to the experts, and then start quantifying the amounts that we were asking for mr. surico. but i understand the court and i will do it another way and i'll move on. the court: okay. that motion is denied. make your motion for a mistrial now. mr. stern: if i may just say, your honor, 5739 just so the record is clear, the argument that mr. lewis suggested i would submit is improper. i understand he is not going make it. but just so we are clear, it is improper. the court: you want to say what? mr. stern: i understand he is not going to make the argument he just suggested, your honor, but i just wanted the record to reflect that in our view, that would be a completely improper argument. the court: that it is improper argument? mr. stern: yes. mr. lewis: we disagree. the court: okay. mr. lewis: yes, ma'am. (thereupon, the sidebar conference was concluded and within the presence of the jury:) mr. lewis: may it please the court. the court: you may. mr. lewis: now, members of the jury, when a person you love more than yourself is taken from you, and when they are taken from you in the way that mrs. surico was taken from mr. surico; as mr. scarola said, you have a 5740 rare opportunity that you may never, ever get again. and for mr. surico, if you give damages that are token damages and not full damages, if you get to that point on the verdict form, then that is just as injust as anything that he could also experience. so mr. surico is asking that, from his perspective, you recognize the loss that he suffered in this case. and i would suggest to you, members of the jury, in this case, mr. scarola put up the life expectancy tables. and the court is going to instruct you on what the life expectancy tables are used for. and, as you saw, when mrs. surico died, she was 63 years old. she died in 1993. and mr. surico is coming up on "the week that was," his birthday is this weekend, his anniversary is coming up, the day he got his second lieutenant bars, the day he married mrs. surico is coming up as "the week that was." and so you can take the life expectancy that mr. scarola showed the members of the jury was 23 years, and he is got another 5.8 years, that is 28 years. so, members of the jury, the evidence 5741 dictates that it is a fair verdict if you return a verdict for $2.5 million. and i say $2.5 million, members of the jury, not as a lawyer who says that if i tell them 2.5, what i really mean is 1.225. no. or what i really mean is 2.6. that is not the right verdict in this case. 2.7 million, 3 million, it is not the right verdict, nor is 1.225 the right verdict. in this case, the right verdict is $2.5 million. and, members of the jury, if you have any question at all with respect to whether that ultimate loss, ultimate harm to mr. surico is excessive, is something that is unreasonable, all i ask you to do is to look how philip morris -- mr. stern: objection, your honor. mr. lewis: -- valued their money. mr. stern: objection. may we approach? the court: overruled. i've instructed counsel. mr. lewis: so that you can take the hourly rate that they agree and they think is reasonable to pay people. mr. stern: objection, your honor. 5742 may we approach. the court: overruled. overruled, sir. mr. lewis: and if you took that hourly rate for mr. surico, for his pain and suffering for the ultimate loss of his spouse, it would be in the millions and millions and millions of dollars. and that is not what he is done. that is not what we have done. so, members of the jury, the right verdict in this case, for this portion of the case, in the compensatory damage case is $2.5 million. and as i take my seat, mr. scarola gave me a note before we started and he had given you some exhibit numbers to write down, and i believe he said pt3608 -- and i think most of you wrote it down. i think that exhibit number was incorrect, so you can cross that exhibit number out. the exhibit number 2044 was the incorrect exhibit number, and you can cross that out. 2203 and 2027. and we will get the opportunity, either mr. scarola, i believe, or myself, but i believe mr. scarola, will get back up after they have had an opportunity to speak with you, and i thank you, just like mr. scarola did, for 5743 always being very, very kind and respectful and listening to me and all of us also. thank you all. 5826 closing rebuttal mr. scarola: thank you very much. ladies and gentlemen, i want to begin with a very brief video clip just as a reminder to you. (thereupon, the video clip was played and transcribed as follows:) "male voice: take the controversy about cigarettes. in the 91st congress, a house committee heard testimony from leading experts on smoking and health. the record shows that many of the country's most respected doctors openly challenged anti-cigarette claims. "female voice: i have to disagree with you that we do not know what causes the ailments that have been attributed to cigarette smoking. "male voice: cigarette smoking does not cause cancer, yes or no. "male voice: it is not known whether cigarettes cause cancer. it has not been causally established. "male voice: cigarette smoking, no causal relationship between cigarette smoking and emphysema. "male voice: despite all of the research 5827 to date, there has been no causal link established. "female voice: the case is still open. the jury has not come in. "male voice: it may not be harmful. we are not convinced. "female voice: it may be or it may not be, we do not know. "male voice: do cigarettes cause cancer? i do not know if they do or not. "female voice: i'm not in a position to give you a does or does not answer. "female voice: well, i think that is a good question, and i think it is worth pointing out that all the links that have been established between smoking and certain diseases are based on statistics. what that means is that the causative relationship has not yet been established. "male voice: yes, they may be --" mr. stern: may we approach? (thereupon, the video paused.) the court: you may approach. (thereupon, out of the presence of the jury:) 5828 stern: this video was not itself introduced into evidence, your honor. it is a splicing together. the court: it is -- it is putting together evidence. he can play each one of them. mr. stern: well, he is not playing the entirety of -- he is spliced together -- he is spliced together the videos as they were introduced into evidence. we would object to that. the court: okay. what is your response? mr. scarola: all of this is in evidence. we are just playing excerpts from a number of different clips, all of which are in evidence. mr. stern: excuse me. lower your voice. mr. scarola: all of which are in evidence which we are certainly entitled to do. there is no rule of completeness in closing argument. the court: i agree. mr. stern: understood, your honor. (thereupon, the sidebar conference was concluded and within the presence of the jury:) mr. scarola: robert, back it up just a little bit, and then we will finish it off. 5829 (thereupon, the video clip was played and transcribed as follows:) "female voice: i think it is worth pointing out that all the links that have been established between smoking and certain diseases are based on statistics. what that means is that the causative relationship has not yet been established. "male voice: yes, i may be convinced. we do not know what causes cancer in general right now, so i think that we may find out what causes cancer and we may find out some relationship which has yet to be proven. (video ended.) mr. scarola: you are told in closing argument, there is no evidence that phyllis surico saw any of these documents, saw any of these particular programs. and what opposing counsel clearly fails to discuss is the fact that this is a case about concealment. the arguments that were made have nothing to do with the charges against philip morris. it is not that philip morris wrote a letter to phyllis surico and lied to her in a 5830 letter. it is not about the fact that philip morris delivered the frank statement to phyllis surico. it is about the fact that philip morris concealed material information not otherwise known or available, knowing that the material was false or misleading. it is about the fact that they agreed to conceal that information intending that smokers and the public would rely on this information to their detriment. they hid the truth. the documents that we have seen were secret documents that remained secret until almost a decade after phyllis surico was buried in arlington cemetery. to suggest to you that this case needs to be decided based upon proof that phyllis surico saw some particular document, when all of the evidence is that what philip morris did was to hide the truth is clearly, clearly an unfortunate misrepresentation of what this case is all about. so let us get back to talking about what this case is all about. and i want to point out some very important things that relate 5831 directly to this argument about whether the information concealed, whether the information concealed would have made any difference. would it have changed the ultimate outcome for phyllis surico? and the answer to that question is we know it would have. and how do we know it would have? we know it would have because philip morris concealed or omitted not just any information, they concealed or omitted material information. and now we get back, again, to talking about how important the law is in order for you to perform your duties, to fulfill your responsibilities as jurors. because this is what is the law says: "material information is information of such importance that mrs. surico would not have acted as she did but for the concealment, omission, or failure to disclose." philip morris concealed or omitted information of such importance that mrs. surico would not have acted as she did. it would have changed the way she acted. it would have made a difference. because it was material. and the court has told us what the law 5832 defines as material information. indeed, "a material fact" at page 16 of the instructions: "a material fact is one that is of such importance that a reasonable person would consider the same significant in their decision-making process." so, did it matter to phyllis surico that the truth was concealed from her? philip morris concealed or omitted material information with the intention that smokers and the public would rely on the omissions and make decisions other than what they would have made if they knew the truth. that is what the law is. and it is so important that you understand and you follow the law. because if you were to accept the representations of defense counsel, then the only way that a case like this could ever be proved, is if this pointer were a magic wand, and we could -- we could resurrect phyllis surico and she could tell us what she saw and what she did not see. if after half a century she could remember, even with the help of a magic wand. but it is not, and that is not the way it works, and that is not what the law 5833 requires. there is no obligation that we prove that phyllis surico saw any particular document at any time. that is simply not the law. i want to respond to the arguments that were made by opposing counsel about addiction and class membership. please remember, class membership is not about fault, it is not about awareness, it is not about choice, it is only about whether phyllis surico was addicted. mr. stern: objection, your honor. that is an incomplete statement of the law; that is just the first half of the question. mr. scarola: i'm getting to the second half, i promise. the court: okay. go ahead. mr. scarola: the first part of the class membership issue has nothing to do with fault or awareness or choice, it is strictly about whether phyllis surico was addicted. and defense counsel is absolutely right, there is no definition in the instructions that you have received about addiction. but what did the defense "expert" dr. rosman tell you? he told you there are two kinds of addictions; there are physiological or 5834 physical addictions and there are psychological addictions. and whether it is physiological or psychological, whether it meets the fagerstrom test or the tests that have been accepted by the world health organization and the surgeon general and dr. burns and dr. cummings, and the treating physicians who diagnosed phyllis surico while she was alive, and while she could be spoken to, and while she could be clinically examined, the way the dsm-iv says you must, if you are to apply dsm-iv standards, the way those treating physicians said she was addicted. regardless of which of those definitions you apply, phyllis surico was, indeed, addicted to nicotine in cigarettes. and the only way that conclusion is avoided is if you do what dr. rosman did. you take the dsm-iv and you take the parts that you want to talk about, you interpret them the way you want to interpret them, and not the way the american psychiatric association says they are to be interpreted and applied, and you distort and make up your own definition without regard to the criteria that the dsm-iv expressly tells you must be applied. 5835 there simply is no way that someone can take an addictive substance, the number of times that phyllis surico took that addictive substance, over 40 years -- and you remember we did the math and showed you how many doses of addictive nicotine administered in a highly efficient free-base fashion, intended to cause addiction, designed to cause addiction, and then, say, phyllis surico was immune to nicotine. that just does not make any sense. that is just not in conformity with the evidence. we know phyllis surico was addicted because she smoked a pack and a half of cigarettes a day for 40 years. she lit up first thing in the morning, she smoked when she got up at night to use the bathroom, she smoked while she was pregnant, she started young, she had to leave situations, and there it says such as church, but we know movies. she did not smoke during the one-hour -- mr. stern: objection. objection to "such as church," your honor. the court: we know that during the 5836 one-hour of a church service she smoked just before she got in the door, and she smoked right after she got out of the door, but we also know from dr. rosman's own admission, that she would have to get up and leave the movies after you could no longer smoke in the balconies to get a cigarette. she tried repeatedly to quit. she tried cold turkey. she tried the nicotine patch. and remember what the testimony was about the nicotine patch. it is a substantially less efficient means by which to administer nicotine than inhaling it deep into your lungs. substantially less efficient as a consequence of which she experienced withdrawal symptoms, even while on the patch, and had to return to cigarettes to satisfy her nicotine addiction. she smoked despite harm. the warnings on those packages were ignored because she did not want to believe them. she says she wished she had never started, but she could not stop. she was embarrassed that she could not stop. she wakes up from her eye surgery, in intensive care, and the first words she speaks are, "i want a cigarette." she is so addicted, that 5837 the nurses write in the hospital record, "let her smoke." now, is there a notation after it says "let her smoke" that she, in fact, smoked? well, no, that notation is not in the hospital record. but why is the notation in the record to begin with if she was not being given permission to smoke, because she needed to satisfy her nicotine craving. we know that she went through significant withdrawal symptoms on the multiple occasions when she tried to stop. phyllis surico was clearly addicted to nicotine in cigarettes. so what is the significance, then, because opposing counsel addressed this. what is the significance of the limiting instruction that the court gave you? that the evidence may not be considered to conclude that any member of phyllis surico's family is legally at fault? what is the significance of the fact that, admittedly, joe surico did not attempt to intervene in his wife's smoking for many years until 1993? well, there appears to be absolutely no conflict in the evidence that in order to overcome an addiction, to the extent 5838 that it goes into remission for whatever period of time it may be, it requires motivation and external support plus one. the balance has got to -- has got to tip in favor of motivation and external support in order for there to be a successful quit attempt. philip morris knew that, philip morris acknowledges that in its papers, and it says, if we ever open the gate to allow addicted smokers to leave, we are out of business. so, we have got to do something to prevent that from happening. we increase the addictive properties of our cigarettes, and we do something else, we attack motivation and external support. we attack the external support that is coming from the public health community. we attack and discredit the surgeon general. we attack motivation by telling smokers they do not need to stop. and what is the effect of that? what is it that prevented joe surico from providing the external support sooner that phyllis surico needed? well, ladies and gentlemen, that is an easy question to answer. it is an easy question to answer. what prevented joe surico from 5839 providing the external support that his wife needed in order to be motivated sufficiently to give up smoking, is exactly the same deprivation of material information hidden from phyllis surico. mr. stern: objection, your honor. there is no evidence to that effect. the court: the same concealment, the same lies, the same conspiracy that affected smokers affected the public. while joe surico was a smoker, it was affecting him. when joe surico was no longer a smoker and member of the general public it was affecting him. can you imagine, ladies and gentlemen, that anyone who loved phyllis surico, as much as her husband and her children loved phyllis surico, would not have done absolutely everything in their power if they knew the truth that was being hidden by philip morris and its coconspirators. can you imagine that it would not have made a difference to joe surico and to the surico's lovely daughters, if they had known the whole truth that when phyllis surico was 5840 switching to filters they were not any safer, they were more dangerous. mr. stern: objection, your honor. the court: would it have made a difference if they knew that phyllis surico was being perceived by philip morris and the coconspirators as a lab rat. that the levels of nicotine in cigarettes were being boosted, that nicotine was being free-based, that filters did not make any difference at all, they were more dangerous. and that, in 1953, philip morris knew cigarettes caused cancer. in 1953 philip morris knew that cigarettes were addictive, and concealed that information at a time when we know it would have made a difference to both joe and phyllis surico, because what they hid is material information. information that would have, could have, should have indeed, unquestionably would have, made a difference. so, what does tobacco do? the industry spends $250 billion on a campaign of deceit, deception, fraud, call it whatever you like, to hide the truth, to bury the facts so that they 5841 can continue raking in their profits from the sale of their knowingly lethally defective products. $250 billion spent destroying motivation and support. firing missiles at the ability to quit. smoking is not addictive, there is no scientific proof that smoking is harmful, we will filter out all harmful substances, filters are safer, low tar and nicotine cigarettes are safer, we will go out of business voluntarily if we ever find out that we are selling a product that hurts anybody. material information concealed from the public. phyllis surico was addicted to nicotine in cigarettes. there it is. we weigh the evidence. there simply can be no reasonable doubt about phyllis surico's addiction. so let us move on. the court: you do need to watch your time, counsel. mr. scarola: yes, thank you very much, your honor. let us talk about whether philip morris cigarettes caused cancer in phyllis surico. this is part of the evidence, it was read 5842 during the course of the trial, it is not a jury instruction, it is a stipulation in the evidence that was read to you. so you are not going to find this in your package. but this is what the court told you the parties agreed to: joseph surico and philip morris stipulate that any smoking by phyllis surico of any cigarettes, manufactured by lorillard, liggett, vector, r.j. reynolds was minimal and did not directly and in natural and continuous sequence produce or contribute substantially to producing any injury sustained by phyllis surico, if any that was caused by smoking cigarettes. no other major manufacturer of cigarettes contributed to phyllis surico's smoking. mr. stern: objection, your honor. there is no testimony about who the population of major manufacturer of cigarettes is. mr. scarola: your honor -- the court: overruled. go ahead. mr. scarola: no other major manufacturer of cigarettes contributed to phyllis surico's addiction and death by stipulation. that leaves only one brand left. 5843 stern: objection, your honor. mr. scarola: only one -- mr. stern: objection. the court: that leaves only one major manufacturer left, and that is the manufacturer of philip morris and parliament cigarettes. the brand that the unrebutted testimony establishes was phyllis surico's first brand, it was the brand that -- mr. stern: objection. mr. scarola: -- that philip morris manufactured that phyllis surico switched to -- the court: -- it was the brand that we know phyllis surico continually purchased, and would only switch to other brands on those occasions when she had coupons; but continuously returned back to this defendant's negligently designed, intentionally defective product. you remember seeing the picture in the lower left-hand side, there is that pack of cigarettes that is blown up, and there is a pack of philip morris-brand cigarettes. 5844 defense counsel wanted photographic proof. there is the photographic proof. were there true cigarettes on the left-hand side of phyllis surico, who is a right-hand dominant, person? yes. does it make any difference whether they were hers or somebody else's? no, because by stipulation, true-brand cigarettes manufactured by liggett, were not a substantial contributing cause to phyllis surico's addiction and her death. time check, robert? technician: 15:40 left. mr. scarola: thank you very much. mr. stern: what? mr. scarola: so let us move on and let us talk about the evidence that relates to whether phyllis surico had a primary lung cancer. i urge you to compare the qualifications of pulmonologist, dr. david burns, with the qualifications of anyone else who has addressed this subject. there is no more eminently qualified pulmonologist that could have been brought to you to speak about the relationship between smoking and lung cancer than dr. david burns. 5845 and dr. burns told us that phyllis surico was addicted to the nicotine in cigarettes, she had primary lung cancer. her cancer was caused by her addiction to nicotine. her death was caused by her addiction to nicotine. every cigarette phyllis surico smoked contributed to her addiction and her lung cancer. but, obviously, there needed to be a significant number of cigarettes smoked of any particular brand in order for it to be a substantially contributing factor to meet the legal cause standard repeated multiple times in the court's instructions. addiction to nicotine must be a substantial contributing -- a substantial contributing factor. not the legal cause, as opposing counsel repeatedly referenced, not the legal cause but a legal cause. which acting together with whatever other causes were involved, produced the result. a substantial contributing cause. caused lung cancer, caused death. did phyllis surico have primary lung cancer? dr. michael cummings, yes; dr. david burns, yes; dr. teufel, her treating physician, 5846 yes; dr. yuvienco -- mr. stern: objection, your honor, there is no substantive evidence of dr. yuvienco. may we approach? (thereupon, out of the presence of the jury:) the court: yes. mr. stern: dr. yuvienco's testimony was never admitted as substantive evidence, your honor, it was only used during examination of the expert, by way of examining him on the basis of his opinion. there was never any deposition, there was obviously no live testimony of mr. yuvienco admitted, there was no deposition testimony admitted substantively. it is improper argument. mr. scarola: dr. rosman expressly acknowledged that he relied upon dr. yuvienco's opinion, and expressly acknowledged that dr. yuvienco's opinion was, this was a primary lung cancer. mr. stern: that was hearsay testimony, your honor, this is the whole point. it was not admitted substantively. mr. scarola: that is evidence that is 5847 before this jury and the subject of fair comment. the court: overruled. (thereupon, the sidebar conference was concluded and within the presence of the jury:) mr. scarola: dr. yuvienco, primary lung cancer; dr. matthew, primary lung cancer. mr. stern: objection to dr. matthew, your honor. the court: the medical records, primary lung cancer that metastasized to other locations from its primary site. on the other side we have dr. andrews. dr. andrews builds his opinion upon one crucial foundation: mrs. surico had a normal chest x-ray four to eight weeks before being diagnosed with lung cancer. a normal chest x-ray. no cancer. but what did dr. andrews admit in cross-examination? remember we went through the little doubling time demonstration with the play-doh? and after we had gone through the little doubling time demonstration with the play-doh with dr. andrews, dr. andrews 5848 admitted the bronchial lesion, the cancerous node in mrs. surico's bronchial tube was there -- what did he say? for a long time. not for weeks. mr. stern: objection, your honor, that mischaracterizes the testimony. the court: he expressly and repeatedly stated and reaffirmed, that lesion was there for a long time. it was -- mr. stern: same objection, your honor. the court: it was missed on x-ray, not because we are speculating about that, but because the science proves it was missed on x-ray. it could not have been the size that it was, based upon dr. andrews' general knowledge of doubling time, if it had not been there for a long time. no one is faulting the radiologist who read this x-ray, but a cancer that was there was missed. we know that the cancer that was there was missed, because all of the treating physicians, all of the treating physicians who knew about this x-ray, who knew that it was 5849 "read normal," all of them still concluded this was primary lung cancer. mr. stern: objection, hearsay, your honor. the court: overruled. technician: ten minutes. mr. scarola: thank you. so how does dr. andrews get to his opinion? well, he gets to his opinion this way. and you will remember this testimony from his cross-examination. he had testified before you, ladies and gentlemen of the jury, that this cancer was a metastatic cancer of unknown origin. and he told you, in this courtroom, that he had reached that conclusion beyond and to the exclusion -- excuse me. by a preponderance of the evidence within his area of expertise. is that an opinion that you hold to a reasonable degree of certainty within your area of expertise? and his answer was, yes, here in trial. you will remember that phrase repeated over and over again with expert witnesses, is that an opinion that you hold to a reasonable 5850 degree of certainty, within your area of expertise? and the opinions that get admitted are opinions that must meet that legal standard. mr. stern: objection,your honor. mr. scarola: a reasonable degree of medical probability or medical certainty within your area of expertise, and that is what he told you here at trial. the court: what did he say during his deposition? what he said during his deposition was: "question: and what do you believe was the cause of her cancer? "answer: i do not know the exact cause of her cancer. my suspicion is that it was a metastatic process. and if we take the pathology reading, as most consistent with adenocarcinoma, then i would have to propose possibilities for a metastatic manifestation in her chest." to a reasonable degree of medical probability or medical certainty within his area expertise? no. all he had when he was deposed, when he is required to state all of 5851 his opinions, was a suspicion about a possibility. i want to address this issue. it has been suggested that there was a conflict between the testimony of dr. burns and dr. cummings with regard to permanent changes in the brain as a consequence of nicotine addiction. there is no conflict. receptors never return to normal, not because the receptors themselves continue in a damaged state. nobody said that. but because the neural pathways between those receptors have been permanently rerouted. brain plasticity. the pathways in the brain have been permanently changed. that is what the testimony was. no conflict between the testimony of dr. burns and dr. cummings. defense counsel: it was not philip morris that was the legal cause of phyllis surico's addiction. remember that the first question is: was phyllis surico nicotine, no matter who manufactured them; and we do not talk about the legal cause, we talk about a legal cause. defense counsel: "dr. rosman told you 5852 that he uses the dsm-iv to diagnose addiction." no, what dr. rosman told you was that he uses his own standards, he does not accept the standards of the american psychiatric association. mr. stern: objection, your honor, that mischaracterizes the evidence. the court: if mrs. surico could have quit then addiction was not the legal cause of her injury. addiction did not prevent her from quitting. ladies and gentlemen of the jury, if the standard was whether addiction prevents someone from quitting, then there would be no litigation against any of the cigarette manufacturers because, as dr. cummings -- mr. stern: objection. the court: -- and dr. burns, and every other witness have acknowledged to you, every addict can quit. heroin addicts can quit, cocaine addicts can quit, alcoholics can quit, nicotine addicts can quit. it takes motivation, plus external support, and nobody 5853 aiming missiles to try to eliminate both motivation and external support in order to get the job done. that is just not the legal standard. that does not conform with the law. so, mr. stern suggests to you that when you are back there, or while you have been listening to me you ought to be asking what would mr. stern say; and i think that is a good idea. what would mr. stern say to 450,000 people, to the survivors of 450,000 people killed every year as a consequence of the ongoing misconduct of his client? what would mr. stern say? mr. stern: objection to the form of this, your honor, that was not the intent or meaning of my remark. mr. scarola knows it. the court: i'll sustain. mr. scarola: i'm sorry, was there -- was that an objection? mr. stern: that is an objection, your honor. the court: i sustained the objection. mr. scarola: okay. you ask yourselves, ladies and gentlemen, how mr. stern could possibly answer for the 5854 misconduct in which his clients had -- mr. stern: same objection, your honor. the court: overruled on this one. mr. scarola: in which his client has been engaging for more than half a decade and continues to engage in today, after promising that it would stop, over and over and over again, so that people would rely upon those material promises and continue to buy the intentionally engineered system of nicotine delivery, remain addicted, and continue to feed the coffers of philip morris usa incorporated. technician: two minutes. the court: can you wind it up now? mr. scarola: yes, ma'am. i'm going to do that right now. we have all seen the statute of lady justice. she is depicted as a woman holding the scales of justice in one hand, and a sword in the other. she is blindfolded. blindfolded to power, blindfolded to wealth, and sensitive only to imbalance in that scale. and when there is an imbalance in that scale, she has the courage to lift her sword and to restore balance using whatever reasonable force is 5855 necessary in order to do that; and i ask each of you ladies, and you gentlemen, to have that same courage to follow the law, to restore the balance that has been so grossly upset by the conduct of the defendant that has been proven to you in this case. thank you again so very, very much. and thank you, your honor.