closing statement mr. stern: thank you, your honor. good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen. the panel: good afternoon. 5744 stern: addiction to cigarettes manufactured by philip morris did not cause mrs. surico's illness and death. addiction to cigarettes manufactured by philip morris was not the legal cause of phyllis surico's illness and death. nothing that philip morris said or did not say was the legal cause of phyllis surico's death. that, ladies and gentlemen, is what the evidence has shown you. and that is how you will know that the plaintiff has not met its burden of proof on those questions or any of the other questions you will be called upon to answer in this case. how do you know that addiction to cigarettes manufactured by philip morris was not the legal cause of phyllis surico's illness and death? you know that from the evidence. you know that from the evidence that it was mrs. surico who was in control of her decisions to smoke. you know that from the evidence that it was mrs. surico who was in control of her decisions when to smoke, where to smoke, and how much to smoke. 5745 the evidence has shown you, ladies and gentlemen, that mrs. surico was in control of those decisions. and it is mrs. surico who is responsible for those decisions, not philip morris. and i'm going to talk you about that evidence. before i do, i want to take a look with you at the verdict form that is already been put up on the screen. but before i do that i want to bring us back to opening statement. you may recall that in opening statement i had a request. and that request was, keep your eye on the ball. that request was, ask yourselves when evidence is presented in the trial, what does that have to do with mrs. surico? that was my request. and i know you did it and i'm going to renew that request right now. because you just saw, when counsel listed off all those documents that he said would be helpful to you in answering the question, "was phyllis surico addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine," not a single one of those documents, ladies and gentlemen, had anything to do with mrs. surico. not a 5746 single one of those documents is a document that any witness got up here on the stand and said, mrs. surico knew about that document. something about that document caused mrs. surico's illness or her death. that is what i meant when i asked you to keep your eye on the ball, ladies and gentlemen. and i'm going to talk about the evidence this afternoon, and i want you to hold me to that standard, too. am i talking about mrs. surico, or am i talking about somebody else? am i talking about a document that mrs. surico saw, or am i talking about a document that there is no evidence she ever saw, read or heard? so let us turn to the verdict form. and, marie, can i get the class membership slide? okay. good. oh, wow, that is small. i may have to use this. if you could -- marie, if you could call out that question. so, i want to make a comment about this question. this is the class membership question. and if you look -- you do not have to call it out, i'm just going to read -- if you look up here, that is for the instructions that 5747 you are going to have. and it says: the first issue for your determination is whether phyllis surico was a member of the engle class. and that question, then, breaks down into a couple different parts. but before i get to that, i want to emphasize something that her honor has instructed you on and will be in the instructions you take back with you. and that point is this: for purposes of answering this question, those engle findings that you heard about in the instructions and that you heard about in mr. scarola's argument, forget them. totally ignore them. for purposes of answering this question, her honor has instructed you, and you will see in the instructions, for purposes of answering this question and all its subparts it is as if those findings do not even exist. those findings do not apply unless and until you can answer yes to this first question, which we will respectfully submit you cannot do because the plaintiff has not met his burden of proof on that question. but there is no dispute that in answering this question, it is as if those 5748 findings do not exist. the only other thing i will say about the findings that you have heard and you will see in the instructions is that those findings in and of themselves do not establish that philip morris is liable. so we put those findings completely to the side in answering this first question. and the question on the verdict form is: "was phyllis surico nicotine"; and then it is got a second part. "and, if so, was this addiction a legal cause of her cancer and death." and perhaps i misunderstood, or misheard counsel when he was arguing, but if you heard counsel to say that you can check yes to this question, if you find that phyllis surico was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine, that is wrong. the only way you can check yes to this question is if you conclude that you can answer yes to both parts of the question, not just "was phyllis surico nicotine," but the second part also "that addiction was a legal cause of her cancer and death." 5749 and i'm going to be talking to you about what that means. and the first instruction that we have from the jury instructions on that -- on what that means comes up here in the highlighted part on the right. could you call that out, marie, in order to be a member. this is the instruction that relates to this question. "in order to be a member of the engle class, the plaintiff must prove," three things. there are three subparts to this question one on the verdict form. the three things that the plaintiff must prove by the greater weight of the evidence are, number one, did mrs. surico have lung cancer? and you know from the testimony we heard just recently that in the context of this case, lung cancer means primary lung cancer, a cancer that originated in the lung as opposed to a cancer that originated somewhere else and spread or metastasized to the lung. so question number one, or subpart one of question number one, requires that the plaintiff prove by the greater weight of the evidence that mrs. surico had primary lung 5750 cancer. the second subpart of question number one requires that the plaintiff prove that mrs. surico was nicotine. and the third part requires the plaintiff to prove that this addiction was a legal cause of her cancer and death. and we submit to you, ladies and gentlemen, that the plaintiff has failed to meet that burden of proof. but i would like to take each of the sub questions, one by one, and talk to you about the evidence on that sub question that relates to mrs. surico. and you will recall that in however long plaintiff's counsel took to argue, they never once addressed the question of whether mrs. surico had primary lung cancer. and they never once addressed the question whether addiction was a legal cause of her cancer and death. i am going to address those questions with you now. and i'm going to start with -- let me just say one more thing about this. can we get the full instruction down 5751 there, marie? if you answered no. in order to answer yes to this question, all of you have to agree that each of the three sub questions has been proved. i'm going to say that again. in order to check "yes" in that box, every member of the jury has to agree that the plaintiff has proved that mrs. surico had primary lung cancer. and, every member of the jury has to agree that mrs. surico was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine. and every member of the jury has to agree that this addiction was a legal cause of her cancer and death. if there is agreement on one of them, but not on the others, that is not good enough. if some people can agree on one, and some people can agree on two, but not everybody agrees on one and two, that is not good enough. everybody has to agree on all three. and then the instruction is, "if you answered no to question one, your verdict is for the defendant and you should proceed no further, except to date and sign the verdict form and return to the courtroom." 5752 so this is one of those questions where there is an instruction that tells you, if the plaintiff has not met his burden of proof, over, done, you have done your job, you can go home. so let us talk about the evidence on each of the three subparts. we submit to you, ladies and gentlemen, that the evidence has shown that mr. surico has not proved, by the greater weight of the evidence, that mrs. surico had primary lung cancer. and starting with that first sub question -- to use some of the medical terms we have heard -- marie, can you put up the next one? mr. surico has to prove that the cancer was a primary lung cancer and not a cancer that started elsewhere and metastasized to the lung. and, actually, marie, take that down for a minute. i'm going to talk about this in just a second, because you will recognize that as the slide that was used in dr. andrews' testimony. but before i talk about dr. andrews i want to talk about dr. burns. you heard from dr. burns on this issue. 5753 dr. burns says that he believes that mrs. surico's cancer originated in her lungs. dr. burns believes that mrs. surico had a primary lung cancer. but what did you learn about that opinion? you learned about the basis of that opinion. you heard the testimony about the medical records and the medical tests that the doctors conducted. and you know that some time in august of 1993, the doctors took a chest x-ray, and you learned that the results of that chest x-ray were -- and it was phrased slightly differently in different ways -- no significant abnormalities, within normal limits -- but the bottom line is that that x-ray showed that there was no tumor present in mrs. surico's chest. now i'm going to talk to you a bit more in a few minutes about dr. andrews' testimony. but you know from the testimony that the absence of a tumor on the x-ray is one of the ways that mrs. surico's -- that we know, and dr. andrews knows, that mrs. surico's cancer did not originate in the lung. but, of course, there was a dispute about what i just said. because i just said that the 5754 x-ray showed no tumor and that means there was no tumor present. dr. burns had a different idea. what dr. burns says is, that the absence of a tumor on that x-ray does not mean that there was not a tumor. he says it is possible that there could have been a tumor. it is possible that the doctors missed a tumor that was actually there. and that means, to accept dr. burns' opinion that mrs. surico had primary lung cancer, you have to accept his testimony that there was a tumor present when we know the x-ray did not show a tumor. and what does that mean? that means that to accept dr. burns' opinion, you have to speculate. am i standing up here trying to tell you that it is impossible that that x-ray missed a tumor? i'm not telling you it is impossible, ladies and gentlemen, but keep your eye on the ball of the burden of proof. the plaintiff has the burden to prove that this is a primary lung cancer. and in the context of dr. burns' testimony, that means there has to be proof that there was a tumor there, not just it is possible, maybe, could be, but by the 5755 greater weight of the evidence, this is primary lung cancer. that is the plaintiff's burden of proof. and i'm going to say something about statistics in just a few minutes. but before i get to the question of statistics overall, i will throw one out here. you heard the evidence elicited on cross-examination that thirty percent of the time a tumor could be missed. so let us just take that number. what does that mean? that means seventy percent of the time, if the x-ray does not show a tumor, it means there is no tumor. that is what that statistic means. that seventy percent of the time that the x-ray shows no tumor there is no tumor. so if we were going to talk about statistics, we would say, based on the statistics, there was no tumor. but i would submit to you, ladies and gentlemen, we do not have to talk about statistics we just talked about evidence. evidence in a court of law. and what is the evidence that there was a tumor present? the evidence is not evidence at all. it is 5756 dr. burns' speculation that perhaps this thing does not mean what it looks like it means. and that, ladies and gentlemen, is not sufficient for the plaintiff to meet his burden of proof. and then you heard from dr. andrews -- can we get that slide, marie? thank you. dr. andrews -- and i'm not going to try to go through all of his testimony again, this testimony, i know, is fresh in everyone's mind and i was going to say my thanks for the end, and i'll still give them at the end, but i want to make an observation. i've been doing this for a long time. i do not know the last time i saw a jury this attentive to some evidence that at times was tedious and at times was very technical. so, under other circumstances i may take more time breaking down and reciting testimony like this, but i know that you were paying close attention and that you got it and that you got the three main points that dr. andrews made, timing, the normal chest x-ray, rapid decline and presentation. and dr. andrews explained to you that his opinion was this was not a primary lung cancer, and he explained why he held that opinion. and 5757 i would ask you, ladies and gentlemen, to think about dr. andrews. think about what kind of witness he was. her honor has instructed you on some of the things that you can consider in deciding whether to believe a witness and how much weight you should give to the testimony of the witness. and when you are thinking about that instruction, think about dr. andrews. what kind of witness was he? did he struggle on cross-examination? did he seem evasive to you? did it seem like he was trying to win a battle with the cross-examining lawyer, with plaintiff's counsel, or did it look like he was giving thoughtful, well-informed answers to all of the questions regardless of who asked the question. we would submit to you that when you think about whether dr. andrews is a credible and reliable witness, you will conclude that he was. i expect that if this issue does get addressed in rebuttal, which i will not have an opportunity to respond to, that one of the things that you might hear is that there is testimony from treating physician. i want to 5758 point one thing out, first. there was no testimony from dr. yuvienco. so nothing that may have been put to dr. andrews about what dr. yuvienco said is admissible evidence for your consideration. it is not substantive evidence. it is something you can use in evaluating the weight to give dr. andrews' opinion, but you did not -- bottom line surico did not hear from dr. yuvienco. so, that is not before you. dr. teufel. you know from dr. teufel that he did not consider other risk factors. and we know from dr. burns that there were other risk factors, he talked about the radiation of the thyroid and he talked about some other things. the bottom line, though, is what dr. andrews told you. and what dr. andrews told you was, look, yes, it would be important in treating mrs. surico to figure out the origin of the cancer, if you could. but what was more important was treating her condition at the time. this was not an exercise, an academic exercise, for these treating physicians to go back, for the purposes of writing a medical journal article, or for the 5759 purposes of testifying in court, to figure out what the origin of the cancer was. that is not what they were about. they were about treating mrs. surico. dr. andrews, with the benefit of hindsight, is able to do an analysis that showed you clearly, we would submit, that the plaintiff has not proved, by the greater weight of the evidence, that this was a primary lung cancer. can we get back to the first slide, marie? so, if you conclude that mrs. surico -- that the plaintiff has not proved that mrs. surico had a primary lung cancer, you are done. you do not need to go any further. because if that is your conclusion, then you have concluded that you cannot all agree that class membership has been proved, and that is the end of that. but i'm going to go on, i'm not going to stop there. i'm going to go on to talk about the other questions that relate to class membership, and i'm going to go on to talk about the other questions on the form. but, please bear in mind, that we believe you do not 5760 even get past the lung cancer question. but let us keep going. the next question is whether mr. surico has met his burden to prove by the greater weight of the evidence that mrs. surico was nicotine. now, i'm not going to try to run through all of the testimony on this point because there was a lot of it. i would like to review the key points of that testimony, but before i do, i want to point out something that i know you are all aware of by now, but it is an important point. and the point is this: there is no legal definition of addiction. there is nowhere in these instructions that you are going to get from her honor that says, for the purpose of this case, addiction means x or y or z. you are not going to get a legal definition of addiction. you also know from the witnesses you heard from that lots of different people have different ideas about what addiction is. and in fact, the plaintiff's own witnesses, dr. burns and dr. cummings, both testified that according to that 2010 surgeon general's 5761 report, and i'm quoting now, "there is no established consensus on criteria for diagnosing nicotine addiction." and dr. burns and dr. cummings both agreed with that statement, and they explained that to them, that means that different people have different ways and different approaches to diagnosing addiction. and i want to say one other thing about addiction, ladies and gentlemen. and this goes back to my original request. you ask yourselves, what does the evidence have to do with mrs. surico? because we believe that what the undisputed evidence showed you is addiction is different for different people. and whether or not one person is addicted is a different question from whether or not another person is addicted. and when i get to the next question, i will suggest to you that what addiction might cause or not cause with respect to one person may be very different from the experience of another person, and that is why it is so important that you focus on the evidence that relates to mrs. surico. 5762 so when we come back to addiction, the bottom line is that dr. rosman, who we called, is the only witness that you heard from who is a medical doctor. he is a psychiatrist who actually diagnoses and treats patients today. dr. cummings and is not a medical doctor, dr. burns has been retired for some time. dr. andrews does not treat -- he treats patients, but not for addiction. dr. rosman is the only medical doctor you heard from who is actively involved in diagnosing and treating patients with addiction problems and who has throughout his career done that actively. and he told you how he diagnoses addiction. he told you that he uses the criteria for diagnosing addiction that are found in that dsm, the diagnostic and statistics manual that we heard so much about, statistical manual. and that is the very same manual that plaintiff's own experts agreed was the authoritative source for psychiatrists who actually diagnose and treat patients. and without reviewing all of that evidence, i know you were paying close 5763 attention, dr. rosman explained to you how he applied those diagnostic criteria to mrs. surico. he talked about the definition in the dsm of addiction as "a maladaptive pattern of substance use that leads to clinically significant impairment or distress." and he explained how his analysis of the factors that make up that major criterion, when applied to mrs. surico, yield his opinion that mrs. surico was not addicted. and we would suggest that when you review that opinion testimony, when you review all the other evidence, you will conclude that the plaintiff has not met his burden to prove by the greater weight of the evidence that mrs. surico was nicotine. but i'm going to go -- and if that is your conclusion, as we submit it should be, again, you stop, you are done. if the answer to any one of these three sub-questions is no, then the answer to question number one must be no, and that ends the case. but i'm going to talk about the third 5764 sub-question as well, and that sub-question is whether addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine was a legal cause of mrs. surico's cancer and death. and this is the one that plaintiff's counsel did not refer to or discuss at all in his opening argument. and i'm going to go ahead and address that question. it uses the phrase "legal cause." and plaintiff's counsel articulated a perspective on legal cause. i'm going to submit to you that what you will find in the jury instructions is that in order for something to be a legal cause, it must reasonably be said to be a but-for cause. b-u-t, f-o-r. and what that means is you have to be able to say, but for addiction, mrs. surico would not have become ill or died. in other words, it is a necessary component of that chain of events. and as i will discuss for the next few minutes, we do not believe that the plaintiff has met his burden on that point. and i would submit to you that the best way to think about this legal cause question, this but-for 5765 question, is to ask yourselves this question. and the question is: could mrs. surico have quit smoking, even if she was addicted, could she have quit smoking in time to avoid her injury? and if the answer to that is yes, if the answer is that even if she was addicted, mrs. surico could have quit in time to avoid her injury, then addiction was not the legal cause of her illness and death. and as i predicted a few minutes ago, i want to pointed out again that in answering this question whether even if she was addicted, could mrs. surico have quit, you have to look at the evidence not about other people, but about mrs. surico. because the answer to whether an addicted smoker can quit may be different for one person than another. we know for sure that addicted smokers can quit. we know that because we heard that from experts. we know that because of mr. surico's experience. he was addicted to smoking. he says he was addicted to smoking. the plaintiff's expert says he was addicted to smoking. and he was able to quit. 5766 there may be addicted smokers who cannot quit, but we know that millions of addicted smokers are able to quit because we know that millions of addicted smokers have quit. i'm talking about statistics, i'll zip my own lips and i'll talk about mrs. surico. we know -- let us assume for the sake of this discussion that mrs. surico was addicted. that is what the plaintiffs say they proved. well, if that is true, what do we know? we know that mrs. surico did quit smoking. we know that even if she was addicted, she did quit smoking in 1993. so either she was not addicted at all and that is why she was able to quit, in which case you have answered no to the second sub-question, or, we know if she was addicted, she still had the ability to quit. so there is no question about whether or not mrs. surico had the ability to quit. the question is, did she have the ability to quit in time to avoid her injury? so put a little differently, we know that addiction did not prevent mrs. surico from quitting in 1993. if she was addicted, that addiction did not prevent her from quitting. 5767 so that brings us to the question, what, if anything, prevented her from quitting before 1993, and in particular, in time to avoid her injury? and dr. burns gave some testimony on this point, and he gave testimony from sort of both ends of the spectrum. on one end of the spectrum, he said that in his opinion, an addicted -- a smoker who quits -- a regular smoker who quits by the age of 35, so for mrs. surico, that would have been 1965, has the same excess risk of getting lung cancer as a never smoker. so in that case, clearly, if a person quits by the time they are 35, according to dr. burns' opinion, then they have quit in time to prevent their injury, to avoid their injury. then on the other end he said, if you quit 15 years before your diagnosis, 15 years or more, then it is medically more likely than not that you would have avoided getting the injury at the time that you did. so let us analyze that question. could mrs. surico have quit in time to avoid her injury, and since we know that addiction did 5768 not prevent her from quitting in 1993, what, if anything, prevented her from quitting before 1993? so how do you know that addiction to smoking was not a but-for legal cause of mrs. surico's illness and death? how do you know from the evidence that addiction did not prevent mrs. surico from quitting before 1993? you will know -- you know that from the evidence that relates to the question that i suggested to you in opening statement, and that question is this: did mrs. surico control her smoking or did her smoking control her? and the answer to that question, ladies and gentlemen, is clear from the evidence about mrs. surico. not about statistics, not about populations, not about other people, but about mrs. surico. and we learned most of what we know about mrs. surico from mr. surico. and you heard what he had to say on this very point. he told you that mrs. surico's decisions to smoke were her decisions. he told you that from his perspective, mrs. surico could decide for herself whether to smoke, when to smoke, 5769 and how much to smoke. and you know that mr. surico's testimony is confirmed and corroborated by the evidence of mrs. surico's smoking history because that evidence clearly establishes that what mr. surico said was exactly right. she was in control of her decisions, those were her decisions, and it was up to her. and what was that evidence? that evidence is the evidence that came out in the testimony about mrs. surico's smoking history. you learned that mrs. surico was able to control her smoking when she cut down on her smoking back in 1964 at the england air force base in louisiana. and the evidence is clear, ladies and gentlemen, we know we have a smoking history that begins in october of 1951 because everybody agrees, there was no evidence from any witness with personal knowledge of anything before that time. that is the time that mr. surico met mrs. surico. and the evidence is clear that at no time between 1951 and 1964 did mrs. surico even attempt to quit smoking. and dr. burns told you that addiction never prevented anyone from 5770 attempting to quit smoking. so we know that addiction was not a but-for cause that prevented mrs. surico from trying to quit between 1951 and 1964. and what else do we know about that period? we know that mrs. surico did not make an effort to quit despite the fact that at least from the time mr. surico met mrs. surico's mother, she was telling mrs. surico to quit. we know that in 1954, there was a gallup poll, dr. burns testified that there was gallup poll that asked this question: "have you heard or read anything recently to the effect that cigarette smoking may be a cause of cancer to the lung?" and ninety percent of the people who responded to that poll said yes. but you know what, i'm going to take it back. because the question is not whether ninety percent said something or eighty percent said something, the question is, what did mrs. surico know? what did mrs. surico know? and here's how statistics can be misleading, ladies and gentlemen. mr. surico 5771 told us that in 1954, he had never heard anything, i'm not talking about believing anything, he had never heard anything as of 1954 about cigarette smoking being a cause of cancer to the lung. well, if we were just to look at statistics and we were to say, well, mr. surico was an adult in 1954. let us try to figure out what he knew. let us look at this poll. if we looked at this poll, we would say, mr. surico, you knew in 1954 or you read or heard something in 1954 to the effect that cigarette smoking may be a cause of cancer to the lung. but you know what? maybe mr. surico is in that ten percent. he says he is. we have no reason to doubt that. and that is how statistics can be misleading, ladies and gentlemen, because if you are going to go by the statistic, we would say, oh, no, mr. surico, you must have known, because ninety percent of the people knew. well, mr. surico would say to us, well, wait a minute, that is fine for those ninety percent. i'm in the ten percent. you have to know about me. it is not enough to know 5772 about the people who filled out a survey or took a poll or who were in a study. you have to know about the person you are talking about. the evidence has to be about mrs. surico. so coming back to 1964, you heard that along with her neighbor, ms. conway, mrs. surico cut down on her smoking, and after a period of time, she resumed smoking. and as mr. surico put it, once they got into the coffee drinking or the wine drinking in the afternoon, that was the end of it. so what does that tell you? what else did you learn about the episode in 1964? you learned what mrs. surico said to mr. surico at the time and you learned how he responded. but before i go on, i want to make one point absolutely, completely crystal clear. we are not blaming mr. surico for mrs. surico's illness and death. we are not blaming joanne surico or madeline holzem for mrs. surico's illness and death. and we are certainly not making any suggestion at all that mrs. surico or ms. joanne -- that mr. surico or ms. joanne surico or madeline holzem had any legal fault. we are not saying those things. 5773 but what plaintiff's counsel told you, with all due respect, was wrong. those are not improper concerns, those are highly relevant concerns, and that is why the evidence was admitted in court. it was admitted in court because it was relevant. it was admitted in court because it is evidence that you can and should consider in evaluating mrs. surico's conduct and her smoking behavior. and it is evidence that you can and must consider in evaluating how you are going to answer these questions. so let me say it again: we are not asking that you put mr. surico on the verdict form. we are not asking that you put joanne surico or madeline holzem on the verdict form. we are not blaming them. we are not saying they are at fault. but what they had to say to mrs. surico and whether she was encouraged or discouraged in her efforts to quit smoking are not only not improper concerns, they are probably the most critical concerns in the whole case. and counsel referred to the notes that you all had written, the questions you all had 5774 written, and i would agree, there were some excellent questions. and that focus was not improper. that focus was completely proper. and important. and we would respectfully submit to you that you should keep that focus on that evidence as it relates to the issues that you are being called upon to decide. and that issue does not include whether mr. surico is legally at fault, and it does not include whether mr. surico should be blamed for mrs. surico's illness and death. and we are not doing any of those things. but let us talk about that how that evidence relates to mrs. surico. and you know from the testimony of the plaintiff's experts that motivation is a key in answering this question whether and when an addicted smoker can quit and whether addiction prevents a smoker from quitting. and we would suggest that the evidence showed that not only is motivation a key, but you may conclude that motivation is the most important key to the question whether a smoker, addicted or not, can successfully quit smoking. and dr. burns, plaintiff's expert, made 5775 crystal clear that to go with that motivation, if you are going to have success, the smoker must have two very important things. he called them the hallmarks or the characteristics of overcoming addiction. and what did he say those two things were? sufficient internal resources and sufficient external support. sufficient internal resources, sufficient external support. and dr. burns' testimony was clear that in his expert opinion, as the plaintiff's expert, as the person who according to plaintiff's counsel knows more about these issues than anyone in the entire solar system, dr. burns told you that to him, family support was a very, very important component of that external support. and that is why it is entirely proper and extremely important that you consider the evidence whether mrs. surico's family members attempted to intervene in her smoking behavior and that you do it consistently with the court's instructions on that point. what is the evidence with respect to the 1964 episode? the evidence is that when 5776 mr. surico saw that mrs. surico was smoking again, all he had to say to her was, "you did not make it." that is all he said. and he explained to us that he just did not feel like discussing it with her. he explained that from his perspective, mrs. surico could decide for herself whether, when, and how much to smoke. and again, ladies and gentlemen, this is not about blaming mr. surico. that explanation made some sense. but the question is, what was it that prevented mrs. surico from quitting? was she waiting to hear something from philip morris, or was she waiting for just a bit more encouragement, a bit more support from those around her? so when you ask yourselves the question, did mrs. surico have the ability to quit smoking in 1964, the answer is clearly yes. what she lacked was not the ability to quit smoking in 1964, what she lacked was a component of the motivation. motivation, which dr. burns tells us, comes from external support including the support of family members. so that question of motivation is something we also have evidence on from what 5777 mr. surico told us about these various times that mrs. surico stopped smoking for certain periods of time. because he told us that she did not throw away her ashtrays in 1964, she did not throw away her cigarettes, she did not throw away her lighters. she did not do any of the things that she would have done if she was truly motivated to quit. and that period in 1964 is the only time between 1951 and 1978 that mrs. surico even attempted to quit smoking. she made the decisions to continue smoking. she made the decisions not even to try to quit. because again, there is no suggestion by any witness in this case or any expert you heard from that addiction prevents somebody from trying to quit. the reason she did not try to quit was she was making her own choices and her own decisions. she did not try to quit in -- well, she did not try to quit in 1962 when mr. surico successfully quit smoking. she did not try to quit in 1966 when those warnings came on the packages of cigarettes sold in the united states. she did not try to quit in 1970 when 5778 those warnings came on. she did not try to quit in 1975 when dr. burns told us everybody -- and i want to make sure i get this quotation right -- dr. burns told us that he gave a speech in 1975 in which he said -- take that down, please, marie. is this the one, mr. philipson? technician: yes, sir. mr. stern: dr. burns told us that what he said in 1975 was: "more americans know that cigarette smoking is dangerous for them than know the name of the president of the united states." she did not quit or even attempt to quit at any of those times. the next time she stopped smoking was in 1978. we learned that in 1978, the suricos moved to their new home in beavercreek. and mr. surico told you that mrs. surico did not want the new house to start smelling like smoke as soon as they moved in. so what did she do? the evidence shows that for eight to ten days when the suricos first moved into that house, mrs. surico stopped smoking. after smoking what the plaintiff contends was a pack 5779 a day for 25 years, give or take, mrs. surico stopped smoking. overnight she went from a pack a day for 25 years to zero. no gum, no patch, she just stopped smoking. and zero again the next day and zero again the day after that until some eight to ten days later she apparently resumed smoking. and there was a not a shred of evidence, ladies and gentlemen, that mrs. surico had any withdrawal symptoms during that time. and we know that is not unusual. we know that from dr. cummings' pamphlet smart move. do we have that on the screen? if not, i have a hard copy. i'm going to do it with the elmo. let me do it with the elmo. technician: do you want me to do it? mr. stern: yeah, please. actually, before i talk about the text of that -- i'm sorry to do that to you, ladies and gentlemen -- i want to talk about the pamphlet itself. the smart move pamphlet. you okay? and you all saw this when i was asking questions of dr. cummings. and this pamphlet is a very important resource. it is an 5780 important resource for smokers who have made the decision to quit and for their families. but i would submit it is also an important resource for you, as jurors, because it tells you what dr. cummings was telling his patients. and why is that important? that is important because of what dr. cummings told you about himself. he candidly admitted that he is not a neutral and impartial and unbiased witness. to the contrary, he told you that he is a biased witness. he told you that because of what he believes he is learned from his research, he has what he, himself, called a "significant bias against my client." and he also testified that he has what he referred to as a "personal interest in the plaintiff winning the case." and we submit to you, ladies and gentlemen, when you look at that instruction on the believability of witnesses, you will see that bias or an interest in who wins the case is something that you can consider in evaluating the credibility, the believability of dr. cummings' testimony. because whether or not dr. cummings thinks he has a good reason for being biased, he is 5781 still biased. and that is something you should take into consideration. but that brings us back to why the smart move pamphlet is an important resource, not only for smokers and their families, but for you, as jurors. and that is because the pamphlet tells you what dr. cummings is telling his patients when he is actually involved in helping them quit smoking. not what he is saying when he is trying to help a plaintiff win a lawsuit. so, returning to that pamphlet, we see why it would not be surprising for mrs. surico not to have withdrawal symptoms, because he is got this whole page of getting over smoking, and those are the things that were referred to as withdrawal symptoms, irritable, tired and so forth. but then, in a special box he writes, "remember." and the first things he writes under "remember" is "you may not have any of these feelings." and that is because some people have withdrawal symptoms and some people do not. that is because different people respond differently. so we know that mrs. surico did not have any withdrawal symptoms when she quit cold 5782 turkey in beavercreek in 1978, after smoking a pack a day for 25 years. she just stopped smoking. and that eight- to ten-day time period is important, ladies and gentlemen, because all of the experts agree that the nicotine would have been out of mrs. surico's system within three or four days. and, once again, the evidence is clear that mrs. surico had the ability to quit. the evidence is clear, from 1964 and 1968 that she had control of where she smoked, when she smoked, and how much she smoked. and the evidence shows you that it was mrs. surico's choices to smoke and her choices to continue to smoke that were the legal cause of her injury. and, once again, you can consider whether mrs. surico had sufficient external support. and what was the evidence on that point? you heard mr. surico's testimony. he told you that after mrs. surico resumed smoking, after eight to ten days, he told you that he did nothing to encourage mrs. surico to stick with it. what else do we know about her control over her smoking? we know that in the 1979 5783 time frame, there was a time period where she cut down on her smoking during a three- or four-month period. mr. surico did not offer us many details about that, but we do know that there is no evidence that she had any withdrawal symptoms. and then, ladies and gentlemen, we get to 1981. because you heard about the time period, shortly after mr. surico left the air force in 1981. and what you learned was that at that point, after smoking what the plaintiff claims was a pack a day, or more, for more than 25 years, mrs. surico, again, stopped smoking. on a dime. she went from a pack a day to zero. and this time, according to joanne surico's sworn testimony, mrs. surico stopped smoking for six months. now mr. surico's testimony was not entirely consistent with that. he remembers the period was something like january to march. but there is no question that for a two- to six-month period in 1981 mrs. surico completely stopped smoking. she continued her -- she controlled her smoking and not the other way around. she made the decision to stop smoking, 5784 and that decision was her decision. it is a clear example that she was able to control her smoking behavior. and that particular decision to control her smoking, that particular decision to stop smoking, for what joanne surico said was six months, is important for another reason. because we know that within days of when mrs. surico stopped smoking, the nicotine was out of her system. that is not disputed. and we also know that if mrs. surico had any withdrawal symptoms at all, they would have been gone in a matter of weeks. also not disputed. we also know that mrs. surico's brain receptors would have returned to normal within some period of time, i'm going to get to the period in a minute, but first i want to point out a disagreement that i know you all noted. how do you know that the brain receptors, the buildup of the brain receptors, completely reverses after some period of time? you know that from the two medical doctors who testified on this subject. first you heard from dr. burns, the 5785 plaintiff's witness, a medical doctor who testified that the buildup of the receptors is completely reversed. and what he said was in two or three or six months. he did not really pin down a specific time period. but the important point, ladies and gentlemen, is dr. burns swore to you that the buildup of the brain receptors is completely reversed within six months at the absolute outside, and possibly within two months. dr. rosman, also a medical doctor, agreed with dr. burns and testified that the receptors, the buildup of the receptors returns to normal, and he put it at even a shorter period of time. the only witness who testified that the receptors never return to normal was dr. cummings. dr. cummings is not a medical doctor of any kind. and, of course, in evaluating his testimony, you can, and we submit you should, take into consideration his self-confessed bias and interest in the case. in evaluating the credibility of his testimony, the bottom line is that the credible evidence shows that the buildup of nicotine 5786 receptors is completely reversed within a certain period of time from when a person stops smoking. so somewhere during that period of time that joanne surico says was six months, the receptors, the buildup of receptors, would have been completely reversed and would have gone back to normal. so what does that mean? that means when mrs. surico made the decision to resume smoking, in 1981, after mr. surico lost his job, there was no nicotine in her system, withdrawal symptoms were gone, and the buildup of her brain receptors had been completely reversed. and what does that mean? that means that when mrs. surico decided to smoke, after mr. surico lost his job, she was making a fresh decision. she was 41 years old, warnings had been on cigarette packages for 15 years. mr. surico told you that certainly by then he was aware of the health risks of smoking. and mrs. surico was in the same information environment that he was. so while we do not have any specific information about mrs. surico, we could say we just do not know, but if we were to indulge this 5787 idea that she knew what mr. surico knew, certainly he knew by that time that there were health risks to smoking. and you know that when she made that fresh decision to smoke, when mr. surico lost her job -- lost his job, that that was a decision that had nothing to do with addiction, it had nothing to do with being addicted to cigarettes, it was her own choice and her own decision. and how else do we know that mrs. surico was able to control her smoking? we know that because her daughters did not want mrs. surico to smoke in their houses and around their children. and how did mrs. surico respond? did she stop visiting her family? did she argue with her daughters? no, she willingly complied with her daughters' requests. that is not an addict, ladies and gentlemen. that is someone who decides something is more important to her than smoking, and does the thing that is more important and controls the smoking. how else do you know that she had the ability to quit with the right motivation? how 5788 do you know that the plaintiff has not met his burden of proof to show that addiction, if she were addicted at all, was a but-for cause of her smoking? you know that from the evidence in the 1992 alaska trip that mr. surico took with her family -- mrs. surico took with her family. you learned that with the help of the patch, mrs. surico stopped smoking for two weeks. not a single cigarette during that entire time. now the record is not entirely clear on whether she had withdrawal symptoms. you heard about irritability, you heard about paranoia, but dr. rosman explained that paranoia is not really a symptom of withdrawal. in any event, all the experts agree that the idea of the patch is to avert the withdrawal symptoms. but in any event, the evidence could not be more clear that mrs. surico had the ability to quit smoking. what she did not have, what she did not have was the motivation and the external support that dr. burns testified about. because earlier this morning, you heard mr. surico's deposition testimony. and he 5789 testified that during this discussion among him, joanne and madeline; joanne and madeline said, hey, let her smoke. and mr. surico said, i'm not stopping her from smoking. we are not blaming joanne surico, we are not blaming madeline holzem, we are not blaming joe surico, mr. surico, but you can and you should consider the role that that lack of encouragement, that that lack of external support, as dr. burns put it, the role that that those things played in her continuing to smoke. but there is certainly no dispute that during that entire 1992 alaska trip, mrs. surico did not smoke a single cigarette. and that brings us to another very significant point about mrs. surico's ability to control her smoking. because the evidence showed that for over a year and a half, from the spring of 1992 until mrs. surico passed in november of '93, her daughters never again saw her smoke. now, mr. surico says that -- mr. surico says that mrs. surico did not quit for good on the 1929 alaska trip. he explains the fact that the daughters never saw mrs. surico smoke 5790 again by saying that for some reason, after smoking openly in front of her now very-grown daughters for almost 40 years, all of a sudden mrs. surico decided to hide her smoking from them. to lie to them and to ask mr. surico to lie to them. we also know that according to the medical records, mrs. surico quit smoking for good in 1992 and not 1993. but, in any event, at the very least, we know that mrs. surico was able to control her smoking to refrain smoking in the presence of her daughters, including when everybody was on that family vacation in hawaii. and mr. surico told us that she would sneak off sometimes, but we know that that was a family trip and that most of the time mrs. surico was saying to herself, there is something more important to me than smoking cigarettes. and that is being with my family. so i am going to be with my family and not smoke, rather than forego being with my family. so, we know that when it was important for her to be around her family, she made the decision to be with her family and not smoke. 5791 if it was more important to her to be around people who might be offended by her smoking, like joanne surico's then husband, she did not beg the people that might be offended, she simply did not smoke. that is not the behavior of an addict. there can be no greater evidence of control than that testimony. and that brings us, ladies and gentlemen, to the clearest evidence of all, that the plaintiff has not met his burden of proof on the question of legal cause in that class membership question. on the question of whether it was an addiction that was a legal cause, a but-for cause of mrs. surico's illness and death. and the clearest evidence of all that mrs. surico had the ability to quit. and that all it took for her to quit successfully was the right motivation and the right external support. was the evidence of what mr. surico himself told you happened on that 1993 cruise to alaska. he and mrs. surico were dancing. mrs. surico got winded. and when she did, mr. surico said to her, "you have to stop smoking or i will not dance with you anymore." 5792 and mr. surico told you, ladies and gentlemen, that was the first time that he had ever told mrs. surico that he wanted her to stop smoking. he told you that that was the first time that he had ever even encouraged mrs. surico to stop smoking. the evidence showed you, ladies and gentlemen, that mrs. surico did not say to mr. surico, "joe, i cannot do it, i cannot quit smoking." she did not say, "i have an addiction that prevents me from quitting smoking." she did not say any of those things, ladies and gentlemen. what she did was she quit smoking on the spot, cold turkey, and never had another cigarette again. and you know from that evidence that it was not an addiction that prevented mrs. surico from quitting before 1993, because addiction did not prevent her from smoking when she finally had the right motivation. you will know that it was not a lack of information about the health risks of smoking, because she knew about those risks decades before 1993, beginning from when she heard mr. surico's doctor's advice and then when she 5793 heard about the 1964 surgeon general's report and then from the warnings on every pack of cigarettes made in the united states that she bought starting in 1966. you will know that she was not prevented from quitting before 1993 by any statement, any statement that she heard or did not hear from philip morris. no, ladies and gentlemen, the evidence showed you that mrs. surico had the ability to quit long before 1993, and certainly in time to avoid her injury. what prevented her from quitting was not addiction. and it was not anything that philip morris said or did not say. all she needed to quit smoking successfully was what dr. burns said is enough for any smoker to quit. all she needed was the right motivation and the external support to go on -- to go along with her own sufficient internal resources. and the first time that she got that support, the first time that she had that motivation, she quit. she quit for good. she quit cold turkey. and that, ladies and gentlemen, is how you 5794 will know that mr. surico has not met his burden of proof to establish that addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine was a but-for legal cause of mrs. surico's illness and death. and that is the evidence upon class membership, ladies and gentlemen. and the evidence shows you that the answer to each of those three sub questions is no. and, as i told you and as the instructions will tell you, unless you all agree that the answer to each of those questions is yes, your work is done. and because we respectfully submit that the plaintiff has not met his burden on that first class membership question, we submit that you will not need to go any further on that verdict form. but there are other questions on the form, and because they are there and because plaintiff's counsel talked about them, i'm going to address them, too. and if we could have the verdict form back up, marie. the next question requires the plaintiff to meet his burden of proof to show that 5795 cigarettes manufactured by philip morris were the legal cause, or a legal cause, a but-for cause of phyllis surico's cancer and death. because, actually, as plaintiff's counsel himself pointed out to you, it is not enough for the plaintiff to prove that phyllis surico was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine and an addiction was a legal cause of her cancer and death, we submit that they have not proved those things, but even if they had, that simply establishes class membership. then the plaintiff must prove, by the greater weight of the evidence, that smoking cigarettes manufactured by philip morris was a legal cause, a but-for cause, of mrs. surico's illness and death. and you will decide whether the plaintiff has met its burden of proof on that question. i would like to suggest to you some of the testimony you should consider. you should consider, of course, the testimony that mrs. surico did not have brand loyalty. that she just bought whatever was the cheapest. we also submit you should consider the 5796 testimony of mr. surico and joanne surico and ms. holzem -- do you have that one, marie? this is what they said about -- the testimony about parliament being mrs. surico's primary brand. and there is no dispute, ladies and gentlemen, i do not want to be heard to be disagreeing with the proposition that parliament is manufactured by philip morris usa. that -- we have agreed to that. but the question is, has the plaintiff met his burden of proof to establish that the cigarettes smoked by mrs. surico, that philip morris usa cigarettes, were a but-for cause. and here was the testimony that you heard. it looks pretty much the same from each of the witnesses. "i would say 85 to ninety percent of the time" and that was referring to smoking parliament. and then ms. joanne surico, "she smoked mostly parliament, so 80, 85 percent of the time at least." joseph surico, "85 to ninety percent of the time." and we would suggest to you, ladies and gentlemen, that in evaluating that testimony -- and that is -- that is just what they said, those are their words -- but we suggest, in 5797 evaluating that testimony you should consider whether that testimony is supported or corroborated by other evidence. what other evidence do we have? you will remember that plaintiff's counsel, in one of his cross-examinations, said that one of the places we could look, to decide whether testimony is supported and corroborated on the one hand, or contradicted and undermined on the other hand, one place to look are the photographs. these are a lot of photographs. a lot of photographs produced during what was referred to as the discovery process, you heard testimony about that. and you saw a lot of photographs in court. and you should consider that if mrs. holzem and ms. surico and mr. surico were right, you would expect that 85 to ninety percent of the cigarettes and cigarette packages shown in those photographs would be parliament. but what do we know from the testimony about those photographs? we know that mr. surico was not able to identify a single cigarette in any of those photographs as being a parliament cigarette. 5798 he was not able to identify a single pack of cigarettes in any of those photographs as being a pack of parliaments. just drop a footnote to that. he did identify a pack as possibly a parliament, but we know it was not. we know that that pack was a pack of true cigarettes. so the only pack that he even purported to identify as parliament, we know is not parliament. so, in evaluating the question whether mr. surico has proved, by the greater weight of the evidence, that it was philip morris usa cigarettes that were a but-for cause of mrs. surico's illness and death, we would suggest that you consider that evidence, the evidence of the photographs, and the evidence you have about mrs. surico always buying the cheapest brand at the commissary, and we know that she had access to the commissary from the time mr. surico joined the air force in 1961 until years after he retired in 1981. so would you take that down, marie, please and get the verdict form back up? so, i'm beginning to sound like a broken record, i know, but we submit to you that you 5799 do not get past sub question one of question one, and you certainty do not get past question one. we also submit to you that you do not past question two, because the evidence i just recited is not sufficient for the plaintiff to meet its burden of proof. but because the question is on the form and because you heard about it from plaintiff's counsel, i'm going to go on to this question. and this question is: "was the concealment or omission by philip morris usa of material information about the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes, or both, a legal cause, a but-for cause, of phyllis surico's cancer and death?" now, again, i may have misheard plaintiff's counsel, but if he suggested to you that those findings answer this question? that is wrong. because those findings do not answer the question whether concealment by philip morris was a legal cause of phyllis surico's illness and death. and that is the question that you must answer. and the key to that question, and the key to the related 5800 instruction is, the legal cause requirement. because the findings do not tell you -- and, remember, those findings have nothing to do with the case unless and until you get past question one. those findings have nothing to do whether concealment was the legal cause of injury to mrs. surico. so even if you were to find that mrs. surico is a member of the class and apply those findings, we, of course, submit that you should not, the findings do not answer that critical question. you have to look to the evidence in this case. and you know, from mr. surico's own testimony, that in this case the answer to that question must absolutely be no. because there is not a shred of evidence -- and this is undisputed -- that mrs. surico's decision to start smoking, whenever that may have been, was the result of any concealment of information by philip morris. and, actually, there is, likewise, not a shred of evidence that any agreement to conceal -- any agreement to conceal information 5801 had anything to do with mrs. surico's decision to begin smoking and, in fact, it could not have because the agreement that you heard about began in 1953 and we know that mrs. surico, at least had her first cigarette before then. there is also not a shred of evidence that any of mrs. surico's decisions to continue smoking were the result of any concealment of information by philip morris. there is very clear evidence to the contrary, ladies and gentlemen, because you know from mr. surico that in 39 years not a single word ever passed mrs. surico's lips about a single cigarette company advertisement, let alone philip morris; not a single word passed her lips in 39 years about ever having heard any statement by any tobacco company about everything. so if plaintiff's -- about anything. so if plaintiff's counsel gets up here and says, well, she must have heard these things because everybody else heard them. she must have been influenced because everybody else was influenced. please keep your eye on the ball. those questions were asked specifically of 5802 mr. surico, and he gave straightforward and informative answers. and you know from his answers to those questions that nothing -- there was no concealment and no omission that was a legal cause of mrs. surico's illness and death. and while i'm on this topic, ladies and gentlemen, you heard testimony, and you have heard argument, and i'm sure you will hear more argument about all these documents. as i said before, mr. scarola suggested that you refer to all these documents in your deliberations, and he listed documents for this question as well. and i submit to you, ladies and gentlemen, you can look at every single page of every one of those documents, you will not find a single mention of mrs. surico. you will not find a single mention that mrs. surico saw or heard or read any of the statements in those documents. and i will give you an example of that. so we keep hearing about this -- what is called the frank statement and the promise in the frank statement. is there any evidence at all that mrs. surico ever saw or heard the frank 5803 statement the day it came out, the one day it appeared as an advertisement in a newspapers? no. is there a shred of evidence from anyone who knew mrs. surico that will tell you that she ever saw or heard anything about that statement? the answer is no. so when the question for you is, has the plaintiff proved by the greater weight of the evidence that concealment or omission or agreement to conceal or omit was a legal cause of mrs. surico's illness or death, you know that the answer to that has to be no. now, i will repeat something that i said in opening, ladies and gentlemen, before i leave this topic, because while there is not a shred of evidence that those documents had any impact on mrs. surico, i do not want to be heard to say everything in those documents is just fine. i do not want to be heard to say, well geez, all those things made perfect sense. there were some pretty stupid and inappropriate things said in those documents. and if there were any evidence from anybody who knew mrs. surico that she had seen or heard or was in any way influenced by any of those 5804 statements, this might be a different case. but there is no such evidence, and that is why, if you even get this far, the answer to those two questions must be no. so, can you go to the next page of the verdict form, please, marie? or scroll further down, however it works. okay. so that brings us to this question number five. and counsel talked to you about question number five. and, of course, you will understand that you do not get this far, we submit to you, because the plaintiff has failed to meet all of the burdens of proof on all of the questions that have to be answered yes in order to make it to this item. but counsel talked about it, so i'm going to talk about it. we submit to you, ladies and gentlemen, that even if you get this far, even if you conclude that mrs. surico has an injury and that philip morris could be a legal cause, we submit to you that the percentages should be philip morris zero, phyllis surico a hundred percent. and that is because, we submit to you, the plaintiff has failed in his burden of proof. 5805 i want to make something clear to you, ladies and gentlemen, we are talking about just this case. i'm not trying to tell you that in every case, forever and ever, philip morris would be a zero. i do not know about other cases, but i know about this case, and i know what the evidence is in this case. and the evidence in this case is that the plaintiff has failed to meet her burden of proof to show that philip morris is at fault. and that is why that one is a zero. so now, ladies and gentlemen, we get to the question of damages. this is a difficult question. once again, we submit you do not even need to reach it. but if you do, this is a difficult question. and i do not mean just here, the concept of this question is difficult. and rather than say whatever the two-point whatever million it is oh, geez, that is ridiculous, i'm not going to say anything like that. i'm not going to suggest a number that you should find if you get this far, which we submit you should not. what i would like to do is suggest a way for you to think about answering this question 5806 in a case like this. and what i would like to suggest to you, and let me say, just so we are really clear, we are not suggesting that mrs. gail surico is a replacement for mrs. phyllis surico. i actually think that mrs. gail surico probably put it best, and mr. lewis actually echoed this. you do not replace a lost loved one, you do not replace a lost parent, you do not replace a lost child, you do not replace a lost spouse. and i do not want to be heard at all to be suggesting anything of the kind. but you are going to be called upon, if you get this far, to answer this question; and i would like to suggest a way that you might think about this. and let me also tell you that when you are thinking about mrs. gail surico and mr. surico's remarriage, that evidence was admitted so that you would have the whole story. you are going to hear an instruction about what you are not supposed to use the evidence for, but i want to make sure you understand what you can use the evidence for. you can use that evidence when you are thinking about the whole story, the truth, when 5807 it comes to the question of compensatory damages. and here is the suggestion i would like to make. one way to think about this is on a spectrum. and on one end of the spectrum, you might have someone who has suffered the tragic loss of a loved one, and that person is never able to get back on his or her feet. that person is never able to move on with his other her life. that person is alone. that person does not remarry, that person does not have other family. that person -- mr. scarola: excuse me, your honor. may we approach? (thereupon, out of the presence of the jury:) mr. scarola: counsel is arguing a precisely improper consideration of this evidence. he is suggesting that it can be considered by the jury in measuring mr. surico's pain and suffering. that is totally improper and contrary to the court's instruction, it is contrary to the law. i ask that he be directed to stop. mr. stern: i will put it clearly in the 5808 context of the plaintiff's burden of proof to prove damages, your honor. the court: overruled. i'll let you address it in your rebuttal, sir. mr. scarola: thank you. (thereupon, the sidebar conference was concluded and within the presence of the jury:) mr. stern: and in deciding whether the plaintiff has met his burden of proof on the question of damages, i would suggest you think about this spectrum. and on the other end of the spectrum would be a person who has likewise suffered the tragic loss of a loved one, but fortunately, is able to get back on his or her feet. mr. scarola: same objection, your honor. the court: overruled. mr. stern: is able to pick up his or her life. is able to reengage with the world. who may be fortunate enough to find someone else to be with. who may be fortunate enough to have a life where they can at least reengage with the world and with their family and with the activities that they like to to. 5809 so i'm not going to give you a number. i'm going to just suggest to you that in deciding whether the plaintiff has met his burden of proof, that that is what you consider. finally, ladies and gentlemen, there is this question about punitive damages. and i want to spend just a few minutes talking about that, and then i will wrap up before too long. so on this question of punitive damages, you can do this part by now. we think you do not get that far. on the question of punitive damages, i'll say this. this is, for lawyers, it is sort of a weird position to be in because i have submitted to you that you will not get past the first sub-question of the first question, and here i am talking to you about what would happen if you got all the way to the bottom of the form. but -- and i know you know by now, we think you do not, but i do want to address it because once again it is something that is on the form, it is addressed in the instructions, it is been addressed by plaintiff's counsel. 5810 and when you consider this question of whether punitive damages are warranted, the first and most important thing i would ask you to bear in mind is the plaintiff's burden of proof is different and substantially higher on this question. so you will see under the circumstance -- you will see that every other question is governed by the greater weight of the evidence standard, which you will find in the instructions i think on page eight. this one is different. this one, the burden of proof is clear and convincing evidence. and the question is whether you find by clear and convincing evidence that punitive damages are warranted. and you will notice, and her honor has instructed you, that this standard is a higher standard than greater weight of the evidence. so purely hypothetically, you understand, if you were to conclude that punitive damages were warranted by the greater weight of the evidence, if that were your conclusion, you would have to check no, because greater weight of the evidence is not enough. so if you 5811 conclude they got greater weight of the evidence on punitives, that is not a yes, that is a no. you have to conclude, in order to check yes, that punitive damages are warranted by clear and convincing evidence. i'm not going to say a lot about this because, again, it is our submission that you do not get this far. but i am going to tell you that it is very important that you listen to her honor's instructions. i also want to make clear that we are talking about just this case. i want you to bear in mind that this is not a class action. other people have their own cases and other people can seek punitive damages in those other cases if that is appropriate. here, for the reasons i suggested before, we submit the evidence is clear that the plaintiff has not met his burden of proof on the other questions, and we certainly submit that it is absolutely clear that the plaintiff has not met his burden by clear and convincing evidence on this question. because there is no evidence of any conduct that counsel was talking about by the companies that had any 5812 impact on mrs. surico. if she did not see it, did not hear it, did not read it, did not have an effect on her, then that is not conduct that resulted in harm to her. and you will see in the first part of the instruction on this point that if it is not conduct that resulted in harm to her, and you do not otherwise find that it is reprehensible, which is a very high standard, then it cannot be the subject of punitive damages. i would also like to make one other point. punitive damages are for punishment. so if you get this far, if you decide that mrs. surico -- mr. surico is entitled to some compensation, you will have already decided to award him some money. this punitive damages issue would be above and beyond that as punishment. it would be above -- as punishment, it would be above and beyond the compensation. that, ladies and gentlemen, is all that i have to say about the evidence. but i want to talk to you for just a minute more about a really important concept. i've said the phrase, but i want to talk about what it means, and that is the burden of proof. 5813 as i told you before, and as her honor has instructed a number of times, including during counsel's arguments, the burden of proof is on the plaintiff. you have got an instruction on that, you should follow that instruction, but i'm going to suggest to you a way to think about that in the context of how you go about doing your job as jurors. one way to think about that is if you want your questions answered, you look to the party that needs to prove the case. and that means that you look over here, you do not look over there. so if you are back there and you are having a discussion and you say, hey, if mrs. surico's addiction prevented her from quitting, how is she able to quit in 1983 when the plaintiff says she was addicted? if that is your question, or if you have a question about how dr. burns could say that there was a tumor when the x-ray was clean without speculating, do not look over there, look over here. that is what the burden of proof is about. and that, ladies and gentlemen, is all i 5814 have to say, except to thank you for being an extraordinarily, extraordinarily patient and attentive jury. and i know that when you go back there, you are going to give the same attentive consideration to the evidence that you did when you were listening in the courtroom, you are going to give the same attentive consideration to her honor's instructions and to the argument of counsel that you have been giving in the courtroom. my closing remark is this: i'm done now. because the plaintiff has the burden of proof, the plaintiff gets to stand back up here and talk again. i want you to do me a favor. because i do not get to come back as you are listening to counsel, i want you to ask yourselves, if stern could get back up here, what would he say? so if counsel says, well, we know there was a tumor because sometimes they get missed. you know what i would say. you know i would say, that is speculation. if counsel gets up here and starts talking about all sorts of documents and there is no evidence that mrs. surico ever saw or heard any 5815 of those documents, i want you to ask yourselves, what would stern say? and you know what i would say. you know i would say this case is about mr. surico, mrs. surico, and not about anybody else. with that, ladies and gentlemen, i will thank you again, bid you a good afternoon, and particularly thank you for the very patient attention you have paid to my remarks this afternoon.