6 judge boyer, ms. shamp, ms. bryan, dr. sury, 7 members of the jury, good morning. when we first met a few weeks ago over in the other courthouse, we talked a little bit about jury service, your role as jurors and how important that is to our system. and one of the things that i mentioned was how much i had enjoyed being on a jury a few times back where i live and how much i hoped that you would enjoy it, too. and let me start by saying a couple things. first, i hope you have enjoyed it. and, second, i'd like to thank you and all of our group -- we work very hard -- and i'd like to thank you for all of your time, all of your attention and particularly all of your patience. this is the last time i get to talk to you. ms. shamp gets to talk to you twice, once as she has already done and then once after dave woods and i get to talk to you now. and the reason ms. shamp gets to talk to you twice is really important to keep in mind. and it does not mean that judge boyer likes her more than he likes mr. woods and me. the reason ms. shamp gets to talk twice is because the plaintiff, her client, has the burden of proof. he has the burden of proof on each and every issue that you are going to decide in this case. and i ask that you keep that in mind. that is why she gets to talk twice. and the other thing that i think is significant about the fact that ms. shamp gets to address you twice, both first and last, is because she will get the opportunity to respond to everything mr. woods and i have to say to you. she gets the opportunity to respond to everything mr. woods and i get to show to you. and so i ask you to keep that in mind. she gets the last word. please focus on what she says in response to what dave and i say and have shown to you. and in particular, try to focus on what ms. shamp does not say in response to what we have said to you, because i'm thinking that on a whole lot of issues she is not going to have much, if anything, to say. let me talk about this case, the issues you are going to have to decide. and first let us start with the name of the case. the name is sury versus r.j. reynolds tobacco company and lorillard tobacco company. this case involves bill sury. it involves nobody else. it is not about dr. proctor's typical smoker. it is not about dr. goldberg's generic smoker. this is not a referendum on cigarettes. it is not a referendum on the tobacco companies. it is not a referendum on dr. frazier's view that 9 people should not have a choice to buy cigarettes. they have that choice. this case is about bill sury. and i start with that point now the same way i started with my opening statement. and what i suggested to you then was that the plaintiffs were going to show you a whole lot of things having nothing to do with bill sury; they were going to show you hours and hours, days and days of videotaped depositions of our company employees having nothing to do with bill sury; that they were going to bring you a number of witnesses, burns, proctor, goldberg, all with opinions having nothing to do with bill sury; and that they would show you document after document after document having nothing to do with bill sury. and that is what is happened here. i checked my calendar last night. we started to present the proof to you, when you actually got over here and we started to present the proof to you, on november 3rd. we went almost two weeks -- two weeks -- until november 16th, wednesday, november 16th, before we heard anything from the plaintiffs about bill sury, when they finally called his son, robert sury, to testify about his father. the plaintiff here did not bring you much other information about bill sury. not one of his friends, virtually nothing about his job, and virtually nothing about his illness. and that is telling, because all of that is really, really important information in this case. and because all that information is so important in this case, we brought you all of the information we could about bill sury and his smoking and his illness and in particular what bill sury knew about the risks of smoking. what we know about bill sury is he grew up in new jersey. he went to a high school, not a prep school. he started in the mailroom at prudential life insurance company. he went in the army in 1941, stationed mostly in hawaii, and he rose through the ranks. important, he rose through the ranks. he started as a technician third class. he rose to become a first lieutenant in the united states army. he was highly decorated. he returned. during the war he got married to kay, and back to the prudential life insurance company after the war. and once again bill sury rose again and again through the ranks. he had one or two promotions in new jersey, and he be- -- came into the accounting department and then he got an appointment into the underwriting department. 11 and then he chose to move down here to jacksonville. and you heard it. he moved up and up and up through the ranks. dr. sury said it. he received a number of promotions within the underwriting department. he advanced to the position of underwriting consultant. he was in the insurance profession. he was a professional underwriter. he had a professional job. he did not have a low-level job. how could he, with all those promotions? he was on a first-name basis with the company president, john buchanan. now, we talked about underwriting, and the reason for that is pretty clear. because of all the businesses in this economy, it is the life insurance companies who are going to have the best grasp on life expectancies. and why is that? well, you heard it from dr. riddel. the longer somebody lives, the less they are going to have to pay out. the shorter somebody lives, the more they are going to have to pay out. it is their business to know about the risks of smoking and how long people are going to live. and to demonstrate this rather basic fact, we showed you that just as the first news of this health hazard was breaking, we saw the insurance companies starting to analyze the additional risks of smoking. they were one of the first, of course. it was their business to know that. and by the '50s we saw in the press, including newsweek, which bill sury read -- he certainly knew about this in his business, but just to show you that he actually -- there was actually something in newsweek, we showed that to you, too, in 1954, reporting on the plans of the life insurance companies to start charging higher rates for smokers. and the companies only got to that point because they had been researching this issue for a lot longer before that, long before bill sury brought his son robert down to his office and showed him how he would calculate the lower rates he could charge for non-smokers. now, that is a big problem for the plaintiffs in this case. and they tried to diminish dr. sury's knowledge of the risks by showing you this chart here. insurance. underwriter, not actuary. well, first of all, we did not suggest he was an actuary. an actuary is a person who actually prepares the rates. we told you bill sury was an underwriter, 13 and we told you that when i made my opening statement and when mr. woods made his opening statement. it was dr. goldberg who thought he was an actuary. but it really does not matter whether actuary or underwriter; they know the risks. and then she also shows you here that -- in the bullpen. i think she means bullpen, not an executive. you know, a lot of executives work in the bullpen. yes, he was in the bullpen. he was an executive. he rose and rose and rose through the ranks. i'm not quite sure why they use the bullpen. maybe to diminish his knowledge. i do not know. but the fact of the matter is he calculated the rates. he calculated the rates. and then they said prudential did not have differential rates until somewhere -- they did not have differential rates. so what? did not have differential rates. does not matter. it was a debate within the industry. and they are not saying they do not have differential rates now. they are saying at some point, according to dr. sury's testimony, they did not have differential -- i'm not quite sure what that means, the significance of that, not having differential rates, because he told you his dad knew of the -- well, he did not say that, but he told you that his dad would look to see if somebody was a smoker. he looked at that. and he used that factor in calculating the rates that the person applying for insurance would get. and ms. shamp just sat down, and before that she used the fact that we were bringing you innuendo to suggest there were differential rates. we were not bringing you innuendo. brought dr. sury to say that they charge less for non-smokers. and remember dr. goldberg? we showed you the 1954 document describing the newsweek article reporting on the fact that the life insurance companies were considering charging lower rates for non-smokers. that was not innuendo. it was the testimony of dr. goldberg and the testimony of -- excuse me -- dr. goldberg and dr. sury. if you are in the life insurance industry, you have a particular knowledge of the risks of smoking. the facts of this case show that bill sury knew the risks of smoking for a very long time. he knew it in two ways. number one, all the things we showed you, back to christopher columbus, evils of smoking, john quincy adams, addictive nature of tobacco, the fact that cigarettes were banned in 14 states in the 1900s, including florida, to the days of world war ii, when cigarettes were referred to as coffin nails. 15 we saw that in the film, frank sinatra film, from here to eternity, set in pearl harbor, ironically set in pearl harbor, where bill sury served. before the pearl harbor bombing frank sinatra is calling them coffin nails, nails, just as bill sury was having his first cigarette. bill sury knew that cigarettes were bad for him. you heard hal rush. everybody knew. it was just common knowledge. bill sury knew even more about the risks of smoking than the average american. second way, of course, his job. even dr. goldberg agreed with that. dr. goldberg admitted that compared to his generic smoker, bill sury would be more sensitive to the risks of smoking because of his job, and because of his job the risks of smoking would be more salient and more vivid to him. but at this point let me take just a little time out and reflect a little bit on what is going on here and what the case is all about. and let me start with a reality check. why is it that we spend so much time on this issue of everybody knew? why have we taken so much time to prove what appears to be the obvious, the obvious fact that everybody's known for a long time about the risks? you know, why do we go on and on about this, maybe even boring you with all the information we brought to you on the awareness of the risks? it is because the plaintiffs in this case have come into court trying to avoid this fact, trying to avoid the fact that people have known for a long time that cigarettes were bad for you, trying to deny that bill sury knew the risks. you heard ms. shamp in her opening statement. she did not say it today, but i think she said it -- i know she said it in opening statement, that in the 1940s and 1950s it was a different era, she said, and it was the time when frank sinatra was singing. remember that? the time, she said, that nobody knew that cigarette smoking was dangerous. just not so. the same frank sinatra who she said was singing is also at the same time calling them nails. the plaintiff here denies that bill sury knew that cigarettes were bad for him back when he started smoking, 1941, and that he remained unaware of the risks or confused until he heard in 1964, supposedly was shocked. and we will talk about that. heard in 1964 from the surgeon general that cigarettes were harmful; he was shocked. we will talk about that. 17 you know, do you really believe that bill sury and everybody else did not know that cigarettes were bad for them before the surgeon general's report? do you really believe the testimony of the son, dr. sury, the two of them were sitting in their chairs in front of the family tv, dr. sury being seven years old, by the way, but old enough to remember his dad was shocked. and, you know, shocked at what news? he was not shocked. no one was shocked. the next day we showed you a lot of newspaper reports, lots of newspaper reports, on the reaction to the surgeon general's report. and they said that the surgeon general was not really telling people anything they did not know. and just to make that clear, can we have demonstrative 2, please? 1964. this was when the surgeon general's report came out. bill sury was supposedly shocked. the journal of the american medical association said, "the health hazards have been well publicized for more than ten years and are common knowledge." let me focus on that word, "common knowledge." you heard hal rush come here into court yesterday, and i asked him, you know, "how old are you" when he started smoking -- or -- yeah, he was a little kid, well before bill sury started to smoke. and i asked him, "hal, when you were growing up, did you know that cigarettes were harmful, bad for you?" he said, "yes." and i said, "well, how do you know?" he said, "well, it was just common knowledge." and if you asked a historian how they would define "common knowledge," what they would say is that common knowledge is something that you know but you do not even know where you heard it from. it is just common; in the woodwork, i guess. and we have spent so much time putting these graphics up on the board about all of the reader's digest articles going back to the '20s and all of the statements of the -- in the papers and john quincy adams, christopher -- all of that. and why do we do that? it is because those are graphic reminders, something that was really happening, and we could put it up on a slide and show it to you to try to prove that. but the real thing is that it was just common knowledge. everybody knew. and now with that, let me turn to the specific questions you will be asked to answer in this case. and the first is a question -- let me show you the verdict form which you will take back and which ms. shamp showed to you. 19 and it has a lot of questions on it. it has a progression of questions on it, and it starts with the first. and the first question is -- the question: "was william sury addicted to cigarettes causing [sic] nicotine, and if so, was cigarette smoking because of such addiction a legal cause of his lung cancer?" and i'm going to get to that in just a minute, but this is the first question. and it is a progression. if you answer "yes" to the first question, you will go on to the others, or to some of the others, and then you will go on if you answer "yes" to them too. if you answer "no," which we think you should, we will be done. the case will be over. we all go home. and so this first question, "was william sury addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine, and, if so, was cigarette smoking because of such addiction a legal cause of his lung cancer?" that is the question. it is one big question. but it has three facets, each of which you should consider. and on each of these facets the plaintiffs have the burden of proof. so the first facet is, "was bill sury addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine," or in laymen's language, "was bill sury a nicotine addict?" you have heard the evidence on this question. dr. frazier, for the plaintiff, says yes, he was; he was addicted. dr. giakas says no. well, how do they differ? they both used that same diagnostic test, the dsm-iv, but they disagreed for two different reasons. i'm going to go through them right now. first reason is dr. frazier marches through each of the elements listed for consideration, and she checked them off. she checked them off one at a time, and ms. shamp did today, check, check, check, double-check, and says, "hey, he was addicted." dr. giakas, though, pointed out something different and something that ms. -- dr. frazier did not mention. before you get to those, you have got to look at the first issue, which is whether there is an overall loss of control. remember that? we talked a lot about that with dr. giakas. did bill sury have an overall loss of control? that is what they must show to you. and that is why ms. shamp got up and said right in the beginning -- and i wrote it down -- she says, "nicotine controls the behavior." let us think about that. nicotine controls the behavior. that is what she says. that is what they have got to prove with respect to bill sury. 21 and so the question, did bill sury ever suffer this loss of control? there is no evidence that bill sury suffered a loss of control. and you also heard from dr. giakas that of the millions of former smokers, fifty percent were addicted, fifty percent not. so fifty percent of former smokers, they can quit. and he told you about that, and he told you that bill sury was not among the fifty percent of smokers who was addicted. now, ms. shamp put up a slide and it said that dr. giakas did not know what he was talking about, said that dr. giakas was not credentialed. not credentialed. i'm not sure what that means. but anyway, he is not credentialed. dr. giakas has treated 500 to 600 addicted smokers. how many did dr. frazier? she tried to suggest that she had done it a lot. you may remember mr. latham impeached her right away on that. she tried to suggest to you it was a lot, remember. one of his first questions was, "have not you said repeatedly in the past, dr. frazier, that you have just treated a few, a few?" and she had to admit she is just treated a few addicted smokers. and then there was something else about the 1998 surgeon general's report he supposedly had not read. well, he had read it. she just got confused. he was shown the 2010 one, just came out. he said he did not -- had not read that, and when he did read it, he did not agree with certain things in there. just because it is a surgeon general's report, you do not have to agree with it. but the fact of the matter is dr. giakas is highly credentialed to give you the opinion that you heard today, and that is why we brought him in here, in view of those credentials. now, the second reason dr. frazier and dr. giakas disagree, even if there was a loss of control, then you get to the next part and you go through the tick marks that ms. shamp went through. and dr. giakas says, "okay. even if you get to that point, i do not think he met the necessary criteria for a diagnosis of a nicotine addict." and so here i want to spend just a little bit of time on this important first question looking at the evidence she relied upon. because, remember, an expert can only have an opinion based upon the evidence in the case. so let us look at what she relied upon. what did she rely upon? there were very, very -- no medical records before 1994. no other written records. 23 did she rely on any observations from anyone who does not stand to gain? maybe a little bit, i think. maybe a little bit from hal or yancey. i cannot remember that. but what she relied upon, virtually all of the evidence that she relies on to say that bill sury was addicted comes from dr. sury. and i suggest to you what dr. sury told you about his dad's addiction was either a little inflated or just maybe wrong. and let us walk through it. you heard about the quit attempts. water filters was a big quit attempt. remember that, water filters? water filter's not a quit attempt. it is just a different way of smoking a cigarette. he gave up cigarettes for lent. lent. you know, somebody who gives up something for lent, it means that they are going to start up when easter comes around. that is not a serious quit attempt. the other supposed quit attempts before the 1980s -- the 1990s, when he apparently went to the patch, what about those quit attempts from 1955 all the way up to 19- -- i do not think there were any. no one else saw him trying to quit. think of that. neither of his friends who played golf with him for almost 20 years ever saw one indication he was trying to quit. the only person who said he was trying to quit is the plaintiff, dr. sury. and then we get to this statement about how hard he was trying to quit. maybe he was not trying to quit hard or he was finding it hard to quit in 1991 or so when the nicotine patch comes and dr. sury says he used that. well, that story dr. sury said was a little hard to keep up with. remember, i went through the depositions with him. in the first deposition dr. sury says he never prescribed the patch for his dad. the patch was only available in 1990 -- excuse me -- over the counter later. in 1991 you had to have a prescription. he said he never prescribed it for him, never. he was quite sure of that fact. and then a couple months ago, getting ready for the trial here, testimony changed. and now he does recall prescribing the patch. now he recalls prescribing the patch, but no records. once again, no records. now he thinks he had his nurse call it in to a pharmacy, but cannot remember the name of the pharmacy, so no records from the pharmacy to confirm that. and i'll add to a little lack of clarity here. now dr. sury cannot remember if he prescribed the patch ten times or if he prescribed the patch a 25 hundred times. no idea how many prescriptions. and this was his father. and then we had this issue that mr. woods talked about him with when he cross-examined mr. sury. and this is really significant, so i'm going to spend a little time on it. how did dr. frazier get to all those tick marks that ms. shamp showed you? well, a lot of it was on the fact that he had -- bill sury supposedly had these withdrawal symptoms. remember what she talked about? well, he was irritable. he had anxiety. he was restless. insomnia. anger. anger. now, where did all those descriptors come from? they came from one person, and that was bob -- robert sury. they did not come from hal rush, they did not come from yancey montgomery, who saw him every week for 20 years, or even from his brother, dan sury. the -- these descriptors, these indicia of withdrawal symptoms, came from dr. sury. you heard it. they came from his internet research on the descriptors getting ready before his deposition. now, that, ladies and gentlemen, is pretty much the sum and substance of dr. frazier's opinion. and i do not think there is much substance there. nevertheless, ms. shamp put up something on the board in front of you that i want to focus on. she said bill sury was hooked -- and her word, "hooked" -- in the military. that was just not on their argument, it was not just on misleading argument, it was inaccurate argument. he may have started smoking in the military, but he was not addicted then or at any time. remember something else she put up on the board. "smoked 30 years heavily." or a pack a day. i'm sorry. "pack a day smoker for 30 years." when did the 30 years start? you saw it up on the board. according to them, it supposedly started in 1964. all those numbers ms. bryan put up on the board started in 1964. there is no evidence in this case he was hooked in the military, and there is no evidence that he was hooked or addicted at any time. so i'm done with the first facet on question 1. was he addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine? the answer is no. now let us get to the second facet. see that word up there? "was cigarette smoking because of such addiction a legal cause of his lung cancer?" that goes to the issue was it a legal cause. in other words, assuming bill sury was 4563 1 addicted, was addiction a legal cause? in other words, did he smoke because of the addiction, his supposed addiction to nicotine, or rather just because he wanted to smoke cigarettes, enjoyed cigarette smoking and wanted to make his own decision? and this question addresses bill sury's willpower, his determination, and that is why we spent so much time on that issue with you. could he have wanted to quit if he -- could he have quit if he wanted to quit? let us look at whether he really did want to quit. big question. did he want to quit? who says he wanted to quit? again, only dr. sury. only dr. sury. he says he did not seem to enjoy it, that he just seemed to smoke automatically, whatever that means. he gave no one else the sense that he smoked automatically. and his friends, smokers themselves, did not say that. according to them, yancey, he appeared to enjoy it. his friends saw no evidence he wanted to quit. both hal and yancey were smokers. yancey said he smoked like a train. both of them quit. both of them told bill sury that they had quit and how they had quit, and that they encouraged him to quit. but no -- none of them recall any indication from bill sury that he wanted to quit. now, i thought about this, and i thought, well, maybe it is because his son said he was a private person. maybe -- maybe he just did not tell people. let us think about that. he plays golf with these guys all the time. after they quit, encouraging him to quit, and he would never once say, "you know, i might try that. i might try quitting. i do not like smoking. i might try quitting"? not once. think of that. 20 years, and not once an indication that he was thinking of quitting or, by the way, even cutting back. then secondly on this second facet -- it gets more complicated -- even if he was addicted, could he have quit if he wanted to quit? of course he could have quit if he had wanted to quit. he did not want to quit. and if he had wanted to quit, he could have quit. you have heard every expert come into this court, dr. burns, dr. proctor, dr. giakas, even dr. frazier. you heard it from the surgeon general, the public health authorities. if you want to quit, you can quit. 60 million people have quit. there are more former smokers today than there are current smokers. 3 and bill sury was one of the ones who could have quit if he had wanted to quit. he was successful in everything he set his mind to, in the army, in his marriage, in his family, in his business, and on the golf course. even his son acknowledged that he had been able to accomplish everything he set his mind to, except maybe not going to college. he was focused. bill sury was determined. if he wanted to quit smoking, he could have quit smoking. and when he wanted to quit smoking, he did quit smoking. he wanted to quit -- he did quit smoking -- first time he wanted to quit, he got a cough. it started to affect his health. a cough. and that was all the motivation bill sury needed to quit. this demonstrates pretty clearly that when bill sury was motivated, he was able to quit, despite any addiction. addiction was not the legal cause of bill sury's illness. he could have quit. and because of that, those two things, he did not want to quit, and if he had wanted to, he could have. they cannot satisfy the second prong -- excuse me, the second facet, i should call it, because i called it a facet before. now, to the third, the last facet, and that has to do with being the legal cause of his lung cancer. that gets into all the medical proof, all the medical proof. what caused his illness? now, that is really not my area. mr. latham talked a lot about that, and mr. woods will talk a lot about that, and how the plaintiff did not carry his burden on this issue. and, as mr. woods will tell you, we simply do not have enough information to determine whether smoking was the cause of his illness. and the reason for that is we do not have the records. they are gone. records are gone. records are discarded. tests were not done. and that is why we stress that point a lot. a lot. and the judge gave you an instruction on that point. and i want to make it clear on this thing. we are not saying that dr. sury destroyed documents. we are not tak- -- blaming him for the fact that the documents are not there from dr. grochmal or dr. marks or dr. gaddis. we are not blaming him. the reason we are making a point of this is to focus on the fact that because the records are gone and the tests were not done prevents dr. sury from carrying his burden of proof on this third facet of question 1, that the cancer was caused by smoking. so let me come back now that i've gone through 5 all the facets of the first question. was bill sury addicted -- william sury addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine, and, if so, was cigarette smoking because of such addiction a legal cause? one question, three facets. got to prove it, all three. he did not prove any of them. did not prove he was addicted, did not prove he could not quit, and they did not prove that his death was caused by smoking. the answer should be "no." and if you answer is "no" on that, and i suggest it should be, then we are done. but if you do not agree with me, you agree with ms. shamp on that, and if you answer "yes" to question 1, then we go on. then we get to questions 2 through 5. those are the engle finding ones, as ms. shamp told you about, findings that the industry was fraudulent, concealed, negligent. only if you get to -- past question 1 do those findings come into play, and now they come into play because we are there and talking about if you answered "yes" to question 1. but as to each one, as the judge instructed you, you are going to have to make the decision as to whether these factors, those engle finding factors, were the legal cause of bill sury's death. and this issue, whether these things caused bill sury's death, depends on whether it was the conduct of the tobacco companies that caused him to smoke, the things we said and things we did not say, or whether, as we have suggested, that bill sury would have started smoking and would have continued smoking because he wanted to start to smoke and he wanted to continue to smoke, regardless of anything we did or said or did not say or did not do. and as we have shown you and proved to you, i hope, it is been known for decades, it is common knowledge, that cigarettes were harmful. it has been understood and embraced that they are harmful and dangerous even before the first studies started to appear. i'll go back to this data point again. i started to show you that. reader's digest article, 1924. way back when, they knew. demonstrative 4. look at all those articles starting back in 1924. that is what leads to the common knowledge, '24. cigarette smoking was dangerous. dr. riddel came here last week to show you the public opinion polls from way back when, very early on, well before bill sury supposedly was hooked. by july of 1954 -- can we have demonstrative 5? let us look at this gallup poll -- ninety percent of people knew or had heard that lung cancer was related to 7 cigarette smoking. as dr. riddel stated, the awareness was overwhelming. now, i want to get to something that we just heard about in ms. shamp's closing argument, the roper polls. remember, she put up the roper poll. and remember, when i opened on this case, we talked -- i talked about right up front the fact that they would give you maybe half the truth but not the whole truth and that they would pull things out of context and would not give you the whole context. and we saw that when she relied on the roper poll. so when she said that, i went and got the roper poll that she was referring to. here's what she did not tell you. here's what else the roper poll says. and you will have this back in the jury room. do not take my word for it. you will see it in the jury room. it is plaintiff's exhibit 289. 289. page 6, over three-quarters of the respondents think it is at least possibly true that cigarette smoking is dangerous, with half thinking definitely or probably true. this is way back when. almost half think that smoking is definitely or probably a cause of illness. on specific diseases, the public, by a fairly large margin, thinks that heart trouble -- not just cancer -- heart trouble, high blood pressure, emphysema are more common among smokers than non-smokers. goes on. gets better. anti-smoking advertisements and publicity have received widespread attention. gets better. anti-smoking publicity appears to be having some real effects on the smoking public. this, by the way, too, a document from our files. page 17, almost half of the respondents think it is definitely or probably true that cigarettes are a cause of smokers having more illnesses. and then page 23. here's the results of the poll. how many people total out of the general public said smoking is not hazardous? please look at this, page 23 of exhibit 289. 6 percent for the roper poll she talked about. and how many said it was either hazardous -- oh, excuse me -- heavy smoking is hazardous, 47 percent. smoking any amount is hazardous, 42 percent. 5 percent did not know. what does that amount up to? it amounts up to 89 percent, almost exactly what george gallup found, which was ninety percent. and the roper polls go on. because, remember, 9 she talked about the campaign of information, the lies, how she went to school and said a four-letter word and really got in trouble, people believed what we were saying. well, there is another roper poll. she showed you the front page of this. she did not show you what it said. and this is plaintiff's exhibit 217. and if you go to page 31, roper asked, "hey, if anybody denies and says there is no connection between lung cancer and cigarette smoking, which are you least likely to believe?" least likely to believe by a factor of ten was the tobacco industry research council. how many people would believe the tobacco industry? in here they said that, 3 percent. and she wants you to believe that bill sury is in the 3 percent. and one of the other things dr. riddel said was that people do not only know it is dangerous; they think it is more dangerous than it really is. and she went through those polls, too, those studies, one by viscusi, a guy who had been retained by the -- or funded at least by the tobacco companies, and one by slovic on the other side, plaintiff's expert. found the same thing. people think it is twice as harmful as it really is. the fact of the matter is people know it is a risky behavior. and the recent studies show that people will choose to smoke regardless of the amount of information that they receive. information or lack of information or disinformation has been proven time and time again in real studies and real big studies not to matter. dr. riddel talked to you about the commit studies -- do you remember that? -- where they tested whether more information about smoking and better information, more salient information, would make any difference in whether people quit. answer? no. think about that. the studies show that information on smoking does not matter. information matters sometimes if people do not know. but if they do know, information is not going to matter. and we talked about -- she talked about that hutchinson study, too, that huge thing called the gold standard sponsored by the national cancer institute, reported on in the national cancer institute journal, 15-year study of the effect of information and more information and more information. and what did it show? did it matter? the answer was no. no matter how much information they get, they are going to start to smoke, they are going to continue to smoke. 11 these studies are a shot to the heart of the plaintiff's case, because the plaintiff's case hinged their -- the plaintiffs hinged their claim upon the fact that information put out there by the tobacco companies caused people to start to smoke and continue to smoke. the fact of the matter is that studies show time and time again it makes no difference. does not matter. and now let us focus on this for a minute. dr. riddel spent some time talking about hutchinson. she spent time talking about commit. and then we get a chance -- ms. shamp had a chance to cross-examine on those studies to see if she could pull the shot to the heart out of the heart. nothing. she asked nothing. ms. shamp asked nothing about either of those studies. she asked nothing about them since they simply devastate this suggestion, this allegation that we told him something that he relied upon. there is no proof of that. and in fact the proof is to the contrary. nothing would have made a difference. so she just ignored them. instead, what the plaintiff tries to do is convince you that bill sury smoked because of what the tobacco industry did. and to do that, they bring you nothing that has to do with studies. they do not bring you studies. what they brought you was opinions of dr. burns, dr. goldberg, dr. proctor. opinions. they are opinions. no studies. we will get to the studies in a minute, to the extent we already have not. bringing these opinions to try to suggest to you that people were deceived and bill sury was deceived, would have acted differently as a result. and i want to get to the opinions of those witnesses and to tell you my view of their opinions and to point out the lack of studies that they relied upon, the lack of hard evidence. but before i do that, i want to spend just a couple minutes talking about witness credibility. you will have an instruction -- or you do have an instruction on page 6 of your instructions. the judge has instructed you -- and i encourage you to look at that -- given you some little guideposts on how you might as jurors evaluate the believability and credibility of the witnesses who have come before you. and he is told you, and you have it in your packet there, look at their -- you should take a look at their demeanor, frankness, their knowledge of facts, the reasonableness of their opinion, their ability to remember whether -- what they have said, 13 to be consistent, and any interest of the witness in the outcome of the case. let us start with demeanor. an excellent way, i have always thought, to judge in a court case the credibility of the witness is to evaluate two things. one, how do they act on direct examination when the person paying them or their client is testifying? and then see if that demeanor changes in any way during cross-examination. are they helpful and cooperative to their own side and then difficult with the cross-examining witness [sic]? because if so, why are they like that? and the suggestion is if they are like that -- my suggestion to you is if they are like that, they have something to hide or that they do not like to discuss. and that is what we saw. with dr. proctor and dr. goldberg, i suggest to you that on a number of times they tried to evade my questions and mr. woods' questions. remember, they would often try to rephrase the question and they would give a nonresponsive answer or a non-response. remember, i wanted to talk with dr. proctor about cigarette filters and how the public health community had for years and years and years encouraged us to put filters on cigarettes so people would die less. and i wanted to talk about the public health community saying that people had died less because of filters. he did not want to talk about that. in response to every question i asked, he focused on compensation, which i will get to later, the concept of you puff more. so maybe it is not as safe. he did not want to talk about it. he did not want to let me talk about it to inform you about the public health community and what they were saying about soft filters, put them on there. dr. goldberg. i admit i like to talk about studies. i like to talk about the advertising studies. and i wanted to talk about them with dr. goldberg so i could tell you about what they really show. but dr. goldberg did not want to talk about the studies. he wanted to talk about the consensus reports. i'd ask him a question. he would say, "no, the consensus reports say something differently." i'd ask him a question. he would say, "the consensus reports say something differently." finally, remember, i said, "dr. goldberg, please. we will get to your consensus reports. could you just tell me about this study?" how many times did it take dr. goldberg to give a definition, a simple definition, of the word 15 "generic"? he did not want to give it. "please tell me generic." "please tell me generic." "please tell me" -- "no, i'll give you an example. i will not give you a definition." it is a word he uses in every case, "generic," and he will not define it? contrast the evasiveness of those two witnesses with the candor and forthrightness of dr. riddel, dr. giakas and dr. stonesifer. if they did not know something, they would tell you, "i do not know something." they would answer the question. that is demeanor. let us talk about reasonableness. you know, just because a witness comes in and says something to you does not mean you have to accept it. of course you do not. you are the finders of fact. you are the finders of credibility. let us look at the reasonableness. you get to judge the reasonableness of these people's opinions. filters. let us talk about filters and dr. proctor. we show dr. proctor and you all of the studies by drs. doll, russell, jarvik, men who were titans in this field. richard doll was knighted by the queen of england for his work on filters. there is not many people who get knighted. he did. all of his work showing the benefits of filters and published, as dr. proctor admitted, in the most prestigious journals, peer-reviewed journals, in the world that showed that filters, what we were doing with filters and low tar was a good thing. what did dr. proctor say about those? do you remember? every one, he said they were flawed. doll study, flawed. jarvik study, flawed. was there one study, by the way, he brought in that said these studies were flawed? no. he just said they were flawed. is that reasonable? dr. goldberg. let us check out the reasonableness of his opinions. he told you that cigarette advertising caused bill sury to start to smoke. did not know bill sury, but he said, "i know it caused bill sury to smoke. everybody is affected, directly or indirectly, by advertising. cigarette advertising caused bill sury to start to smoke. i know." okay, dr. goldberg. i asked him whether advertising caused bill sury to buy a car. what did he say? and i hope you remember it. i do. i wrote it down. he did not know the answer to that question. why? he did not know anything about bill sury. and what about dr. g's opinion on alcohol 17 advertising, beer advertising, wine advertising? well, that is different. that sort of advertising does not cause people to drink. but cigarette advertising causes people to smoke. is that reasonable? let us look at the frankness, third thing you should consider, frankness of the witness, or lack of frankness. the asterisk. remember -- this is a small point, but remember the last little thing with dr. proctor, the one about the asterisk? i showed him, as i was trying to show him all during cross-examination, about the benefit of filters. and he did not like all these things the surgeon general said about the benefits of filters because it undercut his opinion that cigarette filters are no good. so then he saw this little asterisk pointing to a footnote in the passage from the surgeon general's report. he says, "aha, there is an asterisk. the surgeon general is referring to the problem of compensation." so then after ms. bryan finished all her questions, the judge, i believe, let me ask one more, "just one more. i've got one more question." the question was: "okay, dr. proctor. tell me about the asterisk. anything there about compensation?" answer: "no." dr. goldberg, on the issue of frankness. project 16. do you remember project 16? i do. on cross-examination i talked to dr. goldberg, and i spent a lot of time on this because it is a very important point, all the steps an advertiser will take in designing an ad campaign for a target market. i wanted to show that there were no documents in reynolds' files that there would have been if we were supposedly targeting youth like he asserted. so we went through focus groups. "oh, yeah, there'd be documents about the target market to show the age of the focus group." okay. theme testing. "oh, yeah, there would be documents in the files showing the age group of the people who were theme tested," which you would do in every advertising campaign, copy test the same thing. whether it is age group, ethnic group, particularly gender, you will test that group. you will bring them into a room. "what do you think of these concepts? what do you think of these ads? what do you think of these commercials?" and there 19 are records of who was in that target group. of course there are. and he admitted that. it is a critical point, because if we were targeting kids, our files would have those things in the documents. and so at the end of all that i asked dr. goldberg to acknowledge that if we were targeting youth, those documents would exist, and that they did not exist. and then we have an "aha" moment in the trial. remember that? dr. goldberg says, "aha." his "aha" moment in the trial; project 16. "never heard of it. what is that?" he says, "oh, that is the study on 16-year-olds." and talk about how he makes things up. i hope you remember that. at first he says, "you know, i do not know if it was reynolds or not." that is a quote. and then he said, "i believe it is reynolds," another quote. and then he got so -- more certain and he said, "it was reynolds." okay. we go from "do not know" all the way to "i know." okay. so then we had a break, and mr. richardson, who is a whiz with the computer, went to the web to find out about this document 16, project 16. and we found it. had seen it and found it (phonetic). who had done project 16? it was not reynolds. it was not any company even in the united states. it was imperial tobacco, limited, of canada. that made no never-mind to dr. goldberg. he just made something else up. "okay. they are a subsidiary. imperial is a subsidiary now of reynolds." and i said, "how do you know that?" and he said, "i'm from canada." dr. goldberg's penchant to embellish a little bit should become apparent when i point this out. you may not have noticed it when the judge instructed you on this. and you will have it. page 18. the judge instructed you on who reynolds is. it is an important point. reynolds has acquired some companies over time. what it acquired is the american tobacco company, and it acquired the brown & williamson tobacco company. and he said accordingly rjr tobacco is liable for american and for brown & williamson. now so we are liable. but those are the only two. you did not hear a word from the judge about imperial. another factor, witness credibility factor, is the ability of the witness to remember the facts he is already testified to, does he change his 21 testimony. here again we see that with dr. goldberg. remember that article that i mentioned earlier about the higher rates for smokers in 1954? he saw this memo. ms. shamp showed it to him, this memo. it says, "hey, newsweek is talking about these higher rates for smokers." and that is what he said in his direct, higher rates for smokers. then we get to cross. testimony changed. remember that? then he said, "oh, yeah, it says rate changes. i think that must have to do with interest rate calculations or something." i do not know what he said. but, in any event, he just changed his testimony. he did not bat an eyelash. and at the break i looked back and i thought, "geez, i was sure he said that." he did say it. and i showed it to him and i said, "geez, is not this inconsistent?" did not matter to him. he just -- "perhaps." that is what he said, "perhaps." and how about the story about the conference that he went to or did not go to, the learn how to be a witness against the tobacco companies conference? first he said he was in attendance. then he said he did not go. okay. he did not go. why? he had a conflict. okay. what was the conflict? he had a class. then mr. woods got up and said, "wait a minute. you do not teach on saturday, do you?" "no." "well, this conference was held on saturday, was not it?" "oh." that did not matter to him, either. he goes on. remember what he said then? "i must have had football tickets." i hope you looked when it was up on the board to see when that conference was held. it was held in april. penn state does not play football in april. knowledge of the facts. now, i talked to you about the importance of studies, the importance of hard evidence. we brought you studies and hard evidence. the expert's knowledge of the facts is something the judge has indicated that is important for you to consider, or you should consider or you can consider. and let us look at the knowledge of the facts. dr. proctor, historian on smoking and smoking regulation, had not seen or been provided with thousands of documents from the files of the federal government now available, 24 government agencies that produced those documents, available. dr. goldberg had not looked at the seminal 23 studies on the effect of advertising upon smoking and youth smoking. he had never heard of the principal study cited by the surgeon general, conrad, flay and hill. never even heard of it. an important study, because conrad, flay and hill showed that kids start smoking for a variety of reasons, and not once do they mention advertising. but, you know, that did not matter to him, by the way. he said, "oh, i see that chart up on the board" -- i do not know if we have it. we can take that down. but it has all these studies, and you can see it is in the 1994 surgeon general's report, and it shows all the things that cause kids to start smoking, and advertising is not there. so, again, no never-mind to dr. goldberg. all he says is, "well, they did not look at advertising." and then i showed him conrad, flay and hill, page 1722. yes, they have looked at advertising. it was just not a predictor. he had not looked at it. he made things up about it. he does not know the studies. he did not know about the seminal study by the council of economic advisors on advertising and its effect upon smoking rates. he never -- he had not heard of it, and he did not even know who the council of economic advisors was. the fact of the matter is the plaintiffs kept the experts away from a lot of facts that are really important in this case, people's understanding of smoking, their understanding of the risks, the fact about the effects of advertising, the facts about bill sury. plaintiffs did not want to disclose any of that information to their plaintiffs -- to their experts. and one other point on this issue of disclosing facts. it is a point that rankles me. it is a point that maybe might rankle you. the point is disclosure. the point is disclosure of bias and conflict of interest. remember the testimony of dr. riddel. during cross-examination by ms. shamp, she pointed out to dr. riddel that this viscusi study that dr. riddel told you about had -- hey, it had been funded by my law firm, made a big point of that, and she made a big point of it during her closing argument today. and we heard this other thing about paula noble, who works for mr. woods' firm, that he had given her or printed out certain things that dr. riddel had relied upon, like it is a big deal. there is no secret, by the way, about all of that. it is been fully known for a long time that my firm funded the viscusi work. 25 and how is it known? it is disclosed right in viscusi's work. it is no secret. the fact of the matter is the tobacco industry, when they are doing this stuff, are defendants out there, are fully disclosing exactly what the funding is. and with respect to this issue of we gave them certain things, we did not give them other things, no. we gave dr. riddel -- and she testified to it -- everything in her field of expertise, which is risk perception. and they showed her marketing documents, said, "aha, you did not look at these." that is not in her area. we gave her everything in her area. and there is a big difference here, because the plaintiffs have not. you saw up on the board there when they go to this -- dr. g goes -- dr. goldberg goes to these expert witness schools, anti-tobacco schools. they had one thing up there called, you know, like this, "case in a box" or "trial in a box." they go there, the plaintiffs' lawyers go to these things, and somebody comes and says, "here's how you do a trial. here's the witnesses you hire. and, by the way, here are the documents to use." they provide their experts with just the documents that help them, even if they are outside of their field of expertise. and you heard the proof here. it was pretty clear. how could dr. goldberg not have known about conrad, flay and hill or the council of economic advisors? the tobacco industry has disclosed when we fund things. you saw it again in the funding, i believe, of the viscusi work, which was -- point at george allen, head of the tobacco institute, fully disclosed. the green monster thing that we talked about, fully disclosed. but what about the studies that the plaintiffs rely upon? slovic. remember, they put up slovic. not that it helps them. they put up slovic. slovic, the plaintiff's expert, never discloses the fact he is a plaintiff's expert. surgeon general's reports we heard so much about. nci monograph 19, the consensus report dr. goldberg talked about. was there any disclosure -- i tried to make that point -- any disclosure in those reports that the editors, reviewers, contributors, many of them received money from the plaintiffs? there was no disclosure by them of the fact that they are funding the work that they actually then relied upon. no disclosure in 4590 1 any of those reports or from dr. goldberg or burns. dr. goldberg and burns are frequent testifiers against the industry. they are both -- burns is in the million dollar club. goldberg's about there. these witnesses are out there writing these consensus reports damning the tobacco industry with absolutely no disclosure that they were receiving money to testify against the companies, a practice that even dr. proctor called unethical. and let us take just one deeper little look into the circularity of reasoning we saw in the case. can we start with a wine cooler on this one, tammy? i mean the wine cooler article. okay. let us follow this one. dr. goldberg in 1992 writes an article. he concludes that advertising has no effect upon teenage smoking. "research in assessing the link between cigarette advertising and teenage smoking has generated equally inconclusive results." in 1992 he looks at the literature, two articles. he says, "cigarette advertising has no effect upon cigarette smoking." and then he goes to plaintiffs' witness school. and then dr. goldberg gets hired and he starts to get hundreds of thousands of dollars to testify against the industry. and then he gets to help write these consensus reports. who asked him to help write the consensus reports? other people who are getting money to testify against the industry. and then dr. goldberg comes into court to say and base his opinion upon the things that these guys just wrote. and that is why i focus, ladies and gentlemen, so much upon the studies. and i'll get to that when i get to dr. goldberg's opinion, because i'm going to have to stop in just a minute and take a break because the judge asked me to. i could go on, your honor, but i think this is a good time. the court: okay. mr. williams: no. one minute. i'm not done. the court: okay. mr. williams: goldberg comes into court relying upon these studies done by people who testify against the industry with no disclosure and says they are consensus reports. and that is why i focus on the studies. i want you to and i'm going to direct you and show you -- i'm sorry; i'm not going to direct you -- show you how you can look at those studies and make your own conclusion on these issues. because dr. goldberg 3 did not look at the studies and he just presented you with these consensus reports. and who is it a consensus of? it is a consensus of people who are taking money to testify against the industry with no disclosure of their bias. final thing on the credibility of witnesses. you can look at the thing -- the instruction the judge gave you. do they have -- do these witnesses who come before you have an interest in the outcome of the case? obviously dr. sury does here, but so did dr. proctor and dr. goldberg and dr. burns. their testifying represents a huge percentage of their income, a million -- a million dollars almost for two of them, over a million for another, a hundred thousand dollars for proctor just sitting in that chair there, and $75,000 for dr. goldberg, a lot of money they are making to deliver their testimony in a way that helps the plaintiff against the tobacco industry, who these individuals also dislike. i'm going to suggest to you, and then we are going to stop in a minute, and then when i come back i am going to go through their actual opinions. i'm going to suggest to you that those opinions are based upon their dislike of the tobacco companies and not upon any studies or any accurate information. these witnesses will say anything, most anything, to hurt the tobacco industries even if it is inaccurate. now is a good time, your honor. [#deleted recess#] mr. williams: thank you, your honor. i spent a little time before lunch going through the factors that the judge has suggested to you, you might consider in weighing the credibility and believability of the witnesses that is appeared before you. and i'm going to get to the opinions of those witnesses now and to the testimony of those witnesses now, but i wanted to ask you to hold one thing in mind, i'm going to suggest to you that the witnesses we brought to you, the expert witnesses first, dr. giakas and dr. stonesifer, and dr. riddel, i would suggest, they are honest people. they were knowledgeable people. they were candid with you when they told you what they knew, and they would acknowledge when they did not know something, and they did not venture outside of their area of expertise. and the fact witnesses that we brought to you, ms. montgomery and hal rush were equally truthful and candid, i believe, with you. but those were our witnesses. i will leave it to ms. shamp to discuss the candor of her witnesses when she gets up again. she did not say much, if anything, about her expert witnesses. dr. goldberg, i did not hear her mention of. and dr. proctor, maybe she will try to defend their testimony when she returns to talk to you. but my suggestion is that the credibility of our witnesses were significant and the credibility of their witnesses was not. and i mention that because the credibility of the witnesses that we bring in front of you speak volumes about the overall credibility of the case that we bring in 22 front of you, and ms. shamp does as well. let me run through the opinions of the expert witnesses that they brought you. dr. proctor came to you at the beginning of the case with four opinions. can we have that? ms. shamp: what number? mr. williams: those are the four opinions. "by the 1950s, the tobacco industry knew that cigarettes caused cancer, but choose not to tell the public." we addressed that opinion head on. we showed you through scientific study after scientific study and we took you through those studies to confront this allegation. and i think perhaps the most telling thing about that, and i try to tee this into what ms. shamp wrote on the board the very first day, you can see it over there, this issue of fraud by concealment, talking about concealment of facts that were not otherwise known. and we spent some time with that. and after some fencing with dr. proctor, i think he finally admitted -- i know he finally admitted that he could not point to one scientific fact that was known to the tobacco companies and was unknown to the outside world. there was no concealment of facts that were not otherwise known. and he conceded that so many of the facts that the outside world knew had been told to them and published by the tobacco industry. and during our statement, we took you through all the statements of the eminent scientists in this area all tracking the state of the scientific literature on smoking and health. we took you year through year through year from the early 1950s, when wynder first did his mouse painting experiments, up through 1964, and we showed you that until the early 1960s at the release of that report by the british royal college of physicians and then the surgeon general's report, that there was an open, back then, an open and very, very candid about the link between smoking and cancer. and even dr. proctor conceded that this debate, open and valid debate, lasted into the mid-1950s. why do we focus on that and why was that so important? well, it was important because when dr. goldberg got up. it was important because what dr. goldberg was telling you, he was showing you all those things from the files of hill & knowlton, the pr firm that had been hired. he was focusing 24 on those and faulting us for this debate, these issues that we were putting out there, the statements we were making about cigarettes. he was faulting us because we clung to positions that would later be proven wrong. but the fact of the matter is at the time those statements were made, through the mid-1950s, there was significant doubt, even according to dr. proctor, significant doubt within the scientific community. you know, a lot of it. you know, just like cell phone industry today, you know, there is doubt. allegations often get raised about an industry's product, and even goldberg admitted it was commonplace for industries to defend themselves. there is nothing wrong with that. maybe the tobacco industry defended themselves too long. i do not deny that. mr. woods does not deny it. the industry does not deny it after 1964, when the surgeon general's report came out. the companies may have held their position too long. but the question is: does it really matter in this case so many, many years later? it does not, because after '64, there was widespread understanding and belief that cigarettes were harmful. again, mary riddel showed you the polls. we saw the polls from the roper organization, overwhelming majorities of people believed it. no one was deceived. no one started to smoke because of anything we said or we did not say. ms. shamp made the point, she points to the findings and she says, "the findings are the findings. the findings say concealment. they cannot deny the findings," and she is right. you cannot deny that concealment if you get to this point. but, by the same token, the plaintiffs cannot show that it had any effect on bill sury. bill sury is not here so he cannot say it did not have any effect on him, but we can point to other indications that it had no effect on very many people at all. and, again, i go back to the roper poll where they asked, "do you believe what the tobacco industry spokesmen are saying?" how many people? what percent of people believe? 3 percent. they cannot show that any statement had an effect upon bill sury. ms. shamp opened with the statement that they -- she said this: they told him things that he believed. well, first, i do not think he believed anything that he might have 4604 heard. but secondly, there is no evidence in this case that the industry told bill sury anything, that he saw anything. they point to this tobacco -- excuse me, tomato ad put out about tomatoes. hundred years ago tomatoes were poison. and you heard dr. sury say to you, "my dad and i looked at this together." and this -- this is their only evidence that dr. sury -- excuse me, bill sury saw anything supposedly denying the knowledge. this is it. and it is significant, and i raise it because the tobacco industry did not even put this out. it was put out by the tobacco farmers. thus they can do, there is no evidence that bill sury saw anything that was said by reynolds, by lorillard, by the industry, by the tobacco institute, hill & knowlton. there is none of it. she tried, but it is not there. and now i'd like to talk about dr. proctor's second opinion. that is the opinion that the tobacco industry has known for decades that nicotine was addictive but chose not to tell the public. let us talk about addiction because, apparently, the findings address concept of addiction. what does that mean? i want to start with the word, the term, the phrase, the descriptor "addicted." what does that mean? and was the industry -- and this is important -- was the industry trying to hide something about this concept of addiction? and that is why we went through the history of the word. you heard the evidence. for years and decades, the scientific community agreed that nicotine was not addictive. surgeon general said that in 1964 and he said it again and again and again. it was habit, not addictive. and that was because the definition of addiction that everybody was living by for so long was that it had to be intoxicating, and nicotine was not intoxicating. but then what we saw is in the early, mid-1980s, the number of anti-smoking activists, including people who make money testifying against the company, started to push for a new definition. they wanted to drop this intoxicating thing so that nicotine, along with coffee, by the way, would be classified now as addictive. and why did they want to do that? well, let me go to demonstrative 9, if we could. you saw the notes of this seminole conference 2 in 1986 of a government agency, nida. the nida, that is national institute on drug abuse, had a working meeting where they convened it specifically to discuss trying to change the definition of addiction. and what were their reasons? this is an exhibit that will be back in the jury room with you. i encourage you to look at it if you have any questions about this issue of addiction. they wanted to change it, and they say it right here: "it is because policymakers do not base their decisions on reason, rationality and the weight of the evidence. we should use the word 'addiction' for its visceral effect on the public and the pressure on lawmakers that will result." they wanted to change it -- this suggests -- not for any scientific reason, but for the visceral effect on the public and to put pressures on lawmakers, anti-tobacco pressure on lawmakers. and why? because if they got cigarettes classified as addictive, maybe they could get the government to ban cigarettes, which is what they wanted to do. and they also wanted the word changed for another reason. it has a lot of resonance here, i suggest, in these tobacco trials. they wanted to use this, quote, emotion-laden word because it forces the nonsmoking public to have more compassion for smokers and to invest in their treatment. they wanted to do it to turn these people addicted, addicted, for sympathy reasons. and in part, i think sympathy for the plaintiffs in court. that is why we have the word "addictive" now linked to cigarettes. and even dr. proctor acknowledged here that this change was motivated, at least in part, by political reasons. and so then the surgeon general two years later changes the definition. we say the surgeon general changed the definition, and that is right. in the 1988 report, the surgeon general says nicotine is addictive. but if you got one of those surgeon general reports back there, look to see if it is just his report, and if not, just who else's report it is. because there is testimony on this from dr. proctor. that report shows clearly that the senior scientific editor was a man named neal benowitz, an individual who makes a lot of money testifying against the industry. in any event, dr. benowitz, working through the surgeon general and the other people who went 4 to this political conference, got the definition changed and now, voila, nicotine is now an addictive substance. and i make that point for another reason too, because when our chief executive officers were subpoenaed to come up to capital hill in 1994, they were brought up there to ask about addiction because they continued to say, "we do not believe in this new definition. we do not believe that our products should properly be classified as addictive." and you saw them. they all got up on the stand. they are sworn. there is pictures of them broadcast all over the world. and they are asked, each one of them: do you believe nicotine is addictive? and they said no. and they were pilloried by that, for that. and ms. shamp showed you the video clip showing them that they -- and suggesting that they were not telling the truth. and even dr. sury got up and made the additional comment. i'm not sure why, but he made the additional comment that his father was mad because these tobacco company executives were, quote, in dr. sury's words, lying under oath. well, they did not show you the rest of those video clips. they did not show you when our chief executive officers got up there in the beginning and went through precisely why they did not think it was addictive. they were not taking issue with some established scientific fact. they were simply pointing out that they disagreed with this rather political change in the definition. we showed you the full video of our president, jim johnson, testifying why he thought that this was an ill-advised change. and lorillard's president and each of the other presidents said exactly the same thing. they said why. they did not agree with the new definition. you know what, at that time, the world health organization did not agree with it either. we are basing our position up there on the established definition and one that was still recognized around the world. what we were doing was taking issue with the politicized new definition. and then with respect to the rest of the opinion that dr. proctor brought you that we chose not to tell the public that cigarettes were addictive, nicotine was addictive, there is no evidence that the public did not know. 6 and we have gone back and showed you all of that, from john quincy adams up through lady nicotine, a tex williams' song about smoking the cigarette and "i'll kill the son of a gun that got me hooked in the first degree." people had known that. there was nothing there hidden. people knew it. this whole issue about addiction is a political issue to try to create sympathy. third opinion, dr. proctor. dr. proctor says that cigarettes are no less harmful than -- excuse me, filtered cigarettes are no less harmful than unfiltered, that we just did not tell the public. we chose -- we knew they were less harmful. we choose not to tell the public. well, what is wrong with that one? we disagree with the entirety of the proposition. we told you why: filtered cigarettes are less harmful. just think about it. how can they not be less harmful when you put a filter on the tip of an unfiltered cigarettes? it is not just us telling you that. it is every scientist we brought to you through the articles. all of the scientists, doll and russell and all of that, every one of them agreed that filtered cigarettes were less harmful, low-tar cigarettes were less harmful and saved lives. the surgeon general said, "they are less harmful. they save lives." all the scientists. it is only -- who disagrees with that? did you see one study disagreeing with that? from burns? proctor? no. goldberg? they disagreed, but they did not, again, present you with one study. it is just their opinion. all they would say is that, "well, the studies are flawed because people take harder hits, and when the people did these flawed studies, they did not know about compensation." and so, once again, we had to bring you the snippets, the chapters, whatever, in the work of nah, russell and doll and jarvik that talk about their understanding that there was this compensation. people might smoke a little harder on a filtered cigarette or a low-tar cigarette or have more of them, but that it is still safer. even despite the fact they do that, the studies show they are still safer. dr. proctor, you do not want to talk about compensation all the time, and he said they knew more about it than the scientific community, and there is no evidence of that. he presented you none. 8 and by the way, this has nothing to do, once again, with bill sury. there is no evidence that bill sury ever compensated. and now, let me get you to dr. proctor's last opinion. still, by the way, having nothing to do with bill sury, and i remind you that i wrote this up here -- well, can we go to the elmo, please, because i'm working off a different one. all of these opinions i've asked them do any of these opinions have anything to do with this case, with bill sury at least, and the answer was no, no, no and no, none of it. but here's the last opinion. it is the most interesting one, i think, in terms of dr. proctor: smoke and mirrors worked. again, no evidence that a single person started to smoke because of any of this supposed smoke and mirrors. and the best proof on this came from dr. proctor himself. remember, i asked him about studies, once again, studies. one study, one peer-reviewed study that shows that smoke and mirrors worked. and i wrote this on the board. i did not write it with a big enough magic marker. i apologize. but i'll read it to you now. dr. proctor says no peer-reviewed study publication concluded that any statement of the tobacco industry influenced anyone's belief whether cigarettes are dangerous. i wrote that on the board. he said, "that is right." number two, no study showing any tobacco industry statement influenced anyone's decision to smoke. i wrote that on the board. he said, "that is right too. i cannot think of one." no study that any ad campaign influenced anyone's decision to smoke. he said, "that is right. i cannot think of one." as i was walking away, he said, "by the way, oh, i'm sure i think there might be one." you think for a minute that if he knew of one he would not have presented you with it? of course not. he is been asked this. he was asked this six months ago, "can you remember any study?" no. and you do not think he would have looked for one? he comes in here six months later, again dr. proctor, any statement, any study? "i cannot think of one. there is none. no studies." nobody was mislead. nobody was deceived. the word has been out there since the 1950s. yes, ms. shamp is right, we put the thing on the board. you can -- dr. horn, "you know, you can shout it from the rooftops. nobody else will hear. nobody 10 will get any additional information." it is not just dr. horn. how about dr. heller. can we go to him? 1957, seven years before the surgeon general's report: "newspapers, radio, tv have done an excellent job covering this problem, and an objective job. it is an exceedingly valuable way of informing the public." now, in my opening statement -- maybe we can go back to the elmo -- i took you through -- i had my own slide on dr. proctor's testimony, and i put it up on the board and i'll show it to you again. three holes in his testimony. first, smokers were not deceived about the real hazards of cigarettes. we proved that. second -- not even our burden to prove it, we proved it. second, smokers did not start to smoke or continue to smoke because of anything that the tobacco companies said or did. again, not our burden to prove the negative, by the way, but i think we proved it. not our burden to prove the first one, the negative, but i think we proved it. and they certainly did not come close to disproving that. third, bill sury was not deceived. he knew the risks of smoking. i think we have proved that too. have the plaintiffs presented you any information to suggest that bill sury was somehow deceived, particularly given his job? no evidence he was deceived, just like there is -- just like hal rush who told it like it is. since he was a boy, he knew that smoking was dangerous. it is common sense. and particularly with bill sury, because even as much as the public knew, he knew more. he knew precisely the risks. he saw it every day. he worked with it. given his background as an underwriter, the health risks, as dr. goldberg said, would be more salient and certainly more vivid. even dr. proctor could not deny this. even dr. proctor's response to my question said, well, he admitted, as he had to, that despite his opinion, he did have to acknowledge that some people were aware of the risks and were not deceived. and if anyone was aware, it was bill sury. dr. burns, dr. burns was the expert that came to you on videotape. he talked about a lot of his credentials on direct examination. and on cross-examination you learned one of his 12 credentials was testifying against the tobacco industries over and over and over. he on cross -- on direct tried to paint this picture of deceit and obstruction beginning back with the plaza hotel. remember that? the plaza hotel, the frank statement. there is nothing secret about this, nothing. the government was invited to attend. it was reported in the new york times. the frank statement, nobody heard that, nobody saw that, and there is no evidence that bill sury saw it. it ran one day. on direct examination, dr. burns was quite critical of a lot of the research that was sponsored by us, by ctr and tirc. it was not until cross-examination that we had to bring out the point that that research was done by many distinguished scientists, top universities, co-funded, by the way, with the national cancer institute, published in many peer-reviewed journals. and even the findings that were hurtful to us back then were published. and this research was cited in many, many surgeon general's reports. dr. burns talked about the vital information about smoking and health being concealed, but it was not until cross-examination that he acknowledged that more people know that smoking causes disease than know the name of the president of the united states. and that notwithstanding anybody's addiction, smokers can quit and they are reasonable for their own behavior. dr. goldberg, his opinions. let me start with the obvious here. dr. goldberg came and talked to you about advertising. i'll get there in a minute as to why dr. goldberg came, but let me start by saying, no evidence that bill sury started to smoke because of advertising. we will go through his opinions any ways, but let me start with that. you know, we talked a lot about his wine cooler article and how he had this transformation once he started to get paid. and now he thinks that cigarette advertising causes people to smoke. and not just some people, all people are influenced directly or indirectly by advertising, according to dr. goldberg. dr. goldberg did not like my insinuation when i suggested that going to plaintiff's witness school and getting paid might have had something to do with the change in his opinion. and so he told us, "well, you know, i wrote that article back in '92 and that was before '94, and in '94 it was still sort of on the fence." 14 remember, he said that the surgeon general was not quite sure, looked like maybe, maybe not, maybe, maybe, maybe not advertising caused people to start to smoke. but then he said, "but the '94 report, of course, was before all these other studies came out, and now it is crystal clear, everybody agrees, everybody." well, once again, dr. goldberg, i suggest, does not really know the studies because he said all these studies were laid out in the monograph 19 that he wrote. i think he wrote it, but i do not think he read the studies if he said that now it is clear when it was not in 1994. can we go to demonstrative 13? can you highlight where we can highlight there? these are the studies he talked about. you will have monograph 19 back in the jury room, if you want to look at it. and what this shows are all the studies of tobacco advertising and consumption as of 2008. and you can go through these, these before '94 and after. and i've highlighted the ones that are after. and the unhighlighted ones are before. and you can see over in the right-hand column the major conclusions. it will say, for example, up here, the hamilton study, no effect of advertising. schmalensee, no effect. mcginnis, small positive. grabowski no effect. schneider, no effect. and then a small positive. and then it goes on and on and on. you can do the math. you count up the number of studies that show no effect as opposed to positive effect before 1994, you will see that it was inclusive before 1994. and then if you do the next part of that exercise with respect to after '94, you will see the same thing, half and half. the fact of the matter is that the studies were inclusive before '94 and they are still inconclusive. and i think that just shows that dr. goldberg has not looked at those studies. he cannot cite you to one study. all he can tell you is the conclusions of the authors of monograph 19 for people who testified for the plaintiff. he would never heard of conrad, flay & hill. he would never heard of cea, council of economic advisers. he had no interest -- remember, i kept asking him, all these reports by the economists, the federal trade commission who study this day in and day out. ftc regulates advertising in this country, and they have looked a lot at cigarette advertising just 16 to see if it has an effect. their conclusions he did not even bother to look at. and in fact, he says, "i do not have any interest in looking at those conclusions." and in this regard, let me come back one last time to monograph 19. there is a study here that is actually talked about in the text of monograph 19. it is this one down here called andrews and frank, 91. and andrews and frank actually does find a positive effect. what is that positive effect? is the effect of advertising so strong that, like dr. goldberg said, everybody is starting smoke? no. the effect is very small, 6 percent. 6 percent, that most advertising had a 6 percent effect. and the question was: was bill sury part of that 6 percent? of course he was not. i do not think bill sury was affected by advertising. there is no evidence in this case that he started to smoke or continued to smoke because of advertising. so here's the question: if advertising has no effect on people starting to smoke or it does not have much of an effect -- because even all those studies will show, most are inclusive. some show a little -- why do companies advertise? and here we discuss this, i hope it is no surprise, why are they advertising for brand share? keep their smokers loyal and to attract switchers. people are using some other brand, want to make them use your brand. every company does that. car companies, toothpaste companies, everybody. people do not start to brush their teeth. they do not start to buy gasoline when they would not have bought gasoline because of advertising. they choose exxon or they choose the citgo down the street because of advertising. brand choice was the only effect that it had -- excuse me, that advertising had upon bill sury. and we saw that here. he switched to tarrington for a short period of time because he liked the ads, the i'd-rather-fight-than-switch ads. and then we saw that he was smoking some other brand, and he switched to raleighs in order to get the coupons to get his son a clock. dr. goldberg had some other statistic to try to suggest to you that we were advertising for reasons unrelated to brand share. his numbers just did not add up. the fact of the matter is that dr. goldberg is somewhat out of touch with the way advertising affects people. he thinks that it is this great 18 powerful force that causes people to buy things that they would otherwise not want to buy. and i think we heard why he thinks that. he thinks that smokers start to smoke because smokers -- all smokers, he thinks, are dumber than pidgeons. well, you know, all this talk about advertising and grand share and these advertising studies, it is sort of interesting, at least for me. but what does any of this advertising issues have to do with bill sury? nothing. absolutely nothing. squadoosh. it does not have a thing to do because there is no evidence that bill sury started to smoke because of advertising or continued to smoke. in my opening statement, once again, i tried to forecast what i was going to try to show you about all of the testimony we heard from, from dr. goldberg. and here's what i put on the board: first, tobacco company advertising is not unique. we spent hours listening to dr. goldberg go through all our ads and say, "oh, gosh, they are suggesting people give cigarettes for christmas. oh, they are suggesting fun. oh, they are suggesting refreshing. oh, they are using sports figures. oh, oh, oh." what was the point of that? what is the point of that? he admitted, tobacco company advertising is not unique, all companies use the same type of techniques. and then i said, "you know, i'm going to show you that the reason companies advertise is for brand share," and i think we showed that to you. and number three, bill sury did not start to smoke because of advertising. and, again, we have been sitting here for almost three weeks, not one suggestion that bill sury started to smoke because of advertising. he might have bought a pack of tarringtons. he might have switched to raleighs because of advertising, but that was a switch. he did not start to smoke. he did not not quit because of advertising. so why did dr. goldberg come? he came here for one reason, because he had another part of his testimony here. he came here to try to make you mad. and how did he try to do it? he tried to convince you that our companies were out there and are out there targeting youth. that is an incendiary allegation. it strikes at everybody's heart. we should not be doing that and dr. goldberg 20 comes in to say we are doing it. how did he try to do that? he tried to do that by showing you a bunch of documents from the files of the companies that he says show youth marketing, or youth targeting. actually, it was not a bunch of documents. it was seven, seven documents from a 90-year period. he ignores all the other types of documents i was talking about. he ignores all the other documents in our files. seven documents. and then he goes on from those seven to take them remarkably out of context. let me start with diane burrows. this is the diane burrows report. he says it shows reynolds was targeting kids. how does he do it? he points to one appendix way at the back and up at the top it says, "youth adult market," or something like that. and then underneath it in the appendix it has some government data showing age ranges 12 all the way to 25 and up, and because it said "youth market" or "youth, young adult" at the top, he says, "that is how they defined it." i took him through reference after reference after reference. i hope you remember that. kept going through them. diane burrows, right in the introduction, what does she say? young adult market. how does she define it? 18 to 24. "oh, yeah, that is where she defines it there." we went to the next page. "oh, yeah, that is how she defines it there." we went all the way up through it. we got about eight, nine references and he says, "oh, you have not been doing the other part of it. you have not been saying" -- "you have missed all these things." and remember this? i said, "okay," because i know it does not say. i said, "okay. go back, dr. goldberg. you tell me where it says it defines it." and he read something that was totally irrelevant, and he was instructed to answer the question by the judge and he finally had to admit she does not say it. she does not say it. she is talking about 18 to 24, which is an adult market. how about this school days memo, 1927? one reference, he says, prep schools. which, of course, he said prep school and of course that means it goes all the way down to middle school. i do not know where he gets that. but in any event, he ignored everything else in that document. he ignored the direction to -- marketing to who? men and women. he ignored the fact that they should just be marketing to smokers. 22 he ignored the fact that they should just be trying to market to smokers who are smoking smokes of other companies. he ignored all that. claude teague, we heard a lot about claude teague, did not we? he told you a lot about claude teague. here's what claude teague says in his 1973 draft memo: "we should not in any way influence nonsmokers to start smoking." and then he talks about young adults as being 21. dr. goldberg ignored that. that tatham laird document, demonstrative 15. they are talking about a new brand. the brand could not be positioned against youth. there is reference after reference after reference in our files saying the same thing, all of which he ignores. he ignores those references, even in the same documents he cites. and now we get to the other document, hilton head, where it does say 14 to 24. it does. but you know what, dr. goldberg had not done his research on that one either because what were the four campaigns that we were talking about in there? what were the campaigns that were discussed there? in other words, what were we intending to do? what did we do? proof's in the pudding. can we look at the next demonstrative. four of these, the winston candid campaign. that is not youth marketing. there is nobody there under the age of 30. look at this guy up here (indicating), you know, he looks about 50. dr. goldberg thought he was 30. but in any event, nobody under 30. and he could not say that that ad had any particular appeal to kids. and the next one, refresh, he said no particular appeal to kids. he said, "oh, kids would like to swim." but so would adults too. no particular appeal. went to the next one; denim. now, here, he did say -- at first he said, "well, i do not think there is any particular appeal to denim." then he said, "well, you know, maybe kids like blue jeans better than adults." well, come on. there is no proof of that. there is no proof this is targeting kids. and finally, the last one there, we have the meet the turk. this guy, i think he said he was, you know, 30, 35, and he could not find one thing in that ad that had a particular appeal to youth. those ads are not targeted to youth. and let me ask you just one more thing about youth marketing: what does it have to do with bill sury? bill sury did not start to smoke before 24 he was 18. no evidence he started smoking because of advertising. no evidence he started to smoke because of kid. the only reason he came here, dr. goldberg came here, once again, is to try to get you mad because of this youth marketing issue, and it just has no applicability here, or anywhere. i want to put two numbers up on the board. and the numbers are six out of 100 -- i'm not having good luck up here. six out of 100. i was going to put 10 out of 100 because of the polls, but -- because of this roper poll that they showed, i'll use another number which was in that roper poll, 11 out of a 100. 6 percent and 11 percent. and the reason i put those there is because of the 6 percent effect that advertising might have and the 11 percent of people who did not recognize back in 1970, at least, that smoking was not harmful. and what the plaintiffs are trying to do here is to show you that bill sury was one of the six out of 100 and one of the 11 out of a hundred that could possibly have been affected by advertising or could possibly have been affected by something the tobacco companies said or did. plaintiffs want to convince you that he was in those very small percentages because they need to, to prevail in this case. how do they try to do it? by ignoring all the evidence in the case. by ignoring the fact that bill sury was an intelligent man; he was an insurance underwriter. by ignoring the fact he called them coffin nails. by ignoring the fact that he and his friends laughed at the warnings because they were so unnecessary. by ignoring the fact that bill sury and his friends growing up knew that smoking was dangerous. and plaintiffs want you to ignore another thing about bill sury; that he was a successful guy with a successful career. they want you to think something else about bill sury -- he is no longer here to tell you otherwise, and they want you to think he was not a success; that he was not a professional; that he did not have a distinguished career. you heard his son try and say that. you heard his son try and say, and did say -- did say that, "my father had a low-level job." that was no slip of the tongue; he said it twice. bill sury raised his son, provided for him, sent him to college, medical school. bill sury was a true gentleman. he was a wonderful man. he was a good father. he did not complain. you heard hal rush yesterday talk about how 4631 they used to drive together in the golf cart until hal drove he and bill into the lake, and i asked him about, "hey, what was bill sury's reaction to that? what did he say? did he complain?" "no, he did not complain." "did he blame you?" "nope." he was a successful insurance professional. a very intelligent man. he was a professional. he was an executive. and he did not blame anybody. bill sury, you heard through ms. shamp, accepts his responsibility for smoking. but this case is not brought by bill sury. it is brought by his son who seeks to recover from his dad's illness. we understand that. that is the way things seem to work out in florida for people who smoke and chose to smoke. and you heard about why. they had this thing called the engle case, the engle option here. they have the engle option to sue the tobacco companies. you heard dan sury, the brother. played his deposition just a little bit. you heard him say his nephew -- his nephew called him and said he had found a window, a window, as he called it, to bring this lawsuit. the law says he could bring a lawsuit. and maybe there is some cases out there where the plaintiff really was confused about smoking, but not here. ms. shamp: objection, your honor. i think he is going into whether -- the court: excuse me. ms. shamp: i think he is going into something we discussed, your honor, in motion in limine. mr. williams: no, your honor. i'm not. the court: come to sidebar. (a sidebar conference was held outside the hearing of the jury as follows:) ms. shamp: i loath to object to somebody's closing argument, your honor, but he started going into whether it was appropriate for this plaintiff to bring this case. and then he started off with saying bill sury does not blame anybody. so i think this line of argument that he is talking about whether it is appropriate to bring this lawsuit. and this is a lawsuit that he has the right to bring. it is not appropriate argument for him to argue that this is an inappropriate lawsuit or that william sury would not have wanted to bring the lawsuit. mr. williams: i'm not arguing that, 2 your honor. i'm -- i said it was appropriate for him to bring it, and i said he could bring it. he found this window to bring it. that is all. ms. shamp: he found something called "the window" and then he said -- mr. williams: your honor, may i -- we tried to keep the window out. they wanted it in. they wanted it in to show -- look, i am not going to go into any issue that bill sury would not have brought this lawsuit. i understand that order and i'm done with this area. i'm simply -- ms. shamp: he said -- the last thing out of his mouth before i objected was there might be some cases, indicating that there is some cases that have merit under engle and some cases that do not. and that is where i think he is allowed to go. the court: are you going any farther? mr. williams: no. the court: okay. (the sidebar conference was concluded, and the following proceedings were held in open court:) mr. williams: there might be some cases out there where people are confused. they were confused. there might be some people within that 11 percent, but not bill sury. and so i suggest to you that when you get to the verdict form, the questions that relate to whether or not these engle findings and the things in the engle findings were the legal cause of bill sury's death, the answer is no. the conduct of the tobacco company was not the legal cause of bill sury's death. as i said before, these questions are a progression. get through one, you go two through five. and then if you go two through five answering yes, then you get to number 6. this one right here, you can see, is comparative fault. if you find the tobacco companies had some responsibility here, then you have to decide how much. how much we had, my client reynolds. how much mr. woods' client lorillard had. and also how much -- of course, you see there is a spot here for bill sury, william sury. there is no question here that bill sury accepts responsibility. you heard ms. shamp say, "well, okay, he accepts responsibility for all of his smoking and failure to quit and what have you, but only 10 to twenty percent." in view of the overwhelming evidence in this case, if there is responsibility, bill sury should accept all of it. it was their evidence that gets 4 you there, frankly. during the testimony of david burns, you heard the surgeon general's view on whose decision it is to quit. who did he say? it is the smokers'. he told you who is responsible for quitting. what did he say? he said it is the smoker. what burns said, i repeat, "smokers are responsible for their own behavior. it is their responsibility to quit." and why is quitting even more important in this case? we did not hear an awful lot about it, but it is something called declining risk. dr. burns testified about it, and let me go back to it. because if bill sury quit a number of years ago, his risks of getting lung cancer would have gone down significantly. dr. burns said after 15 years of quitting, so that would have been, for bill sury, in 1980, 16 years after the surgeon general's report. after 15 years, his risk of death would have gone down by eighty percent. 20, 25 years later, ninety percent of the risk is gone. think about that: if bill sury had quit when hal and yancey quit, the risk of death would have been down way, way down. bill sury is not this ten percent responsible or this twenty percent responsible. bill sury is responsible entirely for his own decision. but even, again, if you do not assess all of the responsibility, you are going to have to make a decision with respect to lorillard and reynolds. what responsibility do they have? and that issue depends on the amount he smoked of our brands, and for how long. the brands he smoked and for how long. and this is another reason that we continue to push the issue to you on the burden of proof because we had a failure of proof, once again, from the plaintiff on that issue. we do not know enough about what brands bill sury smoked or for how long. we know he started smoking, because we saw the pictures of him with a cigarette, in the 1940s. we do not know what the cigarette brand was. his brother said he thought he was smoking raleighs once when he visited him in the army, but after that, there is this big dead space. we do not know. that was back in the war. and we know from dr. sury's testimony that up until 1961 or '2 he was smoking some other brand. we simply have almost 20 years of smoking history unknown. we do not know who it is. it could have been another company. we do not know. they failed to prove that to you for those 20 years. 6 then we get up to the 1960s, so he smoked raleighs for six -- six months to a year, and then he switched, said he switched to kents. he says couple years. yancey montgomery said something else, little longer. and then we heard some doral in there. we heard l&m, which is not even our product. we heard dorals. we do not know how much. he says -- i do not know what he said, back in the '60s or something. yancey montgomery said no, just a few dorals in the '80s. and frankly, i think yancey would know better. why? because he is playing golf with him every week, and they are putting their smokes right in the golf cart. he is going to be able to see what he is smoking and sharing. we do not know about dorals. we do not know how many, how much, when. dr. sury says, well, from the '90s to '95 he was smoking dorals, and he would know that and, yes. but the fact of the matter is we do not know enough. we know he did smoke some of our product. we know he smoked some of mr. woods' product. we do not know for how long in any of these circumstances. we do not know how much, how many years. it is a failure of proof. and so for that reason as well, i would suggest one hundred percent allocation, in part for simply the failure to bring the proof to mr. sury. and then after question 6, we get to question 7. what were the damages sustained by robert sury? and let us look at what this is. for his loss of his parental companionship, instruction and guidance and for his pain and suffering. now, let me start that by saying that if there are any damages awarded in this case, these damages are not awarded for the pain and suffering for any loss of bill sury, even though he was a smoker. that is the way it works. they are awarded to robert sury. robert sury must show you the loss of the companionship, instruction and guidance. and, you know, sometimes there is a loss for instruction and guidance, but not here because when bill sury died, dr. sury was, i believe, 46 years old. 41, 46. 41. i'm sorry he was 41 years old. he was already through medical school. he already had a medical practice. there is no evidence of any loss of instruction or guidance. companionship, they lived together, but instruction and guidance, no. and pain and suffering, this is robert sury's pain and suffering, not his dad's. and let me talk a little bit about something 8 that ms. shamp will certainly talk to you about, which is his loss of life. she will show you these government tables. they are called the life expectancy tables. and she will show you that at 78, somebody who is 78 who died in 1995 would have an additional life expectancy of seven years. in other words, if you get to 78, odds are you are going to get about to 85. that is the average. so seven years, okay. and that is one way to look at it. but another way to look at it is to go back and look at bill sury's life because he was born in 1919, and you will also see the life expectancy table for somebody born in 1919. and believe it or not, in 1919, the life expectancy for somebody born in that year, a man, was about 55 years. it is hard to believe, but that is what it was in 1919. bill sury outlived that by more than 20 years. he had a good life. he would have had a happy life. he had a full life. and then if you get through that question -- and, again, we hope you stop at number 1. if you get through that question, you get to the question, number 8, at the end, which is punitive damages. let me talk about that. if you get all the way through the verdict form, yes, yes, to all of that, you are going to have to decide what punitive damages are warranted. you know, plaintiffs always make this claim. they always sue -- they get to -- for compensatory damages and for punitives. it goes hand and hand. we do not like to get up here and talk about punitive damages, of course, but we have to because they get to claim that, punitive damages. what the judge will instruct you on punitive damages is a few things. and please bear these in mind if you get that far. punitive damages are not about compensation to dr. sury here. they are not about making anybody whole for any loss. what they are about is about even more money. these punitive damages are designed to, what is called punish and deter the defendants, to punish and deter them for reckless disregard of human life. and with punitive damages, the plaintiff must meet an even higher standard. it is not just one of these greater weights of the evidence. it is the much greater weight of the evidence called clear and convincing evidence. and i'm obviously here to say that this case has nothing to do with punitive damages. but apart from everything i've said before, there is no need, 10 there is no reason here to punish reynolds or lorillard. you have heard about the efforts of the tobacco industry to try to make cigarettes safer. they are a harmful product. everybody knows that. we have tried to make them safer. and we have been trying it for decades and decades. since 1950s when it was first realized that they were harmful, we have tried, if you heard about it, remove harmful chemicals from them called polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons. dr. figlar talked about that. we have cooperated all we can with the federal government at tobacco working group trying to make a safer cigarette, trying to develop a less hazardous cigarette. and a lot of that was this low tar effort, which was encouraged by the federal government and we did it, and that is when we made low-tar cigarettes in part. we thought it was good too. why did we do that? we did that for one reason: to reduce the risk for smokers who still chose to smoke. with respect to reynolds -- i'm very proud of this. you heard from dr. figlar, and even dr. proctor admitted it, this revolutionary breakthrough that reynolds is coming up with, at first it was called premiere, now it is called eclipse. it is this cigarette that does not burn tobacco. it heats it. i talked to dr. proctor about that, and even dr. proctor, no friend of the industry, said that smoking eclipse would cause significantly fewer deaths. quite recently reynolds -- you heard about this nitrosamine. reynolds had found that one of the ways that the farmers were curing tobacco was actually increase the amount of something called nitrosamines into the tobacco. so they came up with a new way. reynolds came up with a new way to cure tobacco for the farmers. and they have gone out all over the country, wherever tobacco is grown, to tell them how to do that. in every decade since the 1950s, r.j. reynolds has been working to make its product safer. perhaps we waited too long acknowledging that smoking caused lung cancer, but our record in trying to make cigarettes is safer is hardly a record of reckless disregard of health. you also saw in the testimony of dr. figlar something else that reynolds is doing today about smoking and lung cancer. you saw the websites, the 12 educational programs with respect to smoking and lung cancer and addiction and relying on public health authorities. you got the quit line up there. can you imagine that, you know, a company trying to get people to quit and not to use their products? it is not a record that requires punishment for deterrents. so if you get that far, and i hope you do not, i hope you find that punitive damages are not warranted. i'm about done. but before i finish, i want to remind you of one thing. remember when we were over in voir dire, jury selection over in the other courthouse, i asked the question right at the end of all the questions i got to ask, and i asked you and i asked everybody in the room one question. i said, look, even if the evidence shows that bill sury was not addicted, or even if the evidence shows that he could have quit, that it was not the legal cause, and even if we show you that cancer was not caused by smoking or they failed to show it, and even if there is no evidence that bill sury smoked because of anything the tobacco companies did or said, and i put all that out there, i asked you, i asked the whole group if you could decide the case on those facts and just those facts, that you could decide the case and not be swayed because of some sympathy for robert sury here or to find for robert sury just because he had brought the case. i asked that question and i put it out to everybody. and i do not know if you remember this, two people raised their hand and said, "why?" and, of course, because of that, they were not selected to sit on this jury. but i mention that because none of you raised your hands. and all of you agreed, i believe, to decide this case just on the basis of the evidence that we presented here and nothing else, and certainly not on any sympathy. so i ask you when you remember to please remember that when you go to the jury room. you agreed that you would decide the case just on the basis of the facts presented. i'm done. let me leave you with this: bill sury made choices throughout his life. he made a choice to smoke. he made a choice to continue to smoke. he made a choice not to quit. it was a choice not to quit. he made a choice to disregard the warnings of his friends and his family. he made a choice to 14 disregard the warnings on the pack. bill sury lived the way he wanted to live his life. bill sury chose to smoke cigarettes on his own freewill. smoking was bill sury's choice and smoking was bill sury's responsibility. again, let me thank you for your service. let me thank you for your attention, your patience, and i hope you enjoy it. mr. woods: thank you, your honor. good afternoon, everyone. you remember me, david woods, for lorillard. this case is about bill sury. the plaintiff's counsel, ms. shamp, said this case is also about the tobacco companies, and i do not disagree with that. we are obviously here. you have seen documents from r.j. reynolds, from lorillard. we have have done our best as the trial has gone on to try to put those documents in context, try to explain what we can. to the extent that there is no good explanation, sometimes there is no good explanation. but what i want to do now is walk through the evidence, especially as it relates to lorillard, and talk to you about what i think the evidence has shown in this case. you will remember this slide from when i started, and that is, what does this have to do with bill sury? you have heard that a lot now. you hear it over and over and over. but it is important, because the burden of proof is on the plaintiff to prove that if either company did something that it caused either bill sury to start smoking, to continue to smoke, or not to smoke, or not to quit earlier. and we do pretrial discovery before the trial starts, and so we have a pretty good idea of who is coming and what they are going to say, what witnesses and what they are going to say. and you have seen dr. proctor and you have seen dr. goldberg, you have seen kristy leung, who was the lorillard marketing representative. you have seen ed robinson, who was the lorillard company scientist. you saw dr. burns, who was on video. and you notice that -- and the reason why i put this up in opening is i think that you probably noticed that those videos especially were taken in other cases, and the idea is you play them in this case really without regard to who the particular smoker is, what brands they smoked, when they smoked them, when they started, and when they quit. and so, for example, with kristy leung you saw 3 all sorts of advertisements and documents and other things relating to old gold, relating to newport, relating to true. all brands that dr. sury confirmed his dad never smoked. and so the question is what does that have to do in this case about bill sury. you have obviously seen kent ads, and the testimony in this case is that mr. sury smoked kent for a time. was it two years like dr. sury says, or was it longer? you are the jury. i'll put that in your hands. i think mr. williams agrees we will put that in your hands in terms of who proved what. but at the end of the day it is still plaintiff's burden to prove that anything that you saw caused bill sury to smoke or caused bill sury to not quit sooner than he did. now, youth smoking. there was a lot of time spent in this case on youth smoking, but the evidence is clear that mr. sury started smoking when he was 21 years old, in 1941. and so like mr. williams said, there may be cases out there where some young person started smoking, was affected by advertisements, did not know the health risks, got addicted and was unable to quit, but that is not this case. that is not bill sury. bill sury, when he smoked kent he was over 45 years old, sometime in the mid 1960's is the testimony. he was married, he was a father, he had been a life insurance underwriter for ten years. you know, i want to talk a little bit about this underwriter thing. i do not know what an underwriter does. i do not know if an underwriter is an executive or if it is not an executive. respectfully, i'm not sure if that this case is about whether bill sury was an executive or not an executive. what we do know is that he worked for prudential insurance company. we know that the job of an insurance company, and from what we understand the job of an underwriter is, is to look at peoples individual risks and determine whether that might affect their longevity, how long they are going to live. and we know from dr. sury's testimony that one of the things that mr. sury looked at when he was doing that was whether somebody smoked. and you recall when mr. williams mentioned this that dr. goldberg agreed that for an underwriter that that type of information, awareness of the health risks of smoking, would be more salient, would be more vivid. and so to the extent that there is relevance in 5 this case that mr. sury was an underwriter, that is what it is. whether he was an executive or not an executive to me does not matter. but again, youth smoking i would submit to you really in some other case maybe, in this case it is not relevant. nicotine. you saw and you heard -- in ms. shamp's opening statement she read some documents talking about minimum levels of nicotine and spiking nicotine, that type of thing, and i tried to explain in opening and then i tried to bring evidence during trial during on cross-examination with dr. proctor and also through the lorillard company's scientist ed robinson, which i'm going to talk to in a minute. but before we get there, i mean, let us talk about nicotine. there is no secret that nicotine is in cigarettes. there is no secret that one of the reasons why people smoke is because there is nicotine in tobacco. nicotine is naturally in tobacco. tobacco companies do not put nicotine in tobacco. mother nature puts nicotine in tobacco. one of the reasons, like i said, that people smoke is because of nicotine. is it the fundamental reason? i do not know. is it fundamental for somebody and maybe not fundamental for another? i do not know. but it is one of the reasons why people smoke, and that is not a secret. now, cigarettes can be addictive. no doubt about it. we also know that even addicted smokers can quit. and i'm not saying it is easy for everybody. i'm not saying that some people -- particularly if you are addicted it may take multiple times. but i think that really comes down to motivation. and when i say motivation i do not mean lack of willpower, you did not try hard enough. it is whether you truly in your heart of hearts whether you want to be a nonsmoker, whether you want to be -- more than you want to be a smoker. but anyway, nicotine is naturally in tobacco. there is actually more tobacco in the leaf -- we talked about that -- in the ground when it comes out than in a commercial cigarette. nicotine levels -- you may have seen i spent a lot of time pulling up nicotine -- tar and nicotine level charts. you remember the reader's digest from 1957, then the reader's digest from 1958 that shows that tar and nicotine levels have gone down. so the importance of that is that it is not -- there is no magic level of nicotine. there is no magic point, whatever, that if you have that much nicotine that is how you addict people. and that is just common sense, if you think 7 about it, because somebody can smoke a half pack a day of an ultra light cigarette and they are going to get x-amount of nicotine. now, they may be addicted. somebody else may smoke two packs a day of unfiltered cigarettes. they are going to get a lot more nicotine. they may be just as addicted as somebody who smokes and gets very, very much less nicotine. no witness came in here to say more nicotine equals more addictive, or less nicotine means less addicted. if that was the case then on average, since nicotine levels have gone down over time, theoretically cigarettes would be less addictive today than they were 50 years ago. and i do not think any scientists believe that. i do not believe that. so there is no magic dose of nicotine. but again the nicotine manipulation. you recall we spent a lot of time talking with dr. proctor, and you may have missed it with the ed robinson video, the lorillard company's scientist, because frankly they are not the most exciting things to watch. but even within there dr. robinson and dr. proctor basically agreed when it came to the tobacco working group. again, you remember i used this document with dr. proctor, national cancer institute, it is from 1976. when you go back -- when you go back to the jury room, if you are concerned about whether lorillard or anybody else manipulated nicotine in cigarettes, please search out the lorillard nicotine documents and read them and read them. read them front to back. and then also read this, and this is trial exhibit 354, and you will seen gio gory from the national cancer institute, brown & williamson, filter manufacturers, and you will remember dr. tso from the u.s. department of agriculture, you will remember he was the one who actually in that document had the idea of adding nicotine to cigarettes. and again, the idea was if tar is the bad thing, but people are going to smoke for nicotine, if you can drop the tar, but you can keep the nicotine where it is, then maybe, maybe that will make it less hazardous. and scientists at the time thought it was a good thing. at the end of the day it did not work. it never resulted in a commercial product. for whatever reason people did not like the taste, did not like cigarettes with lower tar and medium nicotine. so at the end of the day -- i mean, i guess this is relevant as to lorillard and as to bill sury and kent in this case, no kent cigarette ever had low tar medium nicotine, for better or worse. 9 so again you remember this from opening. i tried to boil down what i think this case is about: control, causation, and responsibility. control. who ultimately -- sort of a buck stops here. who ultimately was in control of mr. sury's decision to smoke, his decision to pick up that first cigarette, his decision to continue buying cigarettes, and then his decision ultimately to quit in 1995 when he did quit. causation. you will remember there are two parts to the causation. one is medical causation. and we are going to talk about that in a little bit. but the other one is legal cause. legal cause: the idea that it is the plaintiff's burden to prove that something that either r.j. reynolds or lorillard tobacco company did to cause bill sury to do something that he would not otherwise have done. and we will talk about this as we walk through the verdict form. but the idea here is -- it is called the but for cause in law school, and it is in the instructions. and the concept is that but for something that lorillard did he would have done something differently. and if the plaintiff's do not prove that -- if he would have smoked if lorillard were not even in the picture, then there is no but for causation, because he would have smoked anyway. responsibility. that is really -- that is the when it is all said and done who ultimately is responsible? who was in the best position, the tobacco company, who has -- like it or not, society has decided with warnings on the packs companies can continue to sell and, with restrictions, advertise the product. and so we cannot be punished, we cannot be held liable merely for selling the product. so at the end of the day the question is who is in the best position ultimately to decide whether or not to use the product. so control. let us talk about that first. you remember -- you will see i'm recycling a lot of my slides from the opening. i think this is clear. i think everybody agrees. i think plaintiff agrees, i think reynolds agrees, and i know lorillard agrees that bill sury, mr. sury, was an intelligent, hardworking and successful person. whether he was an executive or whether he was not an executive, it does not matter, he was an intelligent, hardworking, and successful. the witnesses told you that. every fact witness that came in here from his son, dr. sury, to his two golfing buddies, to his younger brother, who you heard by deposition read to you that he was intelligent, that he was well read, and frankly that he was a good guy. no doubt about 11 that. no doubt about that at all. you will remember the timeline that i showed you in opening. i just want to bring it out here for some reminders on dates. but again it shows -- and mr. williams walked through some of this already, so i'm not going to repeat it. but his time in the army, moved his way up from enlisted to officer. started out in the mailroom at prudential. i mean, mr. sury was born in 1919. he was ten years old when the stock market crashed. he is not somebody who had anything handed to him. he got to where he was by working hard, working hard in the military, working hard at prudential. he got himself, frankly, from the mailroom in 1939 to the point where he is golfing every saturday with other successful businessmen. i guess, yancey montgomery and hal rush probably were executives. but, you know, at the end of the day i think we all agree that is pretty impressive. we also know that mr. sury was an informed adult smoker. we have already talked about the fact that he was an adult before he ever first picked up a cigarette, probably 21 years old, either right in the military or right before the military. again when he started smoking kent he was 45 years old at least, somewhere in there. and dr. sury is testifying from memory, from when he was fairly young, but he recalls sometime in the mid 1960's. ms. shamp said right after the surgeon general's report. i do not know if that is right or not, but it is sometime in the mid 1960's. nobody came in here, no fact witness was able to come in here and tell you why did bill sury choose kent. over any other brand out there why did he choose kent? now, we know that dr. goldberg -- and we have heard through ms. shamp it was because of the advertising. it was because of the advertising that was done in the 1950's, that greatest health protection in cigarette history. well, you will remember it was sort of my big aha moment, and it was the -- this picture. and this picture i would submit proves that those advertisements, the greatest health protection advertisements -- you saw one of those in ms. shamp's closing. you also saw, i think it was the voice of wisdom ad. all of those ads were before 1955. you will remember in 1955 were the new ftc advertising guides that said no more health claims in advertising. then you remember dr. goldberg went out and pulled the document out of his trunk and said, aha, here's late '55 and you have got the ftc 13 yelling at you for your advertisements. i think we explained that, well, that was because the advertisement ran before the ftc guides went into effect. but be it as it may, those advertisements stopped in 1955. i think you will probably see the ad for more scientists and educators smoked kent, which ran in 1960. but if you will recall, lorillard started clearing its advertising through the ftc in 1958. and so to the extent that those ads ran, they were approved by the ftc, for right or wrong, better or worse. and that is assuming that mr. sury even saw any of them. and there was no evidence that he did. but even assuming that he did. but again back to the picture. you will recall this is from 1956. this is mr. sury, and this is the young future dr. sury. and it is hard to tell, but you can -- that is obviously the white part of the cigarette, that is a cork tip. if you have seen, some brands have white tipping paper around them, some have cork tip. and you will recall dr. goldberg agreed kent always had -- and if you see more ads after i sit down and ms. shamp gets back up you will notice it always had a white filter, white paper around the filter. so that is the best evidence i can bring you that those ads did not make mr. sury start smoking kent. now, at some point, and i think there is no dispute, he did start smoking kent. he started smoking kent sometime in the mid 1960's. now, i'll put this one up. these have some of the facts from after 1960, but first i'm going to put this up. and this another one of those you saw for maybe ten seconds with kristy leung, and -- but it is important, because what this shows is here's 1952. kent was not on the market before 1952. and you see, if you can read this -- i apologize if you cannot -- this is when it comes in. it says: protection, the health protection ads '52 to 1954. the voice of wisdom ad, 1955. and you see that in 1954 kent brand here actually drops. those advertisements were not causing people to smoke kent. it actually started to drop. then in 1956 and 1957 what happened? you remember the reader's digest articles, the reader's digest articles that did the test on kent and found that kent was the best filter out there. so there is a big difference between an advertiser saying we are the greatest health protection in cigarette history, market share goes down. independent third party running independent 15 tests on tar and nicotine levels, it shot up. that shows you the power of independent -- independent analysis and what independent people say, because people believe independent sources. so again after that, kent now i think in 2010, let us see, it is 0.0. the last time it is even 0.1 is 2004. so think about that when you are thinking about effectiveness of kent advertising. now, again, mr. sury was an adult informed smoker. the risks were known. but i think mr. williams read the last one here to you. but, you know, dr. hammond from 1955, 1957 u.s. surgeon general, 1957 u.s. national cancer institute, all agree. now, dr. goldberg came in, and dr. goldberg said the industry advertising, the wallpaper, and everything hill & knowlton was doing, and whatever the tobacco companies were saying, that watered down the message, that confused people, that completely drowned out the public health message. well, that is what he says in 2011, but if you would have asked these public health officials back in the 1950's they would have disagreed with him. likewise, you remember this. this was with dr. riddel. ms. shamp has used some polls that were done for the tobacco institute, and i think they were found in philip morris files. you saw that dr. riddel was not very impressed with them, but they are in evidence. by all means, go back and read the entire things, the entire polls, and see if they are inconsistent with what we have here. 1954, seventy percent of people think smoking is harmful. climbs up to 85 percent, 91 percent, 96 percent. and these are polls done -- the auts, adult use of tobacco survey. remember, those are polls that are done by the federal government. so again, control. who was in control? who was in the best position to affect whether mr. sury started to smoke, or if he decided when to quit smoking? everybody has decided at one point in their mind -- or one point in time whether they are going to be a smoker or not. everybody is offered a cigarette at one point, and you either try it or you do not try it. and it is a personal decision that everybody makes. mr. sury also had control over his brand choice. and you will remember you were shown all sorts of articles about the public health community and what they were telling smokers, telling them to quit, quit smoking, but if you are not going to quit smoking then at least switch to lower tar. well, ms. shamp said mr. sury looked at these 17 in choosing what brands he was going to pick. well, you see here it says you can buy as much as 34 milligrams of tar or as little as 2. kent is right in the middle. so if somebody is going and their goal is to find the lowest tar and nicotine, it is not kent. kent was right there about with marlboro. advantage is lower, carlton is lower. there is a lot more lower, but i wanted to put the bigger brand names up there. so at the end of the day again it is no doubt mr. sury was a great guy. yancey montgomery said that he enjoyed smoking, from what he could observe it looked like mr. sury enjoyed smoking. dr. sury talked about how when his dad would come home from work -- i think ms. shamp even mentioned that in her closing -- he would sit down, relax, put his feet up, you know, have a hi-ball, bourbon and water, have a cigarette, talk to his wife as she made dinner. all of bill sury's friends smoke. his entire foursome smoked. now, ms. shamp tried -- it seems like she is portraying that as, oh, he smoked everywhere, so he must have been addicted. but the fact of the matter is that is what he did, it was part of his lifestyle. he got together with friends and they joked around, they golfed, and they played pooled or they played cards after golfing, and they would smoke. and there is nothing wrong with that. but, you know, something else that you may have noticed is that every fact witness who testified in this case was at one point a smoker, but quit. every one of them. daniel sury, bill sury's younger brother, he quit in 1959. he had smoked for about ten years one pack a day. he quit cold turkey when he started having kids. dr. sury, you know, you recall he read the warnings to his father, but then he started smoking. you know, he did not smoke that much and did not smoke very long, but even he quit smoking. hal rush, you heard his testimony yesterday. seems like it was a week ago. but you recall that he -- he went and his father who was a smoker was in an oxygen tent in the hospital, and he recalls his father reaching out to try to get his package of cigarettes, and he says that is it, i'm stopping. that is motivation. and it was not easy for hal rush. was hal rush addicted? he may very well may have been. but again it is motivation, and it is not willpower, it is motivation, it is telling yourself i'm going to try. i'm going to try like hal rush did. i'm going to try hypnosis. hypnosis did not work for him, so he went to 19 this nicotine withdrawal clinic that was down the road, down san jose boulevard, and they stuck apparently needles in his eyes and ears and nose, and that was it for him and he stopped smoking. yancey montgomery, two or three pack a day smoker. he quit smoking because he started having heart problems; smoked one last cigarette, quit cold turkey. but there is another one. mr. sury. mr. sury quit. he quit six months before he was diagnosed. this was not one of those situations where somebody gets diagnosed with lung cancer and it is basically a death sentence so they have got to quit. he quit really before he started having any symptoms of his lung cancer, six months before. he quit when he started getting a cough, and when he quit his cough went away, and he stayed quit. again motivation is the key. you have seen these stats before. i'm not going to keep quoting them to you. dr. frazier. you will recall that was plaintiff's expert. i guess she was not a psychiatrist, but she was their addiction expert, and even she agreed that the smoker -- it is motivation -- the smoker has to want to quit. we talked in opening about if you want your spouse to go on a diet, or your spouse wants you to go on a diet, or you want your kids to get straight a's, well, they have -- motivation has to come from within. and the question is, is there evidence of mr. sury being motivated. and again i'm not being critical. i'm not saying he did not try hard enough, he was not -- he did not have the willpower. but ask yourself, if he would have wanted -- truly wanted to quit smoking would not he have -- for example, with friends and family, when hal rush came back, and every saturday they are in the golf cart together, you would think that at least once he would say, hey, hal, tell me about that nicotine withdrawal clinic you went to. i'm tired of smoking. i do not want to smoke anymore. tell me about that. he never did. same thing with yancey montgomery. if they were sitting around shooting pool or playing cards. no conversations, no indication that he wanted to quit. now, there is also no dispute dr. sury wanted his dad to quit smoking. no doubt about that. but that is again you wanting something to do it. unless they have internalized it and unless they want to do it they are not going to make the changes that are going to be required, because for some people it can 21 be hard to quit. stop smoking clinics. in 1982 mr. sury retired from prudential. at that point he is no longer going in to work, he is no longer subject to the daily grind and the stress of work. if he wanted to quit smoking, if he was motivated to quit smoking, he had every resource available to him. he had the resources to go to stop smoking clinics, presumably he had a doctor, he could have gone to his doctor and sought help. he could have -- dr. sury recommended, hey, dad, why do not you go to hypnosis. his dad did not go. and again i'm not being critical, but it is -- if the question is whether mr. sury wanted to quit, if you look at the objective evidence, the objective evidence shows no motivation to quit until the 90's when he did quit. and apparently he used the patch, and it took him a while, but ultimately he was able to quit, and there is no reason that if he would have been motivated that he could not have quit earlier. and why is quitting important? mr. williams walked you through this already. i have a graphic of it. you saw this during opening. but the point here is 15 years of not smoking. so that would be roughly 1980. so about the time when mr. sury retired. if he would have quit smoking about the time he retired his risk of smoking would have dropped by eighty percent. okay. that is a good segue into causation. in a case like this involving a smoker who ends up with a mass in their lung and the question is is that a lung cancer that is caused by smoking. and the key here is when you say lung cancer it is sort of a misnomer, because a cancer in the lung is lung cancer, but the lung cancer can start somewhere else. it can start in the pancreas, it can start anywhere else, and we will get to the relevance of that in a minute. but walking in -- walking into this lawsuit before you heard any evidence what would you have expected to see? medical records, death certificates, x-rays, radiology, all these things. you would have expected to see -- you would have expected to see a treating physician or some expert walk in with a load of medical records and show you x-rays and ct's, and here it is, you can see it here. you see that there is nothing else, no other tumors in the liver, or pancreas, or anything like that. we do not have that here. the records were destroyed. we are not saying dr. sury destroyed the 23 records. the records were destroyed. we tried our best, and i'm sure plaintiff's counsel tried their best to get the records, but they are just not here. all we have are two medical records, one which is the pathology report which you have seen, the other is basically another pathology report which i think says about the same thing. then we have the death certificate, but we know that the death certificate has errors in it. but most importantly we have pathology. we have the actual slides of mr. sury's tumor that experts can look at, pathologists can look at to see what it looks like. does this look like something that started in the lung? does this look like something that may be metastasized to the lung? okay. so what is plaintiff's evidence on medical causation? their first witness was dr. alan marks. he is the one that filled out the death certificate. and he agreed -- he was not the one who treated mr. sury. the one who treated mr. sury -- if you recall, the last person, the last video that we played in our case, dr. gaddis, the one who basically said, i do not have any records, i do not have any recollection of this person, and i cannot tell you what caused his lung cancer, that was mr. sury's treating oncologist. that was the person who treated his cancer, and he had no recollection of him. dr. alan marks was dr. gaddis' medical partner. dr. gaddis was apparently out of the office that day. they got the call. he had never met bill sury, he would never treated bill sury. he did not review the pathology. he said, i assume i looked, because that was his practice, at the records, maybe five pages of records for five minutes. and we know there are errors on the death certificate. we know that it says that there was five or six months from diagnosis to death, and we know that that is wrong because it is 15 or 16 months. we know that it says squamous cell ling cancer, and we know that is wrong, because the pathology report -- the only thing we have about the pathology -- says undifferentiated, or poorly differentiated carcinoma with squamous cell features, which does not mean squamous cell carcinoma. and i'll get to the importance of that in a minute. who was the second expert that opined on causation? it was actually dr. sury's personal physician. he was the one who actually -- when mr. sury started getting weak dr. sury took him in, did a chest x-ray, apparently dr. grochmal recalled from 25 14 years ago the size of the tumor that was on this x-ray. but again he did not treat mr. sury's cancer. he saw that and felt is was suspicious and he sent him to a pathologist to get diagnosed for lung cancer, because that is what pathologists do. he is not a pathologist, he is not an oncologist. again with these videos it is hard to tell, but after he said, well, it is my opinion that this is a primary lung cancer that started in the lung and it was caused by smoking, immediately after that he admitted that he is not an expert in carcinogenesis, which is an expert in cancer causation. so we brought you dr. stonesifer, and dr. stonesifer said bill sury had adenocarcinoma, not squamous cell carcinoma. ms. shamp sort of called into question his credentials. dr. stonesifer has been a pathologist for 26 years. he is board certified, he was the former hospital chief of staff. he showed you what he saw, the signet cell rings and the other features to show that it was adenocarcinoma, it was not squamous cell carcinoma. and the importance there is adenocarcinoma can start in a lot of different places, in the stomach, in the pancreas, in the colon, gi tract, prostate. those are all adenocarcinomas. and the lung, more than -- just because you have a tumor in your lung does not mean that it started there. and in fact the research shows that more than half of the cancers that end up in the lung started somewhere else. the problem is we did not have the medical records. we did not have other ct scans, we did not have anything else to go back and figure it out. all we had were one or two medical records and a -- and a death certificate that we know is faulty. but again, the pathology, other than two medical records, other than a death certificate that we know is wrong, the most critical evidence in this case of what caused mr. sury's cancer, what type of tumor it was, was the pathology. would not you have expected plaintiff's counsel to bring in a pathologist? they took dr. stonesifer's deposition. they knew he was going to come in and say it was adenocarcinoma. why did not they call a pathologist? ask yourself that. well, they may say because it is a red herring because both of them are linked to smoking. but again adenocarcinomas start in a lot of different places and they spread to the lung. the burden of proof is on the plaintiff, and they did not even bring a pathologist. 4679 1 okay. responsibility. who -- who was in the best position? who is responsible? you know, in this country -- we talked about the greatest generation in opening statements. we talked about how -- i think i said dan rather, but i think it is actually tom brokaw who coined it the greatest generation. you know, mr. sury, like i said, born in 1919. i mean, he saw the entire cold war beginning and end. he saw the fall of the soviet union in his lifetime, lived through the depression. he was a member of the greatest generation. well, who was another member of the greatest generation? harry reasoner. here's what he had to say. (video clip played and interpreted by the reporter as follows.) in this kind of a country it comes down to you, whether you like it or not. no one is going to forbid an adult to smoke, and it is now quite clear that no one is going to tell him it is good for him either. the decision is his. the decision and the health that may depend on it. this is harry reasoner. goodnight. (video clip concluded.) and that pretty well sums it up. that is how the greatest generation looked at this issue. no one is going to tell you you cannot smoke. it is your choice to smoke, but smoking comes with health risks. now i want to walk through the verdict form a little bit. mr. williams did it some, but i wanted to put these slides up here. we have spoken about this first question. if you answer no to the first question then you are done. if you answer yes then you go on. so let us look at the first question first. the first question actually has three different parts like mr. williams told you. this is the first part. basically it is was mr. sury addicted. and in this case you had dr. giakas on the one hand, you had dr. frazier on the other hand, and you have common sense. i'm sure you have opinions on whether you believe he was addicted or not addicted, and so i'm going to leave it with you. let us go to the second part of the first question, because even if mr. sury is addicted -- again we know even addicted smokers can quit smoking. so the question is, if so, if he was addicted was cigarette smoking because of such addiction a legal cause. so the question there is, this idea of legal cause, and you will see in the 3 instruction that legal cause requires a direct connection, a substantial impact. direct connection, substantial impact. now, when you think about this you also need to think about the fact that plaintiff, plaintiff counsel has admitted responsibility in this case. admitted some responsibility. and you need to think about what that means. that means -- it has to mean that mr. sury was aware of the health risks and that he was able to quit smoking earlier than he did, because otherwise, if mr. sury was not aware of the health risks of smoking, or if he was not able to quit early enough to avoid his illness then why admit any fault whatsoever? if he was too addicted to quit and unable to quit, if he was ignorant of the health risks, then why would he be at fault at all? so the fact that they are admitting that tells you that he has responsibility, he was aware, and he could have quit earlier. now, direct connection and substantial impact. what does that mean? that means that the plaintiff has to prove that mr. sury's addiction was so strong, that it was so powerful that it basically overcame his freewill. basically overcame his freewill. he could not stop earlier. if he could have stopped earlier then there is no legal cause. okay. let us go on to the third part, basically medical causation. if you find that plaintiff did not meet their burden of proof on medical causation because of the lack of the medical records, questions about the pathology, then the answer is no. so again three-part question. there is three parts to this. plaintiff has the burden on each part. each of these words has meaning. you can tell this is carefully crafted. each word has meaning. plaintiff has to prove all three parts. so plaintiff has to convince each of you on each of the three parts. if any of you disagree with any one part, if any of you disagree with any one part, or if all -- if you disagree, but for different reasons, maybe two of you think, i do not think he was addicted, maybe two of you think, i think he probably was addicted, but, you know, i think he could have quit, and i think he could have quit earlier, and two others might think, you know, i do not think they met their burden of proof on medical causation, that is -- that is no. you do not all have to agree for the same reason. now, we would submit and suggest that the 5 answer here is no. and just shorthand it and let you know where i'm going, for a defense verdict it is essentially no to everything. you do not necessarily have to get there, but all the questions for the plaintiff are yes, all the answers for the defendants are no. we believe you should check no to question 1. that would end the lawsuit right now. now, if you check yes you are not done. if you check yes then you go on to questions 2 through 6, which are liability, legal liability. you heard the negligence and strict liability, and that is questions 2 and 3, whether lorillard -- and i put lorillard up here. obviously there is one for reynolds as well. and obviously you need to weigh evidence differently against both companies. there is two different boxes to check, and you weigh the evidence separately for both companies. and this is where the findings come into play that the judge read you and that ms. shamp has read you a few times. but you understand that the findings do not establish liability. the findings were generic findings. this is bill sury's case. and the plaintiff still has the burden to prove whether lorillard's negligence was a legal cause of mr. sury's death. and again it is the same legal cause. it is direct and substantial. was lorillard's negligence a direct and substantial cause of william sury's death? so when you think about this think about press releases. you remember the press release that ms. shamp read to you. i suspect you are going to see more tobacco company public statements in her next section, her next portion. ask yourself, did mr. sury hear those? did mr. -- did anybody hear those? i mean, if it is a press release, press releases do not necessarily mean that they get published and picked up by anyone. if you have a tobacco institute pamphlet there is no evidence that mr. sury was on the tobacco institute mailing list to get those things. ask yourself, is there evidence that he ever saw it, that he ever did anything after reading it that made him not quit earlier or make him not stop smoking. and if you find the answer is no, the answer is no on question 2. question 3 i'm going to skip over because it is the same concept, but it is whether the defective and unreasonably dangerous cigarettes were a legal cause. and there again i think you have been instructed that you cannot hold the companies liable for the mere sale of cigarettes. you have to link 7 up -- plaintiff's counsel has to link up a defect to the injury. okay. so let us go on. 4 and 5 really are together, and with 4 and 5 if you check no, even if you check yes for 2 and 3, if you check no for 4 and 5 then there should be no punitive damages because the judge instructed you that you cannot get punitive damages just on the negligence and the strict liability questions. but again fraudulent concealment, these two, concealment and conspiracy really go together. again legal cause. legal cause is a requirement for each of these elements in the verdict form. and again this -- and you will see in the instructions, this requires reliance. this requires reliance, reasonable reliance on behalf of mr. sury. so again, did he see it? was he looking for information from the tobacco institute or the council for tobacco research, or lorillard, reynolds, or any other tobacco company for information that he needed before he was going to decide, okay, i'm going to quit? and if your answer is no -- if your answer is no, then the answer is no here, because there is no reliance. if he is not relying on information from the companies, waiting for information from the companies to make his decision about smoking the answer here is no. okay. let us move on comparative fault. we would submit that you should not ever -- you should get here. either you answer no to question 1 or you answer no to questions 2 through 6 -- 2 through 5. but if you get to question 6 on comparative fault, again legal cause. plaintiff has already admitted responsibility, admits that he was aware and that he could quit. plaintiff starts off -- because the burden of proof is on the plaintiff, plaintiff starts off with one hundred percent of the fault. so even if you answered yes to everything above, you still get comparative fault, and plaintiff has to prove each and every percent that they want to move from them to the defense. and again you have separate lines for r.j. reynolds and separate lines for lorillard tobacco. mr. williams mentioned maybe one way you can think about that is unclear smoking history, or things like that. i'm sure there are a number of different ways you can look at it. if you get there i leave it in your sound discretion on how you define -- or how you divide up the fault among the three. you are the jury. that is your sound discretion. i would submit to you that one hundred percent fault to william sury. 9 and i'll say this. i do not like fault. i do not think mr. sury was at fault for smoking. okay. understand that. comparative fault is how it is termed under the law. but i mean if you want to look at this in terms of responsibility and who is responsible, that is the same thing. but i do not want you to walk out of here thinking that i'm blaming mr. sury for smoking. i think that was his choice. i think that is a choice that we all have. i think in this country we have freedom of choice, and freedom of choice brings responsibility. and i think the greatest generation believed in that. but at the end of the day again this is your decision. okay. damages. and again understand we are not -- this is not about valuing mr. sury's life, bill sury's life. that is not what this is about. frankly, that is impossible to do. but what you need to understand here are the damages being sought. so for example, they are not seeking damages for lost medical expenses, what they had to pay for medical, what they had to pay for funeral expenses, and things like that, lost wages. that is not being sought here. the only thing being sought is the loss of parental companionship, instruction and guidance, and for any pain and suffering dr. sury may have felt due to the loss of his father. it is not any pain and suffering that mr. bill sury may have felt. it is what dr. sury felt. and again you remember even back in voir dire and then i think in the judge's instructions here the only thing you can consider, the only evidence you can consider is when dr. sury was on the stand and when he was testifying about the losses that he felt with his father's death, that is -- that is the evidence, that is what you have to -- that is what you would have to consider, and really nothing else. now, i expect after i sit down that ms. shamp is going to get up and she is going to ask for a lot of money. i would expect that she is going to ask for maybe a million dollars. she may ask for multiple millions. i do not know. we believe that the damages -- again, burden of proof is on the plaintiff. we believe that the damages should be zero. look, i understand that a lot of you may not agree with that. so let me suggest to you that if ms. shamp stands up and she asks for damages in this case on this record in the millions of dollars, i would suggest to you that a more fair and reasonable amount would be in the thousands. i mean, not like five or six thousands, but not the millions, in the thousands. i think that would be fair, i think that 11 would be reasonable. again, i do not think you should get here. this is a hard subject to talk about, but on this record respectfully i think the damages are not in the millions, they are in the thousands. let us move to question 8, punitive damages. and i suspect that ms. shamp is going to spend a fair amount of time of her remaining time on punitive damages. but what you need to know about punitive damages are that you cannot use the findings on punitive damages. so those findings, they are completely irrelevant when it comes to punitive damages. punitive damages have to be proved, and the burden is on the plaintiff to prove them based on only what you saw in the courtroom from the plaintiff and from the defense in terms of entitlement. and you will see here the burden, by clear and convincing evidence it is a higher burden. it is not the criminal burden, it is not beyond a reasonable doubt, but it is a higher burden than -- and i think you are going to have the instructions back with you and you will be able to see that. but basically punitive damages requires reckless disregard to life, conscious indifference to smokers. reckless disregard or conscious indifference. now, i think mr. williams stood up -- and we agree that these companies are not perfect. did they hold on to some ideas too long? in 20/20 hindsight, probably. did people have some stupid ideas in documents in the past? probably. but at the end of the day did it have an impact, was it a legal cause, did it cause mr. sury to smoke or to not quit earlier? i want you to consider some of the things that were in evidence. again this was ed robinson, the lorillard company's scientist, in his deposition some of this may have just gone right by you because it is a pretty dry presentation. you can tell he is not an expert witness, his job is to do science. but again some of the things that lorillard has done over the years i would submit to you do not amount to conscious indifference, reckless disregard. you have heard about the tobacco working group. one of their key members was lorillard's dr. spears. now, i'm sure you are probably going to see some documents from dr. spears where he was critical of the council for tobacco research. and that was his opinion, but it is what it is. but he did good work with the tobacco working group trying to come up with a less hazardous cigarette. going back to the 1940's lorillard was doing 13 cooperative research with ohio state university to try to research what was in tobacco smoke. the 50's and 60's, you remember dr. wynder, dr. wynder of wynder and graham, the mouse skin painting studies, also did epidemiology studies. lorillard actually worked with wynder and hoffman, dietrich hoffman, another public health researcher, actually would work with them to give them tar from their cigarettes so that they could go do research. they were trying to do research again to come up with a less hazardous cigarette. you have seen the '63 lorillard submission to the surgeon general's advisory committee dealing with cigarette filtration. and then even today lorillard is working with the institute of medicine. and the institute of medicine lorillard is working with on potentially reduced exposure products. mr. williams was talking about the eclipse product that heats rather than burns tobacco. that is an example. they call prep, potentially reduced exposure products. again, the company was not perfect. people are not perfect. companies are not perfect. but i submit to you on this record you have no nicotine manipulation, trying -- not perfect, but trying to do the right thing, trying to come up with a less hazardous cigarette, shows that there was not conscious indifference to smokers. now, i'm about to sit down, and as you know, ms. shamp, who is smiling pretty big, she gets to go last, and so obviously we cannot respond to what she has to say. all i ask of you is if you see a document, and if it really bothers you, we cannot respond to it, if you want to write it down, if you want to go back and look at it, please read the whole thing before you make any judgments about it. ask yourself -- somebody -- maybe somebody back in the -- back in the jury room after it is all said and done be -- play the devil's advocate, what would mr. williams or what would i have said in response to what ms. shamp is saying, because we will sit down, we cannot say anything. i really do thank you for your attention, you guys. you have been on time, you have been incredibly attentive, you know, even through videos that are not the most exciting thing to watch. the case boils down to this. was bill sury robbed of has freewill by nicotine? i mean, was he a victim of the tobacco companies? or was he intelligent, hardworking, successful, a man who made his own decisions, a man who accepted the consequences of his decisions? because really 15 that is what i think the case boils down to. ms. shamp is going next, and thank you for your time.