14 good morning, ladies and gentlemen. first, i want to thank you for your attention. i know you have been paying close attention and there is been a lot of evidence in this case and i see that you have been taking notes and i appreciate that. this is my closing argument so let me begin as i began in my opening argument, let me take you back. this is a case about bill sury. you have heard the evidence now. you know bill sury was a good man. he was married for 50 years to a girl he met on a beach in florida. in 1941 he went to war when our country did and served in the pacific. when he came home after he would married his wife, he went to work for the prudential where he worked for 36 years starting in the mailroom and eventually becoming an underwriter. he moved to jacksonville, florida, and had a son whom he raised with compassion and gentleness who became a doctor. he was a man who said, goodness gracious when he hit a bad shot on the golf course. he was an usher in his church. he was a good man. and he smoked. we know that he started smoking sometime before he was 21 years old. we know that he went into the military and smoked while he was in the military. we know that he smoked in the '40s, in the '50s, in the '60s, in the '70s and the '80s. and we know that in the 1990s he was able to finally quit smoking with the help of a patch. ladies and gentlemen, this case is about bill sury. in 1996 he was diagnosed with lung cancer. he battled it. it finally spread to his brain, and in may of 1997 he died of that lung cancer. this case is about bill sury but it is also about the companies -- i'm sorry -- that made the cigarettes that he smoked decade after decade. it is about those companies and what they told him and what they did not tell him. it is about what they knew, what they disclosed, what they did. their stories are intertwined, inexplicably intertwined, inexplicably intertwined, and it is the story of 5 both. now, this is my closing argument and i'm not going to spend my time retelling you all of the evidence that you have heard over the last three weeks. i do not want to do that. and i've been thinking how can i present this evidence to you in my closing argument in a way that makes sense. and i think the best way and the way i've decided to do it is to actually look at the things that you are going to be called upon to decide in the verdict form. and the judge told you about those today. the first issue that you are going to be asked to decide and the judge just discussed it with you was whether bill sury is a member of the engle class. it is called class membership. and it is very simple and straightforward in this case. the judge has instructed you, and you will have those instructions, of what it takes to be a member of the engle class. to prove william sury was a member of the engle class, plaintiff must prove by a greater weight of the evidence that william sury was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine, and, if so, that cigarette smoking because of such addiction was a legal cause of his lung cancer. if he is a member of the engle class, he is entitled to the benefits of all of these engle findings that the judge just instructed you about. so we will talk about those in a minute but let us turn right now to talking about what is going to be the very first question on the verdict form, which is the class membership question. question number 1 on the verdict form that you will have with you, it looks just like this, is: was william sury addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine -- i'm sorry, i have a person down. ms. bryan: there was a power boost. ms. shamp: just one moment. i'm sorry. thank you. was william sury addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine, and, if so, was cigarette smoking because of such addiction a legal cause of his cancer? so how i'm going to start today is to talk to you about what the evidence is with respect to that issue. now, first, i want to talk a moment about burden of proof because what it says in here is that plaintiff must prove by a greater weight of the evidence -- and that is called the burden of proof, and what it means is simply as it sounds, the 7 greater weight must be on the side that you decide for. and since we are in a courtroom i like to use the scales of justice. if you put all the evidence on one side of the issue on this side of scales and the evidence in the other, you have to decide where the weight is. it is not a criminal case, it does not have to be beyond a reasonable doubt, but simply the greater weight of the evidence. where does the greater weight of the evidence fall. so let us talk about what the evidence is with respect to the issue of addiction. what did we learn about nicotine and addiction? most of it is absolutely undisputed in this case. what we learned is that nicotine is addictive. every witness who came in here testified as to that. all the documents that we put in said that. nicotine is addictive. there is no question about that. and nicotine changes the brain. and you will remember dr. frazier talking about how it changes the brain and how it releases -- nicotine releases dopamine into the brain and then that dopamine changes the control center of the brain. i thought this was a fascinating piece of testimony because lots of things we do release dopamine. we eat, it releases dopamine; we do something pleasurable, we play golf, it releases dopamine. but those things do not change our brain the way a drug does. and nicotine changes the control center of the brain. and you will remember she put up this slide and she talked about how they can actually look through pet scans at the nicotine action on the control center of the brain. and nicotine actually hi-jacks the brain into thinking that that substance is important for survival because the control center of the brain controls those things we do in order to survive, and that is why somebody who is addicted -- who is addicted is unable to do the things they nor- -- you can normally do, like control the behavior in the same way because that drive is not just a matter of what you want to do or choose to do, it is a brain chemistry that is compelling you to do this. this is not disputed, ladies and gentlemen, that nicotine does this to the brain. and you will have with you the 1988 surgeon general's report which talks about this. it actually talks about they believe there might be a genetic component to it. this is an -- undisputed that nicotine makes an actual physical change in the brain. we also know that forty percent of smokers try and quit every single year, but only 2 to 3 percent are successful. this is a strong addiction. this is 9 not disputed by anybody in this case. you will remember dr. burns came in and testified about that. and you will also remember it is in the surgeon general's report in 1988. forty percent try to quit every year but only 2 to 3 percent are successful. it is a strong addiction, as dr. frazier said, similar to heroin and cocaine in the way it affects the brain and causes that draw. we also know that the longer you smoke and the more you smoke, the greater the likelihood is of being addicted. that is undisputed and that is in the surgeon general's report, too. people who smoke longer, people who smoke more over years, over decades, have a stronger addiction and they are more likely to be addicted. we also learned -- i thought this was a fascinating part of the evidence -- that addicted smokers need a specific dose of nicotine every day and that is why -- and i always wondered this, why is it that when you ask somebody how much they smoke, they generally can tell you what they smoke every day. i smoke a pack a day, a pack and a half a day, two packs a day, a half a pack a day. we learn that is because the dosage is a dosage of nicotine that they need to get in order to satisfy the nicotine receptors in their brain every day. we have got a slide about that, y'all remember dr. frazier talking about how when you smoke the nicotine, it fills up these nicotine receptors in the brain and that tells you, okay, i'm satiated now and as time goes by, after you have stopped smoking, those nicotinic receptors get empty and the brain tells you to fill them up again, and that is why there is a specific dose every day that people smoke. so the next question. was bill sury addicted? what is the evidence we have of that? we know how much he smoked. he smoked a pack and a half every day for over 30 years, every day. that is not disputed. the amount he smoked, a pack and a half a day every day for 30 years, and we have that from his son, dr. sury, who testified. we also have it from his golfing buddies about how much he smoked. he smoked a lot. we also know how often he smoked, his smoking habits. he smoked first thing in the morning, as soon as he got up. you will remember that testimony, he had a bathrobe on and he would come out of room, his bedroom with a cigarette in his mouth. first thing in the morning as soon as he got up he smoked. we know he smoked throughout the day. he smoked in his office, we saw the picture of him at his desk with his ashtray next to him, you will 11 remember the testimony from rob sury when he would go see him as a child that he smoked there in the bullpen and then all the co-workers around him smoked. he smoked throughout the day. we also know that he smoked in the evening when he came home, sat in his easy chair, watching television. we even know that he smoked at night. that he sometimes would wake up from his sleep and smoke. remember the testimony from rob sury when they would go on vacations and they would be staying in the same room in the hotel and he could see the light from the end of the cigarette of his dad waking up in the middle of the night to have a cigarette. we also know he smoked on the golf course. you will remember nancy montgomery testified he smoked a cigarette every hole and then he would smoke more af- -- during lunch and more when they played pool afterwards. so we have evidence of how much he smoked over how long a time. we also know that he made multiple attempts to quit smoking. you will remember the testimony from dr. sury that he would make a new year's resolution to put it down and then he would go around the house and throw away all the ashtrays and throw away the cigarettes and he wanted to stop then and put everything out of his mind but was not able to succeed. and i thought it was a poignant story that dr. sury told when he remembered as a child going out to the garage and seeing his father who had attempted to stop in the corner of the garage smoking cigarettes. and we also know that he was finally able to quit in 1995 but only with the help of the patch. and we know the patch was not available in -- until 1991, the end of 1991, and he started using it in 1992. so we know that the patch, which gives him a dose of nicotine, was what he needed in order to cut down and finally be able to stop. so we have this evidence as to how bill sury smoked and that he was addicted. so we called to the stand dr. sandra frazier to talk about what this means with respect to addiction. and you will remember dr. frazier who came in and testified, and dr. frazier was an addiction specialist. you will remember, she had board certification in addiction medicine. it was her specialty. and she worked at an addiction clinic and she helped other healthcare providers deal with their substance abuse problems. she is an addiction specialist. and she testified that bill sury was 13 addicted. and her testimony was based on the amount he smoked, how he smoked, first thing in the morning, during the day, and her knowledge of nicotine dependence and brain structure, she said there was absolutely no question in her mind that bill sury was addicted to cigarettes. and she also showed us the interesting tool she used, which was the dsm-iv, and you will remember her talking about that and it is a gray book that we put up there and she said there is seven things, seven criteria, and if you meet three of the seven, then you can be diagnosed as addicted. she said he met six of the seven criteria, that is why i've got checks up here. you will remember the criteria of tolerance meaning that over time when he first started he could not have smoked a pack and a half a day because that is actually a toxic amount. so he met the criterion of tolerance, meaning he adapted and was able to smoke a pack and a half. he had withdrawal symptoms or he smoked in order to avoid withdrawal symptoms. and that testimony came about him smoking first thing in the morning, that that is a characteristic of someone who is fighting off that withdrawal system by having your cigarette as soon as you wake up. and you remember she said that most smokers will tell you that feels the best to them because it satisfies those receptors in the brain? that he smoked for longer period than he intended. and she talked about his quit attempts with that one. that he made efforts to control his smoking but was unable to. now, this one is the -- the -- i think, the easiest to check off there and that is time spent. and the criterion is is that if you spend a lot of time in either trying to get the substance or using the substance, then you meet that criteria. and you will remember her talking about that if you take, i think she said, 7 to 10 minutes to smoke a cigarette and you multiply that by 30 cigarettes a day, that is 270 minutes, which is four hours that he spent, that much time, 270 minutes, every day smoking. so he clearly met the time spent category in there. now, she said there was not information about reduced activities because back then when he was smoking you could do it just about everywhere. you could smoke at your office. you could smoke in theatres. you could smoke on airplanes. but she also said he met the seventh criteria, 15 which is continued use, despite knowledge that it might be causing you some physical disturbances. now, the reason i actually put double checks up here is because you will remember dr. giakas, the defendants' addiction expert, he testified that, in fact, bill sury met number 1 and number 2. even his testimony is that he met number 1 and number 2. but dr. giakas said that he was not addicted because he did not meet any of the others. dr. giakas testified that he did not meet the time spent one, that using over four hours a day, in his mind, did not meet the time spent. we think the evidence is very clear that bill sury met the dsm-iv and that he was addicted to cigarettes. now, i talked about the greater weight, so let us talk for a minute about what the defendant put up and the defendants are going to argue to you, i suspect, that bill sury was not addicted to cigarettes. i believe the defendants are going to argue that he smoked, not because of nicotine, not to get nicotine, but simply because he wanted to or he liked it. and what did they bring you? they brought you dr. giakas to put on the other side of the scale the things i just talked about. dr. giakas is not an addiction specialist. he is not worked in an addiction clinic. he is what i would call a run-of-the-mill psychiatrist. i think he said his specialty was actually in geriatrics. he has no specialty in addiction. and i found it almost shocking that when we asked him if he had read the surgeon general's report of 1988, which is the report on nicotine and addiction, that he had not even read it. he is not studied addiction, he is not read about addiction, he is not written about addiction, he does not have a degree in addiction but he came in and told you that robert sury -- i mean, that bill sury was not addicted to nicotine. but what did he base that on? there it is. i think maybe we have a faulty cord there. but what did he base that on? he based it on one thing, you will remember his very first slide that dr. giakas put up, and he said he based the fact he was not addicted because he was able to quit. he said, i believe he controlled -- he could control his smoking behavior because in 1995 he was able to quit and so my opinion he could have quit anytime because he quit in 1995. now, i want to talk for a minute about that because not one witness in this case, including 17 dr. giakas, has said that an addicted smoker cannot quit. nobody has said that. everybody agrees that addicted smokers can quit and they do quit every day. just because somebody quit, does not mean that they are not addicted. think about his testimony. his testimony is, if you quit, and we know millions have, you are not addicted, right, because you can control your smoking decision. so if you quit, you are not addicted. but if you do not quit, like he did in the '60s and '70s, well, you are not addicted, you just did not want to. he tries to have it both ways. he tries to say that, well, if you do not quit, you are not addicted because you just did not -- you were not motivated enough and if you do quit, then, obviously, you can quit so you were not addicted. according to dr. giakas nobody's addicted to nicotine. under dr. giakas's theory, no one is addicted. and if you remember we asked him, what do you base this on that he smoked for some reason other than nicotine? ms. bryan asked him that question. why, if he smoked a pack and a half a day every day for 30 years, would not it make more sense if he was not addicted and he was not smoking for nicotine that he would smoke five one day, ten one day, two packs one day? he gave -- the only thing he said -- whoops. the only thing he said was that he thought people smoked for other reasons like -- and i thought maybe it was even silly what he said. he said, because they like the smell of it, because they like the way their hand goes back and forth to their mouth, maybe there is somebody who smokes for those reasons, but what basis does he have to come and give you testimony here in this courtroom that that is why bill sury smoked? none. that is pure speculation as to any reason other than nicotine. but, ladies and gentlemen, we do not have to rely upon either dr. frazier or dr. giakas because the surgeon general of the united states of america has talked to us about it and you will have that with you. now, i'm going to say right now that when i talk about documents, these go back into the jury room with you and just because they are up here on the board does not mean they actually do not exist physically, and you will have them in the jury room. and we have notebooks with tabs on them, i'm told, and the tabs will let you find where the document is. this is p-487 and you will have that document 19 back there with you. and what the surgeon general of the united states says is that nicotine addiction is the fundamental reason that individuals persist in using tobacco products. we do not even have to rely on that. the defendants, themselves, have talked about this very issue over and over in the documents that you will have back with you. i will not do all of them but i will read some of them to you. this is from p-302, and it says the tobacco industry may be thought of as a specialized, highly ritualized, and stylized segment of the pharmaceutical industry. tobacco products uniquely contain and deliver nicotine, a potent drug, with a variety of psychological effects. happily for the tobacco industry, nicotine is both habituating and unique in its physiological actions. p-285. it must be assumed that nicotine is the sine qua non. i might have this up on the slide. this is the one that says it was a potent drug. nicotine is the sine qua non. that means -- it is latin, it means without which it is nothing; without which it is nothing. and their own documents say it must be assumed that nicotine is the sine qua non of smoking. an rjr document, 301, in theory and probably in fact a given smoker on a given day has a fixed per-hour, per-day requirement for nicotine. i believe that for the typical smoker nicotine satisfaction is the dominant desire as opposed to flavor or other satisfaction; therefore, it is the primary reason smokers smoke. these are their own documents. lorillard document p-881, undoubtedly nicotine serves the primary role in cigarette smoking. lorillard document. tobacco scientists know that physiological satisfaction is almost totally related to nicotine intake. they know that nicotine is addictive, it is a powerful drug, and a person that smokes a pack and a half a day for 30 years is addicted. we believe that the greater weight -- the far greater weight of the evidence in this case shows that bill sury was addicted. but that is not the only part of question 1. question 1 has two parts. so i'm going to go to the second part now. was william sury addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine and, if so, was cigarette smoking because of such addiction a legal cause of his death? 21 so let us talk about that. we brought in four pieces of evidence that prove not only that smoking caused his lung cancer but that he died as a result of the lung cancer caused by smoking. we brought to you dr. alan marks. and you will remember dr. marks is the doctor who signed his death certificate. and you will have the death certificate with you in the jury room. it is p-1, our very first document, the death certificate. and the death certificate says that he died as a result of squamous cell cancer of the lung to the brain, primary in the lung. and you will remember dr. marks' testimony. it was very short, he only testified, i think, 20 or 30 minutes, it was very short testimony, but he said that he died as a result of lung cancer, that lung cancer was the primary, and that his lung cancer came from smoking cigarettes. that was his testimony. we also brought you dr. richard grochmal. now, dr. richard grochmal was important for a different reason because dr. grochmal, you will remember, he was the primary doctor. he was the doctor that bill sury first went in to see when he was weak and he had gotten weak on the golf course. and what dr. grochmal did, he testified, is he did a chest x-ray and that he found a mass and he testified that he found one lung mass, he suspected by the look of it that it might be malignant and it might be cancer, he found it in his lung and he sent him to a pathologist -- i mean, sent him to get a biopsy. there was a biopsy done of the lung tissue which said it was cancerous and then he was treated for that cancer of the lung. so we brought you the death certificate and we also brought you the pathology report. and this is the report that says he has cancer of the lung. you will remember that when dr. -- when dr. grochmal testified, he said it was a large tumor. he said it was four-by-six centimeters and that is in inches, i believe, about an inch-and-a-half-by-two-and-a-half inches. that is a large tumor in the lung. and that is important because as dr. sury told you, they told him then it was inoperable. they could not operate to try and save him, to try and save him. it was at that point inoperable. so they gave him radiation treatment but they did not operate. and that helped. the testimony was that it helped but then it eventually spread to his brain. we believe that is sufficient evidence to find he died from lung cancer as a result of smoking, two witnesses, both -- the one who signed the death 23 certificate who said smoking caused this lung cancer and the doctor who diagnosed him, to send him to -- got a chest x-ray and saw this chest x-ray showed a mass, and got the pathology. both of them said that he had lung cancer as a result of smoking. two doctors who came in who, one, saw him, and the other who saw the medical records. you will remember dr. marks said he looked at the medical records when he was making out the death certificate. he looked at the medical records he had in front of him. now, the defendants are going to come in and argue that he did not die from lung cancer. and they brought to you dr. stonesifer. i like dr. stonesifer, but they brought in dr. stonesifer who gave a very interesting lecture about adenocarcinoma versus squamous cell carcinoma and had the pictures. you will remember, he talked about the water bottle being a sweat gland. that is a complete red herring to anything you have to decide -- everybody does not use the word red herring, but it means something to throw you off the scent. it is something that does not have anything to do with anything. he said he thought it was the adenocarcinoma instead of squamous cell carcinoma. i guess that is something pathologists might disagree about, whether it was a squamous or whether it was adeno. and he looked at the things, and he was very knowledgeable about it, i do not deny, maybe it had some adenocarcinoma features about it but so what? because when ms. bryan got up to cross-examine him, he said both adeno and squamous cell were lung cancers, squamous cell and adenocarcinoma are both lung cancers, okay? okay. both adeno and squamous cell can be primary lung cancers. okay. she asked him the third question, can both adeno and squamous cell be caused by smoking? yes, they both are. the fact that it was adeno versus squamous cell carcinoma makes absolutely no difference in this case. it is lung cancer caused by smoking. now, i think the suggestion that they were trying to make was that it could not -- it might have come from somewhere else in his body and it not be a lung cancer but be a spread, a spread from somewhere else in his body, right? and we know that can happen. you can have a cancer in your stomach or in your kidney or your pancreas and it can spread to your lung or your brain or somewhere else. so he was trying to suggest that this was not a primary tumor as both dr. marks said and dr. grochmal said 25 but it came from somewhere else. well, dr. stonesifer, as he testified, said, i cannot tell if it was primary to the lung or somewhere else just looking at this little bitty slide because that is all he had. that is all he had to testify about was the little slide. and we do not deny that if you hand somebody a slide, that you might not be able to tell by looking at that slide whether it was cancer starting in the lung or starting somewhere else. but we have a lot more in this case other than that little slide that dr. grochmal had and dr. marks had. first, we know that the tissue that he sampled came from the lung. we know that from the pathology report that this was lung tissue that was brought up. now, when you look at the slide, you might not be able to tell that, it might look all the same, but we know because we have the pathology report that it is lung tissue. we also know that there was no other tumor anywhere else in his body. there is not one shred of evidence in this case that he had any other tumor anywhere else in his body, none. and we know importantly that this was diagnosed and treated as a primary lung tumor. and you will remember it was important and we talked about that nowadays they are much more careful about distinguishing between an adeno and a squamous cell. ms. bryan went into that with the witness. because treatment has changed over the 14 years. and now you actually treat the adeno a little differently than you treat squamous cell so now they are more careful. but in 1995 they were not that careful in distinguishing between the two because the treatment would be the same. but what they were careful about in 1994 -- i mean, 1997, was knowing that it was the primary tumor because that is treated differently and so the doctors diagnosed it as the primary. and what do we know about what they did to diagnose it as the primary? well, one, we know that dr. grochmal looked at the chest x-ray and there were no other tumors anywhere on that. we know that dr. grochmal examined his patient because he said that he did. but we also know from dr. stonesifer, which i did not pick up on until the testimony yesterday, that there are actually bone marrow slides. somebody actually -- you remember that testimony? he said 17 slides total but only 10 or so of them are from the lung and the others are from bone 4506 1 marrow. they were searching in this man's body for other tumors. they looked in the bones. they looked other places. there was no other tumor and there is no evidence in this case that there was any other tumor. but even more importantly we know from the time of diagnosis, which was in january of 1996, he lived for another year and a half, and no other tumor ever showed up. if this came from somewhere else, if he had stomach cancer or some other kind, at some point in that year and a half it would have shown up. the only tumor he had was the lung cancer that eventually spread to his brain. no other tumor, no other cancer. the argument that this was something other than a primary is red herring that they are trying to throw in now. it has nothing to do with the facts of this case which you got from two doctors who swore under oath. but perhaps the most important thing here is not what dr. stonesifer said but what dr. stonesifer did not say. dr. stonesifer did not say that this was not the primary tumor. he never said this -- he could have, i guess. they could have brought in somebody that said, in fact, this is actually a stomach cancer, he did not say that. all he said was, based on this slide, i cannot be certain it is a primary. he did not say it was a stomach cancer. he did not. so any argument that they make that this was not the primary tumor is a pure red herring. you have the evidence and the far greater weight of the evidence that this was a primary lung tumor caused by cigarette smoking. and i want to talk just one minute about -- to remind you about some testimony we heard a long time ago from dr. burns about how cigarette smoking causes lung cancer. you will remember these slides early in the case, how the smoke actually paralyzes the cilia that cleans out the lungs and that then the carcinogens in the smoke can land on the lung tissue and start to cause damage, start to cause changes in the structure of the cells, themselves. those eventually turn into metaplasia as he described it and eventually a carcinoma of the lung. you heard that testimony as to how it causes lung cancer. but you also heard him say that 85 to 95 percent of lung cancers are caused by smoking cigarettes and almost all lung cancers in smokers are caused by smoking. we believe the evidence is overwhelming that mr. sury was addicted to cigarettes and that -- that smoking cigarettes caused his lung cancer and that 3 the answer to question number 1 is yes. so now i'll move to question number 2 on the verdict form. well, first, so once it is determined that bill sury was a member of the class, then, as the judge has instructed you, plaintiff is entitled to the benefits of the engle findings. so, now, these are findings that the judge instructed you you must accept as true: smoking cigarettes causes lung cancer. nicotine in cigarettes is addictive. the defendants placed cigarettes on the market that were defective and unreasonably dangerous. fraud by concealment. that all defendants concealed or omitted material information not otherwise known or available knowing that the material was false or misleading, or failed to disclose a material fact concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes or both. that is already been determined that they concealed or omitted important information. and that they conspired. that all defendants agreed to conceal or omit information regarding the health effects of cigarettes or their addictive nature or both with the intention, intending that smokers would rely upon that information to their detriment. all of the defendants were negligent. and the judge has instructed you. you will have these instructions back with you. these findings may not be denied by the defendants. they may not be questioned by the defendants. they must carry the same weight they would have if you had determined them yourselves. so let us move forward and talk about the verdict form with respect to what the next questions are with the benefit of the engle findings. question 2 is negligence, whether the negligence was a legal cause of death. and question 3, as the judge has instructed you, strict liability, whether the defective and unreasonably dangerous cigarettes were a legal cause of william sury's death. these questions are easy and they go together. if you find that smoking cigarettes caused his death, then the question -- the answer to question 3 and the answer to question 2 is yes, because that is already been established that they were negligent and that they placed defective cigarettes on the market. so if you find, as you did with respect to finding 1, that smoking cigarettes caused his death, then the answer to both question 2 and question 3 is yes. those are easy if you find that he died of smoking cigarettes as a result -- of lung cancer as 5 a result of smoking cigarettes. let us turn to questions 4 and 5. and question 4 and 5, i think, is where the defendants are going to argue most strenuously and you have heard a lot of testimony in the trial about and, that is, whether what reynolds -- you have two questions, one for reynolds and one for lorillard, whether their concealment or omission of material fact was a legal cause of william sury's death. now, they obviously cannot dispute this part. they cannot dispute that they concealed or omitted material information. the judge instructed you about that. and they cannot dispute that the material information that they withheld was not otherwise known, that they withheld information that the public did not know. they cannot dispute that. they will but the judge has instructed you that they cannot dispute or question that part of the findings. so what is rjr and lorillard's defense to this? i call it the everybody knew and bill sury knew. well, there is a couple problems with their defense. now, i want to mention, first, here that this is not about comparative fault. this is not about whether bill sury has some responsibility. we get to that question later on. this question is about whether they have any responsibility because they denied under question 4 that they have any responsibility at all because basically what they argue is it did not matter if we lied, it does not matter what we said, it does not matter what we did, because it did not cause bill sury to keep smoking because he already knew. that is their argument. now, importantly, we do not have to prove that they are lying, that their fraudulent concealment was the only cause of his death. we have admitted he bears some responsibility. all we have to prove is it was a cause, a contributing factor. now, as i said, they have got two problems with their argument. the first problem with everybody knew is the engle findings because the engle findings tell you that it was not otherwise known. but the other problem with their argument is they are going to stand up and say everybody knew smoking was bad for you, everybody knew smoking was hazardous. but what they did not know is that there were known carcinogens in cigarettes that they identified from the early 1950s. what they did not know, but they knew, was that smoking filters did not make a difference because people compensated by smoking them deeper, you will remember that testimony. and what they did not know 7 was the addictive nature of the cigarettes, that it was an addictive drug. so let us talk first about the everybody knew defense and you know this defense, they are going to stand up here and talk about it. they will even put up that dan horn quote again where he said, if you shout it from the rooftops -- remember that quote they put up? if you shout it from the rooftops, you would not be telling anybody they did not know -- anything they did not know and so it is dr. reynolds' (sic) testimony, it is the newsweek articles that they keep putting in, it is the new york times articles. so i want to talk about this, ladies and gentlemen, a piece at a time. i want to talk about what they said. i want to talk about what they knew and i want to talk about it in the 1950s first, what they knew. you are going to have with you the teague memo, which is exhibit p-161 and in the teague memo it says that, the studies indicate smoking causes lung cancer in the 1950s. and what they said, they submitted the frank statement, which is p-175, which says, there is no proof that cigarette smoking is a cause of lung cancer. but, third, in the '50s what did people think? you will have with you the document i used with dr. riddell, p-217, and what it shows is people thought in the 1950s -- this is a study that was done in 1959, there was surprisingly little concern in the 1950s about the health aspects of cigarettes. what happened in the 1960s? in the 1960s they knew. you will have two very important documents, which are p-203 and p-233, which talk about the carcinogens in their smoke, that they knew there was 17 known carcinogens in their smoke, 17 cancer-causing agents. the rodgman memo says that, we know that the overwhelming evidence indicts cigarette smoking as a cause of lung cancer. you will have these documents back there that they knew. but what did they say? ready? this is in 1964. well, this is what he said. he said that, if we -- you will remember his testimony, you will remember, and you will actually have this clip back in the jury room with you so you can play it, and what he says is, if there is anything found in cigarettes that is harmful, and we do not think there is, we will take it out. that is what he said in 1964 when sitting in the files of r. j. reynolds are their documents saying that we know that 17 known carcinogens in our smoke. and he stands up there and says to the american 9 people, if we find anything in there, we will take it out. but what were people thinking in the 1960s? what did people think after the surgeon general's report came out? well, we brought you a study and the study shows that among smokers, which bill sury was at that time, the question was asked, do smokers live as long as -- smokers do not live as long as others because they smoke? only 12 percent said yes. only 12 percent thought that smokers did not live as long because they smoked in the -- i think this is 1968. and 61 percent said that they do not believe that smokers do not live as long or they do not know. in the 1970s, what they knew. in 1979 a surgeon general's report came out. this is p-351, which you will have back with you, where it says -- this document is significant for another reason. it demolishes the claims made by cigarette manufacturers and a few others 15 years ago and today, that the scientific evidence is sketchy, that no link between smoking and lung cancer was proven. those claims, empty then, are utterly vacuous now. 1979 they clearly knew that smoking caused lung cancer. but what did they say. this is one of my favorite documents, this is p-298. this is a press release from the tobacco institute. in pursuing their press conference science, some government officials maintain that cigarette smoking is the number one public health problem. we believe that the number one problem is the extent to which these officials knowingly mislead the american public. but what did people think? we have shown you evidence, again, from document p-931, that the overall saliency, meaning the importance to the american public, of the cigarette issue comparing cigarette and health is low. even in the 1980s, ladies and gentlemen, what they were saying -- a voice: we are plugged in. i do not know. the court: let me tell you this. we are going to need to take a break anyway. ms. shamp: i might be stepping on something. the court: ms. shamp, i'm going to take -- ms. shamp: okay. the court: -- a ten-minute break, just a ten-minute break. you can go into the jury room and you can use the facilities or what have you and we will come on back at 20 minutes after 10. [#deleted recess#] ms. shamp: thank you, your honor. let me first say i apologize. it was actually me stepping on something down there, so i think we have prevented that for now. i think where i was was we were in the 1980s. we talked about what they knew, what they said, what people knew from the '50s, '60s, '70s. what about 1980? (a video clip was played and transcribed by the court reporter to the best of her ability as follows:) unidentified speaker: "...does not cause cancer, yes or no?" unidentified speaker: "it is not known whether cigarettes cause cancer." unidentified speaker: "all right, sir." unidentified speaker: "it has not been causally established." (the video clip was ended.) ms. shamp: in 1980 on purpose they were telling the american people a lie. their own documents dispute that. and on purpose they were telling the american people that smoking did not cause cancer. but what did people know in 1980? even as late as 1980, we have -- we brought you p-932, which is a study that the tobacco institute did in 1980. and, ladies and gentlemen, even as late as 1980 -- and you will remember what they said, that non-smokers and smokers thought differently about it. but in 1980, smokers, only one-third, only 33 percent of them, believed that smokers died sooner as a result of smoking. two-thirds of them did not believe it even then. now, i want to talk to you about the evidence they brought in on the subject of everybody knew. and most of what dr. riddel said i did not agree with. but there was one thing she said that i caught, and i thought it was interesting. you know how they put up throughout this trial all those newsweek articles, those reader's digest articles, all of those things which were supposed to convince you that everybody knew smoking was bad for you, in the '50s, in the '60s. in every one of 25 those articles dr. ridell said -- in every one of them there would be a statement by the tobacco industry. and she put up this. i did not. but in every one of them there'd be a statement by the tobacco industry that says, "it is not true. has not been proven. it is not the last word." and it worked. not everybody, but some people believed what the tobacco companies were saying. let us talk about the quality of evidence they brought you with respect to this notion that everybody knew that smoking was hazardous. they brought you dr. ridell. you all remember her. she is an agricultural economist. her degree was in agricultural economy. you remember that. she would never written anything about tobacco until the tobacco industry contacted her. but where did she get her information? all of the information that she testified about there was handed to her by the lawyers. you will remember when she talked about the gallup polls. and my first question out of my mouth was who was paula noble, i think her name was. it was a shook hardy -- shook hardy, a law firm -- that was a shook hardy research assistant. on all those gallup polls, they were printed out by the lawyers and given to her. i asked her where she got the newsweek articles that she relied upon, all of those articles. she could not find them in her library -- remember that? -- so shook hardy gave them to her. and remember the study that she relied upon? a study that was funded by jones day, the law firm mr. williams works for. all of the information that she stood up there, an agricultural economist, told you about was handed to her by their lawyers. she was not an expert. she is not got independent information to bring to you. but most telling was that when i showed her these three studies that i just talked to you about, these three studies which were done for the tobacco institute, which were titled "a study of public attitudes toward cigarette smoking," "a study of attitudes toward cigarette smoking," she said she would never seen them and she did not rely on them. they were unrelied on. does that sound like an expert, who only looks at what the lawyers give them, who does not go out and do independent looking to try to find out what was happening, and who is done absolutely no research 4526 1 in the area or writing in the area until she is contacted and paid by the tobacco companies? but it really begs the question. because the question is whether anything they did kept bill sury smoking, even a little bit longer. it is the cause question. are those lies they told important? if they kept them smoking even a little bit longer. and, ladies and gentlemen, they want you to say no. they want you to say, "all our lies do not matter, because everybody knew." they want you -- they put up here every witness and asked them, "was he an intelligent man?" why would they ask them whether bill sury was an intelligent man? because they want you to believe that, "as many lies as we told him, he was too intelligent to believe them." i call this the big brother defense. when i was a -- i have three big brothers, and when i was a kid, a little girl, one of my brothers told me the meaning of a four-letter word, but he told me wrong. and that day when i went to school and i repeated it and got in trouble and went to the principal's office, my mother called us both into the living room. and my brother was like, "mom, she should have known better. she should have known it was not the truth." and my mother looked at my brother and said, "shame on you. shame on you for blaming her for believing you." and that is stuck with me all these years. it is about integrity. their defense is that bill sury should not have believed their lies. this is important for them. it is an important defense they spent a lot of time on. they spent a lot of time on it because what they are telling you is, "it does not matter if we lied, because it did not cause him to smoke more cigarettes." what they are trying to tell you is, "so what? so what if we lied? so what if we told the american public in 1980 that we do not know that smoking causes cancer? so what? because if it did not cause bill sury to keep smoking, it makes no difference." and frankly, ladies and gentlemen, that is a hard burden for us. it is a hard burden for us because bill sury's no longer here. he is dead. and anything he might have said to somebody else is hearsay. we cannot bring it in. it is a hard burden for us to prove that their lies were a cause of him continuing to smoke. but fortunately in this case we can do it. we can prove 3 that their lies made a difference, and we have got evidence to prove it. in 1964 we have evidence to show -- mr. sury testified -- dr. sury said that when his parents saw the 1964 surgeon general's report, they were shocked. they were shocked by what they were seeing. that at that point they did not know that. that they did not know. so we have that evidence, that 1964 they were shocked. and then we have evidence that he switched to kent. you remember that. he would been smoking raleighs before that, and in the mid '60s he switched to kent. and you will remember testimony about what kent was saying -- what lorillard was saying about kent cigarettes. "you can see the proof of kent's health protection." this was in the 1950s. "your voice of wisdom says, 'smoke kent.'" your voice of wisdom's telling you. 1960. "all over america, more scientists and educators smoke kent with the micronite filter." what -- they were saying that their cigarettes were safer. he switched to kent. and he was smoking kent. and even though you have with you -- you remember the trunk document that mr. -- that dr. goldberg pulled out of the trunk. and this is p-930 where it says in here that they need to stop saying that. and you will remember the kent document. all of us are aware kent was marketed as a safer cigarette. this is proof that their actions did cause him to keep smoking. rather than quitting, he switched to kent, the safer cigarette. what else do we have? what other proof do we have? we have the 1969 tomato ad. you remember what dr. sury talked about as a child. he was 13 years old, sitting at the kitchen table, and his dad saw this ad and showed it to him. just enough to create doubt. that is what they were trying to do. just enough to keep him smoking a little bit longer. now, this was put out by the tobacco associates, inc., which are the growers, which, as you will remember, were part of the frank statement, were part of the group that initially came up and hired hill & knowlton to put out this effort of disinformation. and this was part of their efforts. and we know bill sury saw it. but you do not have to take our word for it. 5 they themselves have told you that doubt is their product. this is a document, p-486, and you will have it back in the jury room with you, when they say, "this is what we are selling, ladies and gentlemen. we are selling doubt. doubt is our product, since it is the best means of competing with the body of fact that exists in the mind of the general public. it is also the means of establishing a controversy." it did make a difference. they were selling doubt. bill sury bought it and kept smoking. we also know that bill sury looked at the tar charts. dr. sury testified that he and his dad together were looking at the charts in there to try and figure out what was the least dangerous cigarette. and we know at that same time that they knew it was not safer, that they knew that smokers -- just because that thing said lower tar, that smokers would smoke more to get the nicotine and have the same amount of tar in their lungs. bill sury did not know that, and he looked at the tar charts and he switched to doral. ladies and gentlemen, it is not a lot of evidence that we have got, but it is enough. it is enough to keep them from winning the big brother defense. it is enough to keep them from arguing that their lies do not matter. because in this case we know that they matter. we have the proof that it did cause him to keep smoking. and as we said -- we will talk about comparative fault later. and we do not have to prove on questions 4 and 5 that it was the only cause, but if their lies were a contributing cause or just a part of it, you should check "yes" on 4 and 5. now, they are going to make a big deal and they have made a big deal throughout this case about the fact that bill sury was in the insurance business and he was an underwriter. but what is the evidence about that issue and is it really, really relevant to the question? what we know -- what we know is that he was an underwriter, not an actuary. and the judge actually cleared that up when there was a mistake. he was an underwriter, not an actuary. he did not set actuarial tables. we know he was in the bullpen, not an executive. and we know from dr. sury's testimony that prudential did not set differential rates for smokers. what they have brought you is innuendo suggesting -- i thought it was really interesting. they tried to get that insurance evidence in all the time. the judge sustained objections. they tried to get it in with dr. goldberg -- 7 mr. woods: objection, your honor. mr. williams: objection. mr. latham: objection, your honor. the court: excuse me. mr. woods: sidebar about this. the court: let me just say something. sustained. ladies and gentlemen, you do not consider anytime i object or -- i mean, anytime i sustain or overrule an objection. you just consider the evidence that comes before you. thank you. ms. shamp: they did not bring in any evidence about insurance rates. they did not bring in any evidence from anybody. just innuendo, just supposition that bill sury had any greater knowledge because he was in the insurance business. and they could have brought in that evidence. they could have brought in somebody who would have sat up on the stand and given insurance testimony and said, "now, we knew back then insurance rates were set differently" -- they did not bring in anything. they want to bring it in through innuendo. but the innuendo proves that in fact he is looking at the tomato ad in 1969. the only evidence they have is from dr. sury, when he was a child, when he was 13 years old, going in and looking at his dad's books. and you will remember what he said about that, that in his dad's books that there were optional points that could be awarded for clean living, for somebody who did not smoke, did not drink; that clean living you could give an extra bonus point for. that is the only evidence in this case that bill sury knew the risks. and that is up against what our testimony -- the actual testimony of what he did, how he expressed shock, how he switched to kents, and how he looked at the tar charts and to select a cigarette that was lower in tar. one thing i'm going to ask you to do is when mr. williams is up here talking, ask yourself, "is that the big brother defense? is that the defense that our lies do not matter because bill sury was intelligent and he should have known?" we think the evidence shows they should not get away with the big brother defense, that the weight of evidence, that the greater weight of the evidence shows that question number 4, whether rjr's fraudulent concealment or omission of a material fact about the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes was a legal cause of william sury's death for both rjr and for lorillard. we 9 think the answer to those questions is "yes." and that is an important answer for this case, because if you check "no" on those answers, then it means their lies do not matter. fraudulent concealment, conspiracy, is the same question. it is just whether they did it together. and the engle findings show that they did do it together. so if you check "yes" on 4, you should check "yes" on 5 as well, that they conspired together to conceal material information about the health effects and addictive nature of smoking cigarettes. next i want to turn to comparative fault. and this is an important piece in this case, because we told you from day one that we accepted some responsibility for bill sury not quitting earlier, and from day one they have denied any responsibility or any fault for any of their actions. but what the jury instructions tell you is it is a comparison that you need to look at. compare the fault of bill sury against the fault of lorillard and rjr. and we think you have enormous evidence to do that. you are going to have notebooks and notebooks of documents. and i know i showed you just a few of the documents about -- when i went through the '50s and '60s and '70s. you know there were lots of them. and you will have them back in there, and i encourage you to look through them. it is document after document where they knew the effects, where they were telling people -- they were issuing press releases, where they were killing stories about the health consequences and they were trying to influence various news outlets not to put the information out. lots of evidence out there. but what i'm going to ask you to do on this comparative fault is to compare lorillard's and rjr's fault against that of bill sury's. so what do we know about what lorillard and rjr did? well, according to the engle findings, they concealed or omitted -- this is the engle findings, something you cannot question -- with the intention that smokers would rely -- and that is important because it shows not only bad conduct but intentional bad conduct, that they did it on purpose. but not only that, it is that smokers would rely to their detriment. in other words, the engle jury found not only that they fraudulently covered up and concealed and omitted information, but that they did it in order to make smokers believe them. they are going to come in and say, "well, none 11 of them did. bill sury did not believe us." but the engle jury found that they did it with the intention that the smokers would rely on it. and we think the evidence in this case shows that that intention was carried out, that in fact bill sury did rely on it. also the evidence that they manipulated the level of nicotine in order to keep people addicted. and we showed you a lot of documents about that. they are in the 800 series, the p-800 series, where they were adding nicotine at certain points in order to keep the target dose of nicotine a certain way. intentional conduct to manipulate the level of nicotine in order to keep smokers addicted. we need to compare that to bill sury. we have admitted he should have stopped smoking sooner and he did not. but what is the evidence? one, the way he was able to stop finally was with the help of the patch. and it was not even available until 1992 -- 1991, beginning of 1992. we know that he got hooked while he was in the military serving our country and that he got cigarettes in his rations. we know that every year forty percent of smokers try to quit, but only 2 to 3 are successful. so, yeah, we accept some responsibility for bill sury not being able to be in that 2 to 3 percent. it is a tough call. it is a tough stand. but we accept some responsibility for him not being in that 2 to 3 percent. but goodness knows, it was not intentional. goodness knows, when compared to the conduct of what they did, it comes nowhere close. we believe he should hold some responsibility, but we believe the lion's share should fall on rjr and lorillard. not just because of the impact of it, but because of the intentional nature of it; his conduct in not stopping sooner compared to the intentional conduct of what they did. you will have question number 6 where you will have to allocate the fault, the percentage of fault that was a legal cause of william sury's death that you charge to rjr, lorillard and william sury. and, ladies and gentlemen, we are going to put that in your hands. you assess the apportionment that you think is right. we suggest to you that bill sury should be charged between 10 and twenty percent, in that range, and that lorillard and rjr are responsible for 40 to 45 percent. whatever you put has to add up to a hundred. whatever you say would be the appropriate amount, we will accept. and as we said from the beginning, we 13 accept some responsibility. the defendants have accepted none. now, the last two things i want to talk about -- it says "end" up there, which means i'm almost done. the last two things i want to talk about are the last two things on the verdict form. and one is damages. and you are going to be called upon to assert -- to put in a blank how much damage the plaintiff is entitled to as a result of his death. and you have with you the mortality tables which are plaintiff's exhibit 11, and these mortality tables show that at the time of bill sury's death he had a life expectancy -- he should have lived a normal life expectancy, if he had not died, of an additional 8.9 years. you have to look it up in these tables based on his age and his race and his gender, but it is 8.9 years, so 9 years basically. he had nine years left to live. and the testimony in the case is that he loved life, that he was healthy, that he enjoyed golfing, that he enjoyed spending time with his son, and that he had no other major illnesses until he was diagnosed with lung cancer. the testimony is that he and his son had a very close relationship. they lived together. and i'll talk more about this later. i should have mentioned this at the beginning, but the way this process works is that i get to speak first and then mr. williams speaks and mr. woods speaks, and i get to come back again at the end and sum up. and so when i do that, i'm going to talk a little more about that damages, talk a little bit more about what we are going to ask you for with respect to that. and i'm also going to talk to you about the last question on the verdict form, which is the punitive damages. and what punitive damages are is an award based -- and the judge has already instructed you about that, but it is an award based on the conduct of the defendant. we believe this case has ample evidence that the jury should award a punitive damage award. and i'm going to talk in length about the reasons for that when i have an opportunity to get back up after they talk. but right now i'm going to sit down and let them talk, and then i'll be able to come back and speak with you. i appreciate your attention. thank you. ms. shamp: thank you, your honor. one of the very first things that john williams said was that ms. shamp might not respond to everything i said, and if she does not then think about what she did not respond to. and they have talked for over 3 and-a-half hours, so i'm not going to respond to everything that he said. i'm just going to hit a few of the important points, and then i'm going to talk a little bit about punitive damages and about damages. i think david woods acknowledged this, but mr. williams did not, and that is that this case is not just about bill sury, but it is about them as well, and their conduct. and you have seen very little from them. and when you go back in the jury room you are going to have very few documents that they admitted in evidence that are their documents, that are documents from lorillard or from r.j. reynolds. those all came in from me. just a quick point. he said that he advanced up at prudential, and i was thinking about that trying to remember the testimony along with ms. bryan. we were trying to remember it together, but we did not have to, because mr. woods put it on a board that mr. sury actually advanced to underwriter in 1959, and he never got another promotion after that until he retired in 1982. so his promotion up the ladder was all the way up until 1959 when he became an underwriter, and he was in the bullpen. but up until 1959 he stayed in the same job from 19 1959 until 1982. they mentioned everybody, this common knowledge, and what hal rush said about it was common knowledge back when we were a kid that smoking was hazardous. well, if you remember what the testimony was about that, dan sury talked about it as well, and he said, yeah, we knew smoking was bad for us because it would make us short of breath, we could not play as much football maybe, not that we knew that there were known carcinogens in there or that we knew that it caused lung cancer. and again throughout mr. williams' and mr. woods' arguments they continued to do what the judge has instructed you they cannot do, and that is question the engle findings that they -- mr. woods: objection, your honor. mr. williams: objection, your honor. we have not. may we approach? the court: ladies and gentlemen, this is argument. and the instructions, let us talk about the instructions that i have read to them. ms. shamp: right, your honor. the court: thank you. ms. shamp: they continue to question the engle findings, and the engle findings, ladies and gentlemen, are binding upon you. they are binding upon you, and thus the argument -- now, we have got it over there, it was up on the board, and that is that they withheld material information that was not otherwise known. so despite all the reader's digest ads and all the newsweek and all the times magazine articles they put in, the engle findings, which bind you, tell you that the information they withheld was not otherwise known, and that is because they withheld not the sort of in the air kind of i think smoking is bad for you, but they withheld specific information about their product, about carcinogens in their product, and about the addictive nature of their product. there are specific things about their product that they withheld that were not otherwise known. he started with the frank sinatra thing again, and he said that, you know, this was in the time when frank sinatra was singing, and he did that from here to eternity clip. do you think that frank sinatra knew that cigarettes caused lung cancer? frank sinatra was actually on the ads for the cigarettes. so was dick van dyke. and the other thing they want you to try and 21 believe is that they engaged in this elaborate public relations campaign which we put on evidence about. they hired the best public relations firm in the city of new york, hill & knowlton, madison avenue top of the line. they hired them to put out this message. but what they want to stand here and tell to believe is that that was not really important, nobody was listening to us, we did not care, everybody already knew. they engaged in this elaborate scheme and put out these booklets, a scientific perspective on the cigarette controversy. these will all be in evidence with you. p182. the smoking controversy, a perspective, a 1978 document, which is p347. smoking and health, a continuing controversy, from the tobacco institute, which is p348. they want you to believe that they spent all the money, that these were actually sent -- you will actually have the document that shows how many copies of those were made. 200,000 copies were made. but they want you to believe, and he is going to stand up here and tell you, that did not make any difference, nobody read those things, nobody cared about them, everybody knew. but i have one -- but they were trying to sell doubt. that is what they were trying to sell. all along they were trying to sell doubt. i showed you the doubt is our product document. but i want to point you to document 168, which is a memorandum that they said, because what they were trying to tell people was, we want to instill this question in them so that they will keep smoking. and they write: there is only one problem, confidence; and how to establish it, public assurance; and how to create it. it is perhaps long interim when scientific -- in this perhaps long interim when scientific doubts must remain, and most important how to free americans from the guilty fear that is going to arise deep in their biological depth regardless of any poo-pooing logic every time they light a cigarette. they were trying to sell doubt. now, i think they tried to suggest -- and i might jump around a bit because i'm trying to address the points he said. they were trying to suggest i think about the patch. well, dr. giakas himself said when mr. sury stopped he was using the patch, based on the brother's testimony, dan sury, that william sury had used the patch. they talk about whether we said it was 30 years back, when it was longer than that. the reason we used the 30 year timeframe -- i 23 want to make that very clear -- is that was the first time that robert sury was old enough to watch his father smoke, and that was in 1964. so the 30 year pack and-a-half a day history that we talk about is only because that is when robert sury was able to testify about the amount and the length of time he was smoking. but we know he was smoking long before that, because we have pictures of him smoking on the beach in 1941, not just one pictures, and you will have those pictures back with you, but many pictures, and we have all the pictures of him smoking in the military as well. but i wanted to clear that up, because the 30 years is just based upon when robert sury was old enough to observe his father smoking. they want to frame the question, ladies and gentlemen, as whether or not -- and i wrote it down. the question was whether he wanted to quit, whether he was in control. that is not the question that is on the verdict form. the question on the verdict form is whether he was addicted to cigarettes. and i went through all of that evidence before, but that is the question you are going to be asked to decide, not whether he wanted to quit or whether he could have quit. the question on the verdict form is whether he was addicted to the nicotine in cigarettes. they talk about hal rush and yancey montgomery who came in here, but you will remember that both of them said that he very well could have been trying to quit and they not known it. both of them said that. now, they have asked you to look at the polls in depth, and i say, please do. look at these polls. they are going back there. because i think it is very interesting for you to know that the polls that i put in and that i asked you about you will have back in evidence. the gallup polls that they have talked about are not back in evidence with you. these are the polls that you are going to have back in evidence. and i want to point out -- he read to you from the gallup poll, and i want to point out on page 31 -- because he said that in the gallup poll it said everybody knew that smoking was hazardous. what it said on page 31 is: while cigarettes are regarded as bad for you to a greater extent than other products we asked about, there is a striking little concern about the health aspects. then the second point was: what concern there is in the health scare seemed largely directed at the avoidance of throat irritation. 25 that is what the poll says that they knew in 1959, what the public was aware of in 1959. not lung cancer, but throat irritation, when we know that the rodgman memo in 1956 showed that there is 17 known carcinogens in their cigarette smoke and that they did not tell anybody about that. they want to make a lot about this issue of studies. i think john williams went on and on about studies, and he actually talked about the hutchinson study. and i was surprised he was talking about the hutchinson study. you remember him saying about the hutchinson study and there was this one study and that what we want to talk about are these consensus documents? the hutchinson study is not in evidence. you will not have the hutchinson study when you go back. what you will have are the surgeon general reports. you will have the consensus documents, not the one study written by one or two authors. the studies that are written by the consensus of the american scientific community when they put together the surgeon general's report. he also talked about project 16. and you remember him talking about that. but you will also remember on goldberg's direct -- and project 16 was whether that study was done by r.j. reynolds which targeted 16 year old children. but you will remember -- and you will have this document, the '94 surgeon general's report. and on page 175 it talks about -- you can look on page 175, the youth target study 87, which was an r.j. reynolds study. the youth target study, where they looked at the effects of cigarette advertising on subjects from the ages of 15 to 24 that r.j. reynolds did. well, the other thing i think both mr. woods and mr. williams made a big deal about, and that was that filters are -- and i believe they actually said this, that filters are actually safer for you. that is not the evidence in the case. in fact, the evidence in the case is quite the contrary. the evidence in the case is that filters actually have had no difference on safety. and you have that in the 2010 surgeon general's report. right. the 2010 surgeon general's report says it right here on page 37: unfortunately with the accrual and evaluation of additional data the evidence today does not demonstrate that efforts to lower nicotine measured -- lower machined measured tar and nicotine yields actually decrease the health risks of smoking, primarily because these changes did not reduce smokers actual exposure to tobacco toxicants. indeed to the extent that filters and 4706 1 other efforts to reduce machined measured tar and nicotine reduced smokers' health concerns and thereby delayed quitting and/or increased cigarette use they may have contributed to overall increase in cigarette-caused mortality. it also says that: the tobacco industry documents, many of which are available on the legacy documents library, clearly demonstrate that at least by the mid 70's the tobacco industry well understood the importance of creating health reassurance messages in order to alleviate health concerns, and the one important method of doing so was claims of low deliveries of tar. for example, in 1977 the british american company marketing report concluded that all work in this area should be directed toward providing consumer reassurance. it says that the tobacco industry knew -- and you can read this on page 175 -- that the lower tar and nicotine cigarettes did not produce any health benefits, and that the tobacco industry knew that, because they knew that people compensated. i think he -- mr. williams maybe misspoke. he also said that nobody saw the frank statement. that is what he said, he said nobody saw the frank statement, which was published in every newspaper in a city of more than 50,000 residents. it was published in every single newspaper during that day. now, the ftc reports that he talked about, they are actually in evidence in this case, and they will show you that in '94 the tobacco industry was spending 4 billion dollars a year on advertising, but the value, the total value of people who were switching from one to another was only 650 million. and so the '94 study, and the '94 surgeon general's report, and monograph 19 talk about that marketing and advertising does in fact increase tobacco use. it does, and the industry well knows it, and that is why they spend the money. they do not spend that kind of money just to get people to switch from one brand to another brand. the testimony in the case about dorals, dr. sury testified that his father smoked dorals from about 1969, '70 all the way until his death, and he also smoked kent. i think mr. williams must have misread the national life statistics table, which you will have back. he said it was seven years. but if you look very clearly, you have to look at a white male who was 77 years old at the time, and if you look across there it is 8.9 years that he had left to live, not seven. and mr. woods said there at the end of his 3 presentation that mr. sury never picked up a cigarette before 1941. there is no evidence of that. in fact, what we do know is that by 1941 he was already smoking. we do not know when he started, but he was already smoking by that time, and the evidence in this case from every witness is, including the surgeon general's report, is that almost all smokers, 85 to ninety percent, start in their teens. now, the kent ads that were also interesting. mr. woods talked about how those kent ads had to be stopped in 1955 because the ftc put a stop to it and would not let them use those health protection ads. we showed you ones that went not only to 1960 but '64, through that time, because they still were advertising their micronite filter all the way through the 60's. you will remember, you will have it back there, the p21's are the ads, but there is the bob cousy ad, remember the basketball player, and that is a '64 ad, and the science ad i showed in the first part of my opening, the 1960 ad. you will also have document 367, which is the ftc report, and mr. woods touched on it. but the ftc report -- what the ftc report said, and you will remember we put this in evidence, is that the tobacco industry spends in one day in advertising what the public health community spends in an entire year. in one day they spend what they spend in an entire year. and dr. goldberg testified i think accurately that the public health message was overwhelmed by the cigarette advertising message. you also have document 343 back with you, and this you will remember was in evidence, this is a 1978 document which says in it: very few consumers are aware of the effects of nicotine, its addictive nature, and that nicotine is a poison. the tobacco industry itself is telling them they do not know, people do not know the addictive nature of cigarettes. and that is exhibit 343. finally i want to talk a little bit more about the -- mr. woods mentioned that we did not bring a pathologist in. we brought in two doctors who gave unequivocal testimony that this was a primary lung cancer caused by smoking. they brought in on the other side a pathologist who only looked at the slides and who said not that this was not a primary tumor, only that based on this he could not tell. so now after i've talked about that i want to move to a little bit about damages. ladies and gentlemen, i think there is a whole host of reasons in this case that plaintiffs are entitled to an award of punitive damages for the defendants' 5 conduct. and punitive damages, as the judge has already instructed you in his instructions, and it is at the back of the page, punitive damages are warranted if you find by clear and convincing evidence. and then the instructions give four different reasons, and i want to focus on number 3 of those reasons. number 3. the conduct showed an entire lack of care that r.j. reynolds and lorillard must have wantonly or recklessly disregarded the safety or welfare of the public. so what is the evidence that r.j. reynolds and lorillard disregarded the safety and welfare of the public? that is what i want to focus on. first, marketing to kids. the evidence is overwhelming that both lorillard and r.j. reynolds have marketed to youth. you have seen those documents, and there are many of them, not just the seven. i'm going to focus on a few of them. first i want to focus on the '94 surgeon general's report. there is an entire chapter which talks about the marketing of cigarettes to kids by the tobacco companies. part of it is what i just read. this document says they are marketing to children. right. but we do not have to listen to them, because we have their own documents. their document, which i showed you, document 309, plaintiff's 309, which says -- and i commend you to read the entire document, because the entire document is talking about how to prey upon the weakness of adolescents by creating a brand that kids will want to smoke. this entire document talks about that, and frankly it is reprehensible. what it says here is: a new brand aimed at the young -- he is talking about how to make this brand appealable -- should not in any way be promoted as a health brand, and perhaps should carry some implied risk. in this sense the warning label on the package may be a plus. it talks about how children during this period, adolescents, are insecure, and so they need to market their product to try and capitalize on their insecurity and make them have a greater sense of self image. this is a very damaging document for them, and it talks about the teens that they promote to. also a lorillard document -- and i just picked a few out, ladies and gentlemen. there are lots of them back there. but the lorillard document from '78 says: the base of our business is the high school student. and that is document -- that is august 30, 1978, the curtis judge document. 7 the hilton head document. this was to the board of directors. this is not just a low -- this is a presentation to the board of directors of r.j. reynolds, which was done at hilton head in 1974, where they talk about how we are going to market to 14 year olds. then it also talks about they are going to insert additional ads in magazines like sports illustrated, playboy, and mist, magazines that they know there is a youth readership of. this is document 316. there is lots of youth marketing documents. you will have them all back. and the surgeon general's report. the fundamental fact is that the tobacco industry knows it, and it is in the surgeon general's report, is they have to get replacement smokers. and they call them replacement smokers in some of the documents we put up in front of you. smokers die and smokers quit, and the place they get replacement smokers is kids, and they know it, and they target their targeting efforts at kids. the second reason we believe we are entitled to punitive damages, because of their reprehensible conduct, is the manipulation of nicotine in their cigarettes. and you will have many documents, and they start -- i've written down a list of them: documents 862, 871, 872, 874, and all of them talk about how they were trying to control the level of nicotine in their products. experiments have indicated that free nicotine can be added at almost any place in the manufacturing process. an investigation into increasing the nicotine content of our present type of reconstituted tobacco has been made. nicotine was added to all three batches of the slurry. this is called the nicotine enrichment project. and then my favorite, which is document 874, which says: in any case, information we gain on the mechanism nicotine activity may be useful in determining how to adjust the physiological impact in our cigarettes. that is what they wanted to do, to adjust the physiological impact of their cigarettes, to adjust the nicotine level to keep people addicted. the third reason we think we are entitled to punitive damages is that the only time the cigarette manufacturers have ever put warnings on their products, that they ever communicated warnings was when they were forced to. you will remember the testimony from lorillard's corporate reps, you will remember the testimony from r.j. reynolds, when the warnings were proposed they opposed them. contrast 9 that to what you see today amongst manufacturers of products. it happened just this weekend i noticed with a toy, that there was a concern that a toy on the shelf might cause a choking hazard. and the first thing that matel does is pull the toy off the shelf. they do not wait for the government to force them, they do not go to committee hearings, they pull the things off the shelf. whenever there is a problem with a food substance the manufacturers pull those things. the manufacturers take those toys off the shelf. compare that to what happened in this case, where the manufacturers of cigarettes fought the warnings every time and at every step of the process. but the fourth and probably the most important reason that we punitive damages should be awarded in this case is that it is still happening today. they have not changed. it is still happening today in this courtroom. mr. williams: objection, your honor. mr. woods: approach, please. [#deleted sidebar#] the court: okay. ladies and gentlemen, please disregard the last statement. nothing that has happened in this courtroom is a basis for punitive damages. you are to only consider the evidence that has been presented in this courtroom. you may proceed. ms. shamp: thank you. i want to talk for a moment about addiction. i want to talk for a moment about what dr. giakas said about addiction. what mr. williams said in his openings and closing. he said -- and i wrote it down -- that bill sury could have quit any time he wanted to, that he just did not want to bad enough, that he smoked because he wanted to, not because he was addicted. and i wrote down this because it struck me in the very first day of trial in opening statements where david woods said the choice to smoke was like grabbing low fat dressing out of the refrigerator. remember him saying that? it evinces not only a misunderstanding about addiction, but we know they know about addiction, because what they wanted to tell people was you could pick it up and put it down any time you want. pick it up, put it down. pick it up, put it down. put the ads on. it is a happy thing to do. pick it up, put it down. it is like grabbing low fat dressing out of the refrigerator. pick it up, put it down. but what dr. giakas said on the stand, it was just a matter of him wanting to. just a matter of him wanting to. shows a deep misunderstanding of 23 addiction that i think is intentional. i think it is intentional because we have a document. it is document 363. and i want you to read it when you get back, because it is a document from 1980. what it says is: i'm told that the entire matter of addiction is the most potent weapon a prosecuting attorney can have in a lung cancer cigarette case. we cannot defend continued smoking as free choice if the person was addicted. that is their own document. they cannot defend this as free choice. and they know they cannot, because bill sury was addicted. document 363. i also want to talk for a moment about mary ridell's testimony, because what mary ridell said was that campaigns to try to keep kids from smoking were not important, should not even be done because kids make, i believe she talked about, rational informed choices. pick it up, put it down. that is what they are telling you. that is what they were telling kids. pick it up, put it down. finally i want to talk for just a minute about damages. that is the question that you will have on the jury form. now, this is the hard part, and i will tell you at the front i'm no better with coming up with what the right number is than you are. i've thought about it, i've talked with dr. sury about it, thought hard about what i would ask you for and what the evidence would support, and what we know about bill sury. he was a good man who loved life and who had nine years left to live. not the nine years -- nine years in his retirement time when he was still -- if you will remember he was still playing golf, walking on the beach with his son. nine years of life taken from him. what is that worth? you know, it is funny. there is been some disagreement in this case about whether mr. sury was a successful man in terms of his business. but there is no disagreement that mr. sury was a successful man. he was a successful man because of the family he had, he was a successful man because of the life he had. his life and the life he shared with his son was valued. so i am going to ask you for millions of dollars. i am going to ask you for five million dollars, and even number, for bill sury's life. now, you might be sitting there saying, now, where did ms. shamp get that number? did she pull it out of her hair, pull it out of the air? and the answer is -- mr. woods: your honor, may we approach? sorry. 25 the court: yes. (sidebar conference outside the hearing of the jury.) the court: this is my third tobacco trial, and it always seems i get more sidebars in the last 20 minutes of the trial than any other time. but go ahead. mr. woods: i apologize, your honor, but she just asked for five million dollars for bill sury's life. she cannot ask -- the court: well, she said that and then there was a pause. i think you need to make it clear, ms. shamp, unless you want me to make it clear. ms. shamp: i think i -- the court: no, you did not. ms. shamp: i'm sorry. the court: i heard what he said, and you said five million dollars for mr. sury's life. there was no objection for a while, and then you said i may have pulled that out of the air or hair, and so then there was an objection. i want you to clear it up, and if you do not clear it up well enough then i'll clear it up that it is not for his life, it is for the wrongful death issues on the verdict form. ms. shamp: i understand. the court: and the motion -- unless it was not clear earlier, the motion for mistrial on the last time we were up here is denied, and as it relates to the curative instruction i gave, i was happy to have considered other curative instructions, but the defense chose not to give one, saying it was impossible. thank you. (following sidebar.) ms. shamp: let me make it clear. we are asking for five million dollars for the companionship that robert sury lost as a result of losing his father. the testimony is clear that they had a close relationship, and that -- you will have the mortality tables, that he had nine years left to live. but as i said, that is a decision within the sound discretion of the jury to make the determination. and i am no better at the determination than the six of you combined talking together about what the right number is or ought to be under those scenarios. but we believe that five million dollars for the loss is a fair number to ask you for. i want to thank you again on behalf of myself and my team, leslie bryan, my co-counsel, ragan 4733 1 ferguson, tiffany mccain, and also on behalf of our client dr. robert sury. we thank you for your service in this case, because that is what it is. and the judge talked to you about that at the very beginning, that this was service. and i thought it was interesting that the case fell over veterans day and we had veterans day in it, and that this service that you are providing is the only service that would be more important than service to your country at war. let me make it clear that the service that you are providing today is not to me or my team or even to dr. sury, but to this country and your community. the word verdict means to speak the truth, ver for veritos, veritble, means truth, and dic like in dictaphone means to speak. we are asking you for a verdict in this case that speaks the truth. we are asking you for a verdict that says that what they said and the lies they told are important and did have a cause. we are asking you for a verdict that says the plaintiff is entitled to punitive damages, and we are asking for a verdict that awards damages for the death and for the loss that robert sury has suffered as a result of his father's death. i thank you. the court: ladies and gentlemen, as i told you before i have some other instructions to give you. it is going to take me a few minutes to set up all that we need to do, because when i complete these instructions you are going to go and deliberate. so what i'm going to do is organize some things so that i can put -- i'm going to ask you to go out, but while you are doing that i'm going to organize so i can put all those documents and other evidence and things you have seen in the courtroom in a method so that i can get it into the jury room when you come back out. i'm going to give a copy of the instructions that you read with me earlier. i'm going to put a set of those in the jury room. the instructions i'm about to give you, i'm going to put those in the jury room, but i'm going to also put them on your chair so you can read those instructions along with me, and then the verdict form that you will utilize i'm going to put that in the jury room. so as we organize this it is just going to take several minutes to organize. so i'm going to ask that you go into the jury room while we organize transferring all that stuff. thank you.