mr. cofer: counsel, members of the jury, mr. szymanski. i told you in opening statement that we believe this case comes down to three pretty straightforward questions. first, why did jack szymanski smoke; second, why did he wait so long to quit; and, third, what, if anything, did the defendants do to cause mr. szymanski to get sick? if you remember back in the opening statement what i told you was that mr. szymanski smoked because his friends and family smoked, that at all times mr. szymanski had the ability to quit smoking, and that the evidence would be that nothing that the defendants did or did not do, say or did not say affected mr. szymanski. now, you may also remember that during opening statement the first thing i did was i told you what was not in dispute. do you remember that? and i did that so we could take those things off the table and we could focus instead on what it is that you have to decide and what the issues are. so i want to do that very same thing this morning. and what i want to do, i want to start with the facts, what the facts are. i really want to tie them to those three issues. so let us start with that. what are the facts, why did mr. szymanski smoke? well, you heard that jack szymanski got his first cigarette from his mother. you heard from both cummings and from henningfield that the most important factor in determining whether someone becomes a smoker is whether their friends and family smoke. and you heard, of course, from all the evidence that everyone in mr. szymanski's family smoked and most of his friends smoked. second, why did mr. szymanski wait so long to quit? you heard that by the 1950s, he understood that smoking could be dangerous. remember, he told you around 1960, that when jules gross got lip cancer from smoking, it, quote, scared the hell out of him. he told you from the first time he tried to quit smoking, whether it was during college or earlier, and there was different testimony on that, but he told you that whenever that was, at that point he understood that smoking could be hard to quit, and he understood that smoking was dangerous. point number three, dr. cummings told you this. i do not know whether you remember this because there was so much going on with dr. cummings, but he told you that if mr. szymanski had quit smoking when he was in his 20s, that he would have had no risk of getting sick from smoking. why did he wait so long to quit? everyone told you that even addicted smokers can quit smoking. you heard these numbers from everybody. 60 million americans have quit, 3,000 americans quit each and every day. each and every year, somewhere between 1 and 2 million people stop smoking. you also heard that the majority of those people were, in fact, addicted. the very first time, and we will talk about this in detail as we walk through mr. szymanski's life, but the very first time that mr. szymanski actually thought that his smoking was harming him, one of two things happened, he either quit smoking and never smoked again or in about a six-month period he went from two, three packs a day down to one or two cigarettes a day. what if anything did the defendants do to cause mr. szymanski to get sick? you heard that mr. szymanski had a number of opportunities to tell his story to the jury. his deposition was taken on three different dates, he was interviewed twice by dr. werner, once by dr. kaplan, and he testified live in front of you. on the first day of his deposition, mr. szymanski testified he never chose a cigarette brand based on advertising. remember i showed you that testimony of dr. cummings, and i asked mr. szymanski about it, too. because in fairness, i wanted to make sure that he had a chance to tell his story. on the first day of his deposition, mr. szymanski testified he did not think low tar cigarettes were safer. again, you remember, i showed that to dr. cummings and i showed it to mr. szymanski, too. he testified he never heard the frank statement, he never heard the tobacco institute research committee, the council for tobacco research, or the tobacco institute. so those are the facts. the question is how do they help you decide what you need to decide in this case? so what is this? two ships passing in the night. why am i showing you this? well, the reason why is, as you have been sitting here for two weeks, it is almost like the parties were trying two different cases; right? if you think about it, our cases, our presentation of evidence was truly like two ships passing in the night. we believe this case comes down to two words, and you know what those two words are, jack szymanski. thats what we believe this case is about because this is jack szymanski's case. it is mr. szymanski who is asking you to award him money. he is the one that is claiming that the defendants wronged him. members of the jury, this is not a referendum on tobacco companies or cigarettes. this is a personal injury lawsuit, no more, no less. i do not mean to diminish it by saying it, but that is what it is, that is why you are here. you are here to decide jack szymanski's lawsuit. so what have we done? what has been our focus in this trial? we have done our very best to bring you the evidence that you need to decide mr. szymanski's case. what he knew and when he knew it, why he smoked and why he waited so long to quit. that is been the focus of our case from opening statement through right now. now, let me tell you something, it is also pretty clear that plaintiff believes this case comes down to two words, too, but those words are not jack szymanski. i'll bet you could guess what those words are, those words are punitive damages. from this table, that is what the case is about. it took mr. mitnik three minutes in his opening statement to get to punitive damages -- in his closing statement, closing argument this morning, to get to punitive damages. from the witnesses they called to his case to the evidence they chose to present, it is clear, members of the jury, that plaintiffs want to spend as little time talking about jack szymanski as they can possibly get away with. they want to talk about generalizations; they do not want to talk about specifics. instead, what they want to do is they want to make you mad because they want to ring the bell. they want you to bring back -mr. mitnik: objection, your honor. mr. cofer: -- a punitive damages award. the court: sustained. mr. mitnik: and i'd ask to disregard the curative. mr. cofer: may we approach? the court: you may. (bench conference was held within the presence of the jury.) mr. cofer: this is closing argument. the court: i understand it is closing argument. mr. cofer: i gave him wide weight to argue whatever he wanted. this is my theory of the case and the evidence supports it. this is my theory of the case. what does it have to do with jack szymanski? the court: well, let us talk about your argument, your position that you are saying what they feel. mr. cofer: okay. all right. that is fine. thank you. the court: no curative. (bench conference concluded and proceedings continued as follows:) mr. cofer: okay. let me go to the facts then. i want you to remember back to mr. mitnik's opening statement. you remember that a couple weeks ago? he kept telling you he was going to tell you about mr. szymanski. do you remember that? but he never got around to it. do you remember at the end of the 90 minutes he ran out of time? and he actually asked the judge for more time. he kept saying, i'm going to talk to you about jack szymanski, but he never got around to it. i want you to think about that. you have 90 minutes to tell the jury why your client is entitled to recover money, but you do not talk about it. what does that tell you about plaintiff's case? who showed you the time line of mr. szymanski's life? who introduced you to mr. szymanski and told you about his family, the life he has lived, and the choices he has made? where did you get that information from? and i'll tell you something, i admitted in opening statement, i told you that if you look back at the comments that have been made by tobacco employees in the millions of pages of documents written by thousands of employees over the last 60 years, you would find -- do you remember what i told you? they said some dumb things; right? and now you know it is true, because you have seen it. but i also told you that we are not here to decide whether tobacco companies said document things. we are here to decide whether they said something that affected or did something that affected mr. szymanski. the issue is whether the defendants did anything that caused mr. szymanski to get sick, to smoke and get sick or, to use the instructions, the issue is whether defendants' actions were a legal cause of mr. szymanski's injuries. and that is what i want to talk about this morning. i want to focus on mr. szymanski; i want to focus on the evidence. let us start and talk for a few minutes about dr. cummings and dr. henningfield. you remember that dr. cummings showed you a bunch of old ads and clips of statements, public statements that were made by some tobacco company employees. but on cross-examination, dr. cummings admitted he could not tell you that mr. szymanski saw any of those ads or that he heard any of those statements. mr. szymanski never testified that he saw or heard any of those statements. and let me tell you something, members of the jury, if you do not hear it and you do not see it, how can it affect you? mr. szymanski was never confused about the dangers of smoking. to the contrary, he admitted he knew smoking could be bad for him for decades. mr. mitnik said in opening statement, the defendants were concealing that it was dangerous. that is impossible. they were concealing that they knew it. it was impossible to conceal that smoking could be dangerous and smoking could be hard to quit. and you heard both henningfield and cummings walk through that that has been known, the fact it could be hard to quit and the nicotine in it. it is been known for a hundred or 200 years. i'm going to walk through some of these materials, but the bottom line is that mr. mitnik is right about that. it was impossible to conceal it because it was well known, and more importantly, mr. szymanski knew it. now, the waxman hearings. mr. mitnik raised the waxman hearings. that is where the ceos raised their hands and testified on addiction. do you remember that? and what you will remember, hopefully, is i think the second person who was to testify was the executive for reynolds. and remember, he tried to say, i do not believe it is addictive because it is not intoxicating. and you remember congressman wyden cut him off and said, we do not need to hear that, give me a yes or a no. but here's the deal. no matter what you think of those waxman hearings -- we do not need to spend a lot of time talking about the waxman hearings, because here's why. do you know when the waxman hearings were? 1994. and under any version of the facts, mr. szymanski was not smoking then. i admit you can watch those hearings and they can make you mad and you can laugh and you can say what a bunch of fools or whatever, and you can certainly have, you know, that attitude. but it had nothing to do with mr. szymanski because he was not smoking then. let me make a couple other comments about dr. cummings. dr. cummings travels from trial to trial and gives the identical testimony. and how do you know that is true? do you remember when i was cross-examining him? i was reading questions and answers from prior trials. that was not testimony that just came in -- was brought to you for mr. szymanski. for the purposes of dr. cummings's testimony, it could be anybody, jack szymanski, mary doe, john smith; it is just a name. it is all the same. in fact, cummings admitted, all he needs to know to give an opinion whether someone is addicted, do they smoke in the morning and whether they were a daily smoker; that is it. that is the heaviness of smoking index. is that science? is that a medical diagnosis? is that helpful? because dr. cummings testified in every case he is ever testified in he found that the plaintiff was addicted. we will talk about dr. kaplan in a moment, but think about how that compares, that approach, how it compares with dr. kaplan's testimony. now, we talked in voir dire about paul harvey. some of you remember paul harvey, the really engaging radio commentator, best story teller alive. start out with a story, get you all ramped up, you know, leave with a cliffhanger, go to commercial. you would actually sit and listen to the commercials because the guy was that engaging. when he came back, he finished the story, and usually you had a completely different impression once you heard the whole story; right? well, i want you to think about dr. cummings. i want you to think about the first few questions i asked him. so on direct examination, on questioning from mr. prysock, what cummings told you was, yeah, i get paid, but i give half the money i make to a cancer center. well, that seems like a really noble thing to do; right? and that is probably why dr. cummings told you that; right? and i'm sure you thought, well, that really makes quite an impression. and then it was not until i got up on cross-examination and said, well, the fact is you do that now, you started doing that in april of 2010; you did not do it the first 12 years that you were testifying. you basically doubled your rate at the suggestion of another plaintiff's lawyer; that is what happened. and do not get me wrong, there is nothing wrong with cummings getting paid, nothing wrong. these people, you know what, they take time out of their schedules, time out of the day, they come here. but do not pretend that the story is something that it is not; that is my point. 1958 was a big year for dr. cummings. he told you about the blatnick hearings -- blatnick hearings that considered whether early cigarette smokers were affected. do you remember that? and then what cummings said was he used 1958 document to argue that all filters that were used on cigarettes over the next 50 years were a fraud and a hoax. where did that come from? where was any assertion of that other than dr. cummings' naked testimony? if the blatnick hearings really proved that all filters from that point forward were a fraud and a hoax, would not you have seen some evidence? would not it have been in the '64 surgeon general's report or the '88 surgeon general's report or the '89 silver anniversary edition? dr. henningfield was a plaintiff cigarette design expert. did he say it? of course not. and we even heard from mr. szymanski himself that, when he switched to filters, he would tear the filters off, and do you remember why he did it? do you remember what he told you? because he could not get the tar and nicotine he wanted. now, think about that. if filters were not taking up tar and nicotine, why was mr. szymanski tearing the filters off the cigarettes, filtered cigarettes he buys, so he can get more tar and nicotine so they can be stronger? i use the example of the blatnick hearings because i'm trying to make a point. and that is that when you get an opinion from a witness, it is important not to just accept it at face value, but instead, you have to consider the basis of the opinion. what are the reasons for the opinion? what is the evidence that supports the opinion? and as mr. mitnik told you, it does not make sense, it does not make common sense. so here's the evidence, and here was the evidence. all cigarettes can cause cancer, all cigarettes can be addictive. and here's why, when you light tobacco and you suck it into your lungs, it creates carcinogens that can cause cancer. it is the chemicals in the tobacco when you light tobacco that creates the carcinogens that can cause cancer. nicotine -- and you heard this from both cummings and from henningfield. nicotine occurs naturally in the tobacco plant, and if cigarettes had nicotine in them, they can be addictive; that is true of light cigarettes, full-filtered cigarettes, unfiltered cigarettes, additive-free cigarettes, and roll your own cigarettes. dr. henningfield told you that, too. in fact, on direct examination dr. henningfield told you if you just take tobacco, the simplest cigarette, just take the tobacco leaves, shred them, wrap them in paper, you have a really crude cigarette, and that is a dangerous addictive deadly product. that is what henningfield told you; it is the tobacco, members of the jury. now, mr. szymanski understood that cigarettes are risky. on the first day of his deposition, mr. szymanski testified he understood there was no such thing as a safer cigarette, and that a lower tar cigarette was not a healthier cigarette. you heard mr. szymanski testify on that first day of his deposition in march of 2010 that the reason he tried marlboro lights -- do you remember what he said the reason was? he wanted to see what they tasted like. that is what he said; he wanted to see what they tasted like. and he testified he did not like the way they tasted because they were not strong enough, so he tore the filters off. mr. szymanski testified several times that taste was very important to him in selecting the brands he chose to smoke. do you remember he said that he would go into a store, he would see new brands and try them, but bottom line is he smoked the ones -- he said he chose the ones where he liked the taste. you also heard that mr. szymanski testified on that same first day of his deposition there was never a time that he switched to marlboro lights as his primary brand. that is what he said in march. now, three months later in june, he gave another deposition, he had a chance to review his deposition, he had a chance to review some records, he had a chance to meet with his lawyers, and he changed his testimony. and then he said what happened was he switched to lights as soon as they came out. do you remember? he said he switched to lights as soon as they came out, and you heard from henningfield and cummings that marlboro lights came out in 1971. so we have version one, never switched to lights as my primary brand; version two, did it when they came out. mr. mitnik may have misspoke but he said today he switched to marlboro lights when he had a lump in his throat, so that would have been in the 1980s. and the other testimony you heard from the stand was that mr. szymanski smoked marlboro and marlboro lights interchangeably. remember he smoked reds and he smoked lights interchangeably. and you remember it was kim stanton who testified, when she was living with mr. szymanski, she is the one who switched to marlboro lights. so when john szymanski said he saw marlboro lights in his home, kim was smoking marlboro lights, too. and as traci szymanski told you, her father smoked whatever brand his girlfriend smoked and traci said whenever her father changed girlfriends, he changed cigarette brands. so this whole lights thing, you really need to look at the evidence and the evolution of the evidence, why he smoked what he smoked, when he said what he smoked, but let me go back to the central point. the fact is some people who smoke will get cancer from smoking, and it really does not matter what kind of cigarettes they smoke. because if it has tobacco in it, it can cause cancer. but let me tell you something, the fact that all cigarettes can cause cancer, that does not mean that the companies have not worked hard to try to make the safest cigarettes that they can. use your common sense. it is in the defendants' and the companies' business interest to make the safest cigarettes that they possibly can. of course it is. you heard how the companies work with the national cancer institute on the safer cigarette program, with the tobacco working group, how they looked at things like reconstituted tobacco and they looked at things like ph, to raise the ph. because you remember henningfield told you that the problem with cigarettes is the nicotine does not cause cancer but people smoke in large measure for nicotine, and if you are smoking for nicotine and you get the tar, then you can get disease. so they were looking at is there a way to give smokers the tar they want -- or i'm sorry, the nicotine they want while reducing the tar? so that is one example, that is one example of the companies' we are going to try to come up with a safer cigarette. now, in closing argument mr. mitnik said, well, they could have taken the nicotine out, they could have taken the addiction out. remember he told you that? well, as you remember, philip morris actually made and tried to sell cigarettes that took the nicotine out. remember it was called denic? i talked about it with henningfield. what happened, philip morris actually bought general foods because general foods had sanka coffee, and they wanted to get the decaffeination patent in process so they could apply to that cigarettes. you heard they spent something like 200 or 300 or $400 million, built a plant, and actually brought nicotine-free cigarettes to market. they also put them on a couple of their brands, merit, and i do not recall what the other was. but you heard about it from dr. henningfield. so, yeah, we know you can take the nicotine out of cigarettes, but the problem is no one would buy them. people did not want them. and dr. henningfield told you that a safer cigarette that no one will buy does not do anyone any good because people will just smoke the other cigarettes. there was also a discussion about ingredients. do you remember that with dr. henningfield? he was talking about ingredients. and i think after cross-examination, where we ended up was henningfield admitted that the companies have disclosed the list of all the ingredients used to the secretary of health and human services since the early 1980s. since 1994, the list of all the ingredients that are used have been public. now, the companies do not disclose their recipes for individual brands because those are trade secret and proprietary; it would break commercial value. just like coca-cola does not tell you the formula for coke; just like colonel sanders does not tell you the 11 secret herbs and spices that makes kentucky fried chicken what we all know and love. those are trade secrets, and they have great commercial value. but here's the deal, members of the jury, the whole issue of additives and ingredients is a red herring because it is the tobacco that is when it is burned that can cause cancer, and it is the nicotine that naturally occurs in the tobacco that can make cigarettes addictive, and all the additives do is make the product a more enjoyable and a more pleasurable product. and i want to make two more comments about 1958. i told you that was a big year for dr. cummings. first, based on a single document written in 1958 by three tobacco company scientists from england, dr. cummings told you the case was closed and cigarettes were a proven cause of cancer. do you remember that? he waved the batco trip report based on one document. yet, the surgeon general six years later, six years later, you heard about everything that went into the surgeon general's report, all that was made, and what he said was it was incredibly complicated, the issue of whether smoking caused cancer was incredibly complicated back in the '60s. and you heard that we made up the term controversy. it is in the '64 surgeon general's report: few medical questions have stirred such public interest or created more scientific debate than the tobacco and health controversy. dr. cummings, one document from 1958, the '64 surgeon general's report. now, let me say the fact that some people by 1958 knew that smoking caused cancer or believed that smoking caused cancer is not a surprise. mr. szymanski himself admitted that by the late 1950s we were all aware that smoking was not good for you. when a medical advocate actually offers opinion, and there is jury instruction the court read to you, you have to take the witness's bias into account, you have to. and we know that from our everyday life experiences. dr. cummings admits that he is biased against the tobacco companies. dr. cummings admits he wants the tobacco companies to go out of business. he admitted it on the stand. you probably wonder why i was asking him that, whether i was being rude. i did not want to be rude, but it is important that you bring out both sides of the story. and i thought it was really important that you understood dr. cummings' mindset, because respectfully, members of the jury, i suggest that sometimes he lets his zeal get in the way of the facts. again, dr. cummings admitted he could not tell you mr. szymanski saw any of the ads or read any of the documents -- saw any of the documents, but he said instead it is like wallpaper, right, it is like wallpaper, he must have been influenced. and, again, if you think about plaintiff's case, it is been about generalizations. here is this stuff going on, it must have swept up mr. szymanski. but we wanted to bring you mr. szymanski so you would know whether it affected him and what he knew and what he did not know, so let us talk about mr. szymanski. here is a quote i showed you from the statement, you have seen it with the witnesses. this is mr. szymanski's sworn testimony. of course, everybody was aware that -- i mean, we were all aware that cigarettes were not good for you. back then, which was, what, the late 1950s. and that is not a surprise, members of the jury, because with cummings i showed you all the articles that were being published back in magazines and the paper, on tv, back in the '40s and the '50s and the '60s. and we know the people were reading these things because here is a gallup poll. 1954, have you heard or read anything recently to the effect that cigarette smoking may be a cause of cancer of the lungs? ninety percent said yes. now, let me tell you something, mr. mitnik wants to argue, well, that does not say they all believed it, well, that is true. but that misses the point. what this does prove is the information was out there, so people were aware of it, and if people decided they were going to smoke, they had the information to understand that they may be taking health risks. and we know, we know that mr. szymanski understood that. mr. mitnik told you that today in closing argument. we know that mr. szymanski personally believed by around 1960 that smoking could cause cancer because mr. szymanski admitted that when jules gross died of lip cancer from smoking in around 1960, you can see that phrase itself, it scared the hell out of him; right? and that was not his only source of information, mr. szymanski had other sources of information, too. you know we talked about at utah state and we talked about the environment at utah state because the environment you are in is obviously important. and thats a school that has a very large mormon body, student body. and you heard actually from dr. cummings, since the late 1980s the mormon church has not allowed smoking for health reasons, health reasons and religious reasons. remember cummings told you because the body is the temple, and you should not defile the temple with something that is harmful. that is where mr. szymanski went to school for five years; he was on a scholarship. there were many places where he could not smoke or he had to hide his smoking. we went through those. he could not smoke in his swim meets, he could not smoke at his swim practices, he could not smoke on the bus, although he did say once he lit up a cigarette on the bus with his coach and -- i want you to think about that. if someone over in that corner lit up a cigarette, how long do you think it would be before you smelled it? he could not smoke at the student union, i guess, until they built that smokers only facility. do you remember he talked about that? lots of places, lots of places where he could not smoke. he took health classes at utah state, lots of places where he had information. and then around the same time the surgeon general's report came out, remember, 1964. cummings told you that was a huge deal, and mr. szymanski said he -- he did not read the report, he saw -- he saw the report -- not the report, he saw it reported in the papers. remember he and i went back and forth on that, but he was aware of the report. two years after that, the first warning label went on cigarette packs, and mr. szymanski told you he saw those warnings, too. you remember the testimony was congress told the companies exactly what that wording was to be, where it was to be placed on the pack, how big it was to be, the typeset. we know that when mr. szymanski was getting this information, he tried to stop smoking when he was in college. we will talk about what he said his motives were, but he said he tried to stop. and he also admitted that he never went more than a few hours without a cigarette. do you remember that? we will come back to that because that is important. the next year after this warning mr. szymanski got married. he moved back to new jersey and he married louise teel. remember she did not like his smoking, and she told him to quit. two years later in 1969, his son john was born. the next year his daughter was born. you remember when mr. szymanski told you when his kids were born he wanted to stop smoking, or he was concerned, at least, that his smoking might harm his children. so remember he said he changed kind of his smoking behaviors. do you remember what he said he did? he said he would go outside and smoke. he said he walked down the beach with a cup of coffee and cigarette. well, you will have to decide whether that was really a serious quit attempt. you will have to decide whether mr. szymanski was really serious about quitting smoking. and let me tell you why it is important, and you heard this testimony. why is it important? because when a person stops smoking, his or her risk of getting sick from smoking goes down. and if the person stops early enough and stays quit long enough, his or her risk becomes the same basically of that of someone who never smoked. dr. cummings admitted that if mr. szymanski had stopped smoking in the '60s when he was in his 20s, when he had all that information that we just discussed, more likely than not he would have had no risk, he would have had no risk of getting sick from smoking. now, i want you to think about that. basically, mr. szymanski, he could have smoked through high school, he could have smoked through college, he could have smoked up until the time he got married, but around the time he started having kids, if he would have stopped, none of the early smoking would have mattered. all the smoking as a teenager would not have mattered. but we know that mr. szymanski did not quit. so in 1976 mr. and mrs. szymanski got divorced, and four years later in 1980 -- because you remember mrs. szymanski died unexpectedly and mr. szymanski moved back into the family home -- shortly after that he met kim stanton and ms. stanton moved from north carolina in to live with mr. szymanski and his children. ms. stanton was a very important part of the household. she had a romantic relationship with mr. szymanski, and she testified that she acted like a surrogate mother for his children. remember she said she did everything that a mother did. during the years that ms. stanton was living with mr. szymanski and his children, and that is somewhere 1980 to about 1985, mr. szymanski began having trouble with his throat. he felt a lump in his throat, he felt tightness in his throat, he had trouble breathing, and kim told you that he kept touching his throat and saying i got to get that checked out. between '80 and '85. in '85 the stanton and szymanski relationship ended and she moved out. that same year, the warnings changed. actually, this is the '70 warning. remember this warning went on the packs in 1985. now, you remember when mr. szymanski was on the stand, i walked through the warnings with him. i showed him the '66 warning, said, do you remember that? he said, yeah. i showed him the '70 warning. i said, do you remember that? and he said, yeah. i showed him the '85 warning. do you remember he looked at it and he said, i have no recollection of ever seeing that warning. i said, really, i said how about the one that says quitting now greatly reduces serious risk of health. he said, no, i do not remember that. i said, how about the lung cancer warning? and he said, i do not remember that. well, think about that. you have seen him; we will see him again soon. but several medical records show that mr. szymanski told his doctors he quit smoking sometime in the mid '80s. mr. szymanski's son testified that his dad stopped smoking by 1987 when he graduated from high school. traci, his daughter, confirmed that. and then you heard from gail lawson, the woman he used to date who said the same thing. so you have medical records and three witnesses saying he stopped smoking in the '80s. you have mr. szymanski telling you, i do not remember those warnings at all. let us just look briefly at the records, and all i want to do at this point is i just want to flag them for you, because if you want to look at the records when you go to deliberate, they are going to be in all these big binders. so it is important that you at least know the name of the doctor and the dates, so i'll go through this quickly. i know you have all seen it. the first one is brown, dr. brown in 1988, quit smoking two years ago. the second one is dr. andrews, remember this is for laryngeal cancer. said he is quit smoking three or four years ago, used moderate alcohol up to that time. next you have dr. blitzer, the radiation oncologist, same thing, '93, quit three or four years ago, also stopped drinking completely three or four years ago, drank two beers a day before that time. nurse's note, none since 1987, in mr. szymanski's own handwriting, and then the nurse sat down with him. dr. spiro, the doctor who actually performed the laryngectomy, quit three or four years ago, also -- or three or four packs a day, stopped four years ago, consumed at least three or four beers a day up until that time. back to dr. fuller, '93, stopped four years ago. and then back to another nurse, this is november 1st, 1996, quit in 1990. and, again, i told you that mr. szymanski's son testified he definitely quit smoking, but in '87 when i was in high school before he had cancer, traci szymanski, she was living with him her junior year, she said does not remember any cigarettes, does not remember him smoking. gail lawson going out with him at the same time said she was a smoker, she does not remember him smoking, she remembers mr. szymanski telling her that she should not smoke. so there is lots of evidence that mr. szymanski quit smoking somewhere between '86 and 1990, a year before he had cancer. well, mr. mitnik says, what does that have to do with this case? who cares; right? i mean, that is what scher said, that is what cummings said. they say it does not matter when he quit. he smoked, he smoked a long time, therefore, he was addicted. so why does it matter? well, the first issue you have to decide in this case is whether mr. szymanski is a member of the engle class, and you will see the verdict form, but the first question is was john szymanski addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine? and if so, was his addiction a legal cause of his laryngeal cancer. it is legal cause i want to focus on. as i told you in opening, legal cause, there are three things that mr. szymanski has to prove. first, does smoking cause laryngeal cancer; second, that he was addicted to nicotine; the third, that the addiction to nicotine was a legal cause. and i want to start with the last two questions, the addiction questions. so plaintiff called two experts to testify about mr. szymanski's smoking history, and he offered two experts who testified that mr. szymanski was addicted. he brought in dr. scher and he brought in dr. cummings. as you remember, dr. scher is mr. szymanski's ent; he is his treating ear, nose, and throat doctor. dr. scher admitted that mr. szymanski had quit smoking long before scher ever met him. dr. scher admitted that, for purposes of his care and treatment, he never diagnosed mr. szymanski as addicted, and why would he, because mr. szymanski had quit smoking years before. dr. scher admitted he has no particular training in addiction. he admitted that even though he has testified in 30 or 35 different kinds of cases, not tobacco cases, but malpractice cases, other, he has never once offered an opinion on addiction. this was his first time. and basically, dr. scher told you mr. szymanski smoked a lot of cigarettes for a long time and said he tried to quit, and that is it. that is his basis. members of the jury, i respectfully suggest that dr. scher may be a very, very good head and neck surgeon, and i expect that he is. he is also a treating physician who cares a great deal about mr. szymanski, and he took time out of his life to come down here and testify for his patient, and he offered an opinion that his plaintiff needs -- or rather his patient needs to be a class member in this case. and while his opinion may be honest to him, frankly, it is not the sort of opinion that deserves a lot of credit because it is simply not dr. scher's area of expertise. i mean, you have to wonder with all of the addiction experts out there, why are they relying on the testimony of an ear, nose, and throat guy from duke? dr. cummings, we talked briefly about him. he said he believes mr. szymanski is addicted, relied on heaviness of smoking index, all i need to know, he smoked in the morning, he is a daily smoker, there you go. he has testified -- dr. cummings has testified in dozens of trials, dozens of trials all over the country, and he has never met a plaintiff who is not addicted, never. in every case dr. cummings has ever testified in since 1996, he has never met a plaintiff who was not addicted. well, i want you to think about what he did in this case. did he meet mr. szymanski? did he interview him? did he read all the records? did he read all the depositions? no, what he did was he read hand-selected depositions that counsel sent him and he read some hand-selected medical records that counsel sent him. he gives the exact same testimony in every case. he did not analyze mr. szymanski's particular circumstances or even take the time to interview him. now, you heard from dr. kaplan and you heard very different testimony. dr. kaplan is a medical doctor; he is a board certified psychiatrist who practices outside of tampa and treats patients in tampa. you have heard during the course of this trial that the word addiction has basically lost its meaning. people talk about being addicted to video games, tanning, chocolate, running, what have you. dr. henningfield told you that, but what dr. kaplan told you is, in the world of medicine, that addiction has a very specific meaning. it is a mental disorder, if you are going to diagnose somebody with a mental disorder, then there are criteria that need to be applied. he said he applies dsm-iv. he said that he believes dsm-iv is a gold standard. he said under dsm-iv, about fifty percent of smokers meet the criteria, fifty percent do not. he says he believes the most important factor is whether the behavior or the substance creates clinically significant impairment in the person's life. and he said, based on his interview with mr. szymanski, based on all the materials he reviewed, he does not think mr. szymanski meets the criteria; that is his opinion. but here is the important point, whatever definition of addiction that you choose to use, and no one is going to tell you what that definition is -- even if you decide that mr. szymanski is, in fact, addicted, that does not mean he is a class member because he has to prove more, he has to prove something much more important than that. he has to prove that addiction to nicotine was a legal cause of his laryngeal cancer. so let us talk about legal cause. now, you remember during voir dire and in opening i gave you an example of legal cause. remember? i told you about the guy that steps out in the street and is hit by the truck. what is the cause in fact? he got hit by the truck. but what is the legal cause? you needed to know more. well, here is the definition of legal cause that her honor has read to you. and it is a mouthful, and i'll tell you i'll read the first paragraph to you, you will have this instruction, and i have highlighted or italicized the most important points but: addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine is a legal cause -- it only has to be a legal cause, not the -- a legal cause of john szymanski's laryngeal cancer if it directly and in a natural and continuous sequence produced or contributed substantially to producing his laryngeal cancer so that it can reasonably be said that, but for his addiction, his laryngeal cancer would not have our occurred. all the second paragraph tells you is that it does not have to be the only legal cause; there can be other causes. but for purposes of determining whether addiction -- and addiction is a legal cause, it is the first paragraph, and the italicized language, that is the important language. so let us talk about context as you consider that issue. we know that some people who smoke become addicted; right? we know some people who smoke do not become addicted; right? we know that all addicted smokers have the ability to quit. henningfield and cummings told you that. remember i asked cummings flat out, true or false, even addicted smokers can quit? and he said, true. remember i put up that stop smoking guide, the american cancer society that had the three questions, do you want to quit, do you want to make some effort? we spent a lot of time talking about that and i think it is fair to say that not everybody finds it easy to quit. for some people it is harder to quit, but even addicted smokers can quit. now, let me be clear, the fact that mr. szymanski did quit does not prove that he was never addicted. let me make that clear. the fact that he did quit does not prove he was never addicted. but it is a critically important fact on legal cause. when you look at the definition of legal cause, that is a very important fact because the bottom line is why did not he quit earlier? was he addicted and was his addiction so strong that, but for the addiction, he would have quit? that is what plaintiff has to prove. plaintiff has to prove that an addiction to nicotine contributed so substantially that it can reasonably be said that, but for the addiction, he would not have continued to smoke and he would not have gotten sick. well, i want you to think about how that definition, that concept applies to mr. szymanski and his life. we know that mr. szymanski is a bright, educated man. we know he has a master's degree, and he is had a successful career. we also know that he is a person up to this day who weighs the risks and benefits of things he enjoys. and sometimes even knowing the risk, he makes the decision to go with pleasure. do you remember the example of the boat? dr. fuller -- i showed you the letter that dr. fuller, the medical record, he said, mr. szymanski, you cannot go out on a boat with a laryngectomy. if you fall over, you will drown, you will die immediately, you are literally taking your life in your own hands. i showed you that record, do you remember? do you remember what mr. szymanski said? hey, that is his opinion. do you know what? i get to make my choices; that is his opinion. that is not nicotine that is driving that opinion; it is the right we all have to make a decision whether we are going to accept risk in exchange for pleasure. we all do that each and every day in all kinds of contexts. mr. szymanski also knew for a very long time that his decision to smoke was a risky one. so why did not he quit smoking earlier? was it because of addiction? the answer, members of the jury, is because he liked to smoke. he said he enjoyed the taste of cigarettes, he said cigarettes put him at ease in social situations, he said -- you remember, i asked him this. i asked cummings this, too. he said cigarettes made him feel more secure and calmer and smoking helped him to relieve stress. why did not he quit earlier? well, think about the methods he used to try to quit. left his cigarettes at home, well, you are going back home, so they are going to be here, or he would leave them in the glove box, well, he had a key to the glove box, or you wrap rubber bands around them, well, take the rubber bands off. think about the things he did not do. he never asked a doctor for help, never once, never asked a doctor for help. he never asked anyone he knew who had quit smoking, hey, how did you do it? give me some advice, you used to smoke, how did you do it? he never contacted the american lung association, american cancer society, never asked for some of those pamphlets. he said he never went to smoking cessation clinics. do you remember what kim stanton said? tried acupuncture, i tried hypnosis, he did not. do you remember what mr. szymanski said, i knew about hypnosis, but i just blew it off. you know, you really, when you think about was have they proven that an addiction was a legal cause that, but for his addiction, he would not have smoked and he would not have got sick? you have to really think about, well, how serious were his quit attempts? did he really want to quit, what was his motivation? so you heard about, you know, quit attempts in college. they were not motivated by health. he did not want his coach to see him, and he was having trouble getting dates. and i'll admit, you know, i went to college, getting dates is a big deal, but it is different than a health reason; right? when his children were born, he did not want smoking to harm his children, but he did not quit. just when they were young he made an effort to not smoke around them, grab a cigarette, grab a cup of coffee, walk down the beach and smoke or smoked on his deck or smoked on the dock. the fact is, until the mid 1980s when mr. szymanski felt that lump in his throat and for the first time got worried, that is the first time he really had an interest and a motivation to quit smoking. up until that time, he testified that he had never gone more than a few hours without a cigarette, but all that changed when he started having trouble with his throat. as soon as he got worried, one of two things happened. if you believe those medical records, if you believe the testimony of his son, if you believe the testimony of his daughter, if you believe the testimony of gail lawson, he quit. he put them down and he quit. and let me ask you, you know, all those records from 1993, all those records for all of that treatment for laryngeal cancer, has anyone ever showed you a single record from that 1993 treatment where anyone said he was still smoking? there is not a single record, so if you do not believe his son, if you do not believe his daughter, if you do not believe gail lawson, if you do not believe that any of those doctors would have picked it up, and you believe the story that mr. szymanski is now telling, well, he did not quit completely, but he went from two to three packs a day down to a cigarette or two in about a six-month period. even if you believe that, that shows tremendous control, tremendous control. legal cause, can you really say that, but for an addiction, he would not have continued to smoke? he smoked until the first time he thought his smoking was catching up with him, and, you know, we all do that in our lives. i want you to think about that -mr. mitnik: your honor, i hate to object, but -mr. cofer: go ahead. the court: approach the bench. when you object, he gets extra time. (bench conference was held within the presence of the jury.) mr. mitnik: this is the second time, we all know this. mr. cofer: this is closing argument. mr. mitnik: he can do it, i'm going to do it. the court: that is kind of getting to the jury. mr. mitnik: he is done it, we all know i get to do it, too. the court: no, you are not going to do it. just because he violates it. i'm admonishing him not to do it, and you have -mr. cofer: how much time do i have? the court: you have used 55 minutes. (bench conference concluded and proceedings continued as follows:) mr. cofer: it is common knowledge that people make decisions that can have bad consequences. people go to dinner and have a couple of glasses of wine, and people know that you can get in the car and you can get pulled over or something bad can happen. people think it will not happen to them. it does not mean people do not understand it can happen; it is just that until it affects you, you do not always think about it. we have those -- we do not all have those experiences, but those are experiences that are common. mr. mitnik: okay, judge. mr. cofer: i apologize. mr. mitnik: may i do the same, that is my only request? mr. cofer: you may do the same. mr. mitnik: thank you. he agrees. mr. cofer: so the bottom line is, the first time mr. szymanski understood his smoking was harming him, he decided to quit. it is the first time he went more than a couple hours, it is the first time he went more than 24 hours. experts in the case including a surgeon general tell you that until you make at least a 24-hour quit attempt, it is not a serious quit attempt. if you are not willing to put them down for at least a day, how can you say that you really want to quit? and the very first time that it was important to quit, he put them down and he walked away from them. legal cause. you heard from all the experts what is the most important factor and whether people successfully quit smoking, motivation and persistence. that is common sense; right? if you do not want to, you are not going to. so you have to think about at what point in time was it important for mr. szymanski to quit and what happened when it became important and he became motivated? you heard mr. mitnik tell you that plaintiff accepts some responsibility for his role in getting him here. what does that mean? does that mean he could have quit earlier? does that mean he had any information that he needed to know he should have quit earlier? because if he could not quit earlier and if he did not know, how could he possibly be responsible? the fact that plaintiff takes the position that he is responsible, does not that mean -- is not that an admission, i knew i should have quit and i had the ability to quit? we do not know what mr. szymanski would have said because he never testified to that. mr. stevens never asked him that question. it is mr. mitnik that told you -- it is mr. mitnik that told you they accept responsibility, not mr. szymanski. but what does that mean? because i'll tell you if what it means is i could quit and i knew i should quit and i just did not quit, then an addiction was not a legal cause and that is an admission. okay. medical cause -- i have a few minutes left. i'll try to go through this fairly quickly because it is an important part because plaintiff has to show that smoking caused laryngeal cancer. here's the evidence on that. as you know, mr. szymanski suffered five different cancers in four different parts of his body, three different cell types over an 18-year period. you have heard me say that how many times, you can probably say it in your sleep. i apologize for that. two of those had nothing to do with smoking. what caused the colon cancer? what caused the mucoepidermoid? it was not smoking. why did this man get two cancers completely unrelated to smoking? let us talk about laryngeal cancer. that is the one that mr. szymanski has the burden of proving that smoking was a substantial factor in causing his laryngeal cancer or he is not a member of the class. you heard from four different board certified ents, you heard from andrews, webster, scher, and fuller, and what did they tell you? fuller and scher told you they think smoking and drinking caused it. andrews and webster told you that medically there is no way to really know, and here's why. all four doctors told you smoking can independently cause laryngeal cancer. all four doctors told you that drinking can independently cause laryngeal cancer. three of the doctors, fuller, andrews, and webster, told you that gerd, gastroesophageal reflux disease -- please do not make me say it again -- can independently cause laryngeal cancer. they told you that often there are no symptoms of gerd. they told you when there are symptoms, the classic symptom was tightening in the throat. kaplan did not know that, but kaplan is not an ent. webster is a yale trained board certified ent. you heard the same thing from andrews. you heard fuller actually complement the questioner when he asked about gerd. he said that is really good because we really were not that familiar with that back in 1993, but you are right, that is an important factor. the only person that disagrees on gerd is scher. he is the only one who really kind of pooh-poohed (phonetic) that as a risk factor. now, i want to talk about andrews for a second. so he is the ent here in fort myers that initially treated mr. szymanski. he is the one who diagnosed him and treated him. he saw him in '93, did not see him again till 1996. his deposition was taken in this case as a treating physician. it is true -- it is true that he has worked with us on a couple of other cases. so what is plaintiff suggesting? that dr. andrews gave a false opinion and false testimony about his patient because he had consulted on some other tobacco cases? he was not retained in this case. the only physician, the only treating physician that got paid in this case is scher who got paid by them. they hired scher, paid him $750 an hour to review records, review depositions, come here, and he gave an addiction opinion, one that he never gave for his patient. so what andrews said is this, the first time we are taking his deposition he said, well, god, he smoke and drank, i think that probably caused it. i said, okay, did you know that he had the '99 neck cancer? no, i did not know he had the '99 neck cancer. did you know he had colon cancer in 2009. no, i did not know he had colon cancer in 2009. he said, i had no idea he had two cancers. then he says, based on all that information, i cannot tell you to a reasonable degree of medical certainty, which is the test and the standard, that is the standard by which doctors must testify by, i cannot tell you to a reasonable degree of medical probability or medical certainty that smoking caused any of the cancers because he has two cancers that have nothing to do with smoking; right? that was dr. andrews' testimony. you heard the same thing from dr. webster, the yale trained ent that came down here, and he told you the same thing. he talked about all of the different risk factors; he talked about alcohol and gerd and smoking. he talked about mr. szymanski just being one of those people who has a genetic predisposition to cancer. no one knows what is triggering these cancers, but we know that he is getting them. we go to the neck cancer -- i'll make this quick. four doctors testify, fuller, andrews, and webster said it was a metastasis from an occult primary. those three doctors said it was a metastasis from an occult primary. on cross-examination, the lawyers for plaintiff said to fuller, would you defer to the treating doctor? he said, sure, i mean, he is not going to argue about it, but they said it is a metastasis from an occult primary, not from the larynx. because six years went by and it just makes no sense that a cancer would pop up in one spot in one lymph node, not hit the other 14 lymph nodes six years later. and webster told you when they radiated the area, the first one he showed you where he radiated, to the extent that the tumor started back there, the radiation would cure that, too. he also told you it is not the least bit unusual that the primary tumor does not show up. and, again, only dr. scher disagreed with that. do you remember what he said when i cross-examined him? i am absolutely certain. do you remember i said? i made kind of a smart aleck comment that i should apologize for. i said, you are awfully confident, and then there was an objection, sustained, and i was told not to do that. but the point i was trying to make was how can somebody say, i'm absolutely sure, in a situation like that that is so unusual? particularly when you now know three other board certified ents said the opposite. so that takes us then to the neck cancer, the cancer of the tongue base. it is squamous cell, everybody says it is a new primary. this one right here, it is a new primary, it has nothing to do with the larynx, has nothing to do with the neck, it is a squamous. but you know what? it occurred somewhere between 18 and 25 years after mr. szymanski's last cigarette. you heard from dr. webster that after ten years of quitting, a person's risk of getting head and neck cancer from smoking is the same as a never smoker. the fact that mr. szymanski continued to get cancers and continued to get head and neck cancers 18 to 25 years after his last cigarette proves that it is something other than cigarettes that is continuing to trigger mr. szymanski's problems. okay. could we switch over, please, jeff, to the elmo? let me talk about the verdict form. the first question, was mr. szymanski addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine, and if so, was his addiction a legal cause of his laryngeal cancer? for all the reasons, members of the jury, we have discussed, he has not proved smoking caused the laryngeal cancer, he has not proved that he was addicted. but even if you believe he is addicted, he did not prove that addiction was a legal cause of his smoking. he has not proved that, but for an addiction, he would not have smoked and he would not have got sick. i respectfully suggest to you, members of the jury, that the evidence is compelling that mr. szymanski has not met his burden of proving he is a class member. i respectfully suggest that you check no on that box, that you knock on the door, and you tell cindy that you have a verdict, because if he is not a class member, the case is over. the court: you asked for another warning after ten more minutes. mr. cofer: thank you, your honor. the second question: if you disagree, if you find he was a class member, that does not mean the plaintiff is entitled to recover money. because remember plaintiff has to prove something more. they have to prove that something defendants did was a legal cause of mr. szymanski's injuries. with respect to negligence, they have to prove, first of all, they have to prove something other than the engle findings. there is an instruction that tells you the engle findings alone do not prove anything about legal cause or do not prove anything whether defendants are liable to mr. szymanski. in addition, they have to prove something more than that defendants just sold cigarettes and mr. szymanski got sick. simply selling cigarettes cannot be the basis of liability. so they have to show either we did something more than selling cigarettes, they have to show you something more than the engle findings, and where is that evidence? mr. szymanski admits he is known since the late '50s smoking could harm him. mr. szymanski admits he is known since the first time he tried to quit it could be hard to quit. we know mr. szymanski had the ability to quit. we know the first time he is motivated to quit, he did quit. i respectfully suggest, members of the jury, that even if you find mr. szymanski was a class member on the second question, negligence, that you check no. the third question asks the exact same thing although this time it asks whether a defect was a legal cause. for the very same reasons negligence was not a legal cause, i respectfully suggest that if you get that far, that you check no. the next one asks whether concealment or omission of material information about health effects or addiction was a legal cause. i have showed you and you have seen all of the information mr. szymanski had. you heard mr. mitnik tell you that they were not concealing that it was dangerous, that is impossible, they were concealing that they knew it. it does not matter what we knew if mr. szymanski had the information he needed to make an informed decision whether to smoke or quit smoking. i respectfully suggest, members of the jury, that he did. i respectfully suggest that if you get that far, the evidence tells you to answer no to that question, too. 5 is basically the same question as 4 and i will not repeat the arguments, but i suggest that as well. that takes us to 6. and let me tell you briefly about 6. 6 is what is called comparative fault, and as i think we talked about in voir dire, that in this state you can decide -- if you decide that mr. szymanski is responsible and you decide the defendant is responsible, you can assign how much each party is responsible. well, let me tell you something so there is no confusion. you never get to comparative fault unless you find legal cause that he is a class member. this is a completely separate question. plaintiff has to prove that he is a class member, that an addiction to nicotine was a legal cause of his laryngeal cancer, or you never get this far on the verdict form. even if he proves he is a class member, he has to prove that something that the defendants did other than selling cigarettes and other than the engle findings was a legal cause or you never get here. you never get here until you answer those legal cause questions, so please do not be confused about that. it can be confusing, comparative fault and legal cause, but you do not even get here until you determine liability. mr. mitnik told you, it is true, we stipulated that if you decide mr. szymanski is entitled to recover money, we stipulated to the amount of medical expenses, and you will have that stipulation. we stipulated to the amount of the employment, lost wages, and you will have that stipulation. you will have that amount. with respect to pain and suffering, that is something that you in your collective judgment, if you get that far, you have to decide. and frankly, there is nothing i can really suggest on that that can guide you. okay. let me get this one last point, and that is punitive damages. so let me basically end my closing where i started. the final question on the verdict form asks about punitive damages, and the one thing i want to do is make sure that you understand what they are asking you to do. they are not asking you for an amount of punitive damages. the issue here is whether, by clear and convincing evidence, plaintiff has shown that they are entitled to punitive damages. do not spend one second thinking about amount. the question before you right now is whether they have shown, under the evidence, they are entitled to punitive damages. if you decide they are, there is another phase of the trial, plaintiff puts on evidence, philip morris puts on evidence, reynolds puts on evidence, liggett puts on evidence, and we have closing arguments, and that is when you get to the amount stage. so i want to make sure you focus on this issue that you clearly consider whatever it is you have to decide. when you look at the instructions, you will see that clear and convincing evidence is defined. it is a much higher standard of proof than the greater weight of the evidence. you remember in voir dire someone said 51/49, they said that is not the standard, even for the regular standard, regular weight. with respect to punitive damages, it is much, much higher. it is much higher. in fact, you will see the instruction on page 24 that says: it is evidence that is precise, explicit, lacking in confusion, and of such weight that produces a firm belief of conviction about the matter of issue. it is a much higher standard. you have to be really, really convinced that punitive damages are important -- are appropriate. and let me tell you something else, you have to decide that if you get there, that there is punitive damages warranted based on the conduct that harmed mr. szymanski. this case is about jack szymanski. it is not a class action anymore, it is not about harm to other people. this is jack szymanski's case. other people have an opportunity to bring their own lawsuits and ask for damages. so this is about conduct and whether it harmed mr. szymanski. now, i respectfully suggest, members of the jury, based on the evidence, nothing defendants did or did not do harmed mr. szymanski. we sold cigarettes; that cannot be a basis for liability alone. the engle findings are not a basis. let me say one more thing about philip morris. the evidence is undisputed that mr. szymanski did not smoke marlboros until the 1960s. at that point, he was an adult, he had been smoking for a long time, he was aware that smoking could be harmful and be hard to quit. the evidence is simply that nothing that philip morris did, nothing that any of the defendants did affected mr. szymanski in any way. members of the jury, i want to thank you for your service for jurors in this case. you have been diligent, you have been prompt, you have taken three weeks out of your life, and on behalf of everybody, we appreciate it. this is an important case to mr. szymanski; it is an important case to these defendants, too. it is important to all of us. and all we ask when we were picking a jury, we asked one thing, we asked you to keep an open mind and we asked you to give us a fair shot. i know you have done that and i appreciate it and thank you very, very much for your service. thank you. ms. kaschel: thank you, your honor. may it please the court. good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen. i want to begin by saying it is been a real privilege to be before you and judge winesett's courtroom and to represent liggett in this case. we all really appreciate your attention, your patience, and consideration throughout this process, so thank you. ladies and gentlemen, i want to try to be brief, first of all, you must be hungry, but at the end of the day it is the evidence, it is not lawyer's arguments and not even sympathy for mr. szymanski that simply does not support a verdict against any of these defendants. and for sure, mr. szymanski's lawyers have not met the burden of proof they have against my client, liggett. the evidence just is not there. smoking cigarettes manufactured by liggett was not a legal cause of mr. szymanski's injuries. there is no need for me to repeat the important points already made by mr. cofer. i'm going to try to be brief, like i said, i'm going to focus on the little that relates to liggett in this case. first, mr. szymanski's smoking. if we step back and look at the 40 years during which mr. szymanski chose to smoke, in the big picture he smoked a small amount of liggett brand cigarettes a very long time ago. out of the 11 brands mr. szymanski testified on monday to having smoked, only two are liggett brands, and those would be l&m and chesterfield. and mr. szymanski told us about that first cigarette when he was about 11 years old. he said he took a few puffs from one cigarette, it was a chesterfield cigarette he remembered, and it was given to him by his mother at his family's kitchen table. honestly, hearing a parent give their son, a child, a cigarette to smoke at that age may be a bit jarring, but the reality is liggett is not, nor is any defendant here, responsible for john szymanski's first few puffs of a cigarette. and while we will never know why his mother gave his son that cigarette, we know first few puffs did not addict him, and mr. szymanski himself said he did not like that first cigarette, in fact, did not smoke again for two or three years. now, mr. szymanski does not claim to have become a regular smoker until a few years later anyway, until about 1953. so the only place really my client comes into play is approximately this time period of 1953 to 1961, an eight-year period where mr. szymanski said he was trying out a whole bunch of different brands, pretty much at the same time. i would like to go over those eight years with you quickly. i'm going to use this board. so first off, mr. szymanski claims to have smoked marlboro and marlboro lights, i guess, beginning in early '60s, his testimony he says about 1961, and there is some dispute of when he quit, somewhere, say in the early '90s. he claims to have quit in 1993. and mr. szymanski himself claims to have begun smoking regularly in 1953. he said he started smoking -- his second cigarette was a pall mall that his friend gave him. and during this eight-year period, mr. szymanski told us he tried a bunch of different cigarettes, and he smoked them in an overlapping way. he said some of his favorites were chesterfield, lucky strikes, camel, and on monday he told us specifically he smoked -i'll try to write these down here -- newport, parliament, and he was asked about parliament, he said he smoked it for about a year, and he said he smoked kent, on monday, he said about two years. and l&m. and he said he smoked -- at different times he said at one point he smoked l&m for one year, another time he said two years. and, again, all these brands he smoked interchangeably. so the bottom line with this eight-year smoking is that he smoked eight different brands in eight years, and why that is important for my client is that -- and also one other fact i wanted to bring out. his early smoking, he claims and he says himself was relatively in a modest amount. he said that he started smoking about half a pack a day, and towards the early '60s that increased at most to about a pack and a half to two packs a day, compared to the more heavy smoking he did later on. and my point here is that liggett's cigarettes are just too little too long ago to have caused mr. szymanski's cancer. now, i would submit your inquiries to the evidence to relate to them right there, but i owed it to my client -- and i'm here for longer, if the judge will allow -- i owed it to my client to discuss the truth of plaintiff's accusations, specifically against liggett. this case is really about mr. szymanski, though, his motivations, all that he knew, and ultimately his choices in life. but in the attempt to deflect you from all of that, his lawyers have tried their best to connect some old ads and random company documents, the vast majority that did not come from liggett, that had absolutely nothing to do with mr. szymanski's decision to smoke. and mr. cofer already spoke to you about some ads, i believe, and how they did not figure into mr. szymanski's decision to smoke, but one thing i just wanted to mention about liggett. and that is there is no evidence that mr. szymanski relied on or saw a chesterfield ad. and as for l&m, whatever ad he may have seen about lower tar or nicotine, what is important is what we know the connection between l&m and john szymanski's smoking is, and that is -- he said he smoked first of all for a short amount of time in the 40 years of his smoking, he said he did not like l&m, and he said he ripped off the filters of l&m, really not smoking a filter cigarette at all. so next i would like to talk to you about liggett's conduct as a cigarette manufacturer. first with dr. henningfield. dr. henningfield did not rely on one liggett document throughout his testimony. in fact, he did not say much about my client until i asked him a handful of questions. here's what he had to say. dr. henningfield testified that there was no evidence that liggett has ever manipulated nicotine levels, used ammonia in any cigarette sold to the public. dr. henningfield also pointed out that liggett has done things differently, and that is the only company that discloses all of its cigarettes' ingredients right on its packaging. now, we later heard from dr. cummings who spent a lot of time describing the conduct of the tobacco companies. he jumped -- he lumped all the companies into one group and used terms like the tobacco company or the tobacco industry and plaintiff's lawyers have done the same thing. they showed you a document -not from liggett -- mr. mitnik will say, they knew, they said nicotine this or they said this when liggett did not say that. that is not a liggett document he was referring to. but that is sort of the arguing going on here and what i'm trying to clear up, what the evidence says about liggett. so remember your duty here is to hold plaintiff to his burden of proof against each defendant individually because they are distinct companies. now, let us talk about the many internal company documents shown to you. now, according to my last count -- i'm sure if i'm wrong plaintiff's lawyers will correct me -- but plaintiff admitted i believe around 95 documents into evidence, and i'm just talking about not ads, not ti documents, not the two arthur d. little documents, the research group that i'll talk about in a minute that liggett hired, but internal documents from liggett. there was one out of 95 exhibits that came from liggett. and that document, i believe mr. mitnik just showed you, it discussed filtered cigarettes, and their allegation is that mr. szymanski smoked an l&m filtered cigarette in about 1960. that document is dated 1978. i submit to that there is no relevance to that document, it is a stretch to try to connect some kind of wrongdoing from that document to mr. szymanski's smoking and his injuries. and you know, all those tv show interviews of tobacco executives on videos that were shown to you, not one of those men was from liggett. likewise, the documents dr. cummings referred to as youth marketing, not one was from liggett. now, i would like to touch on conspiracy. plaintiff's conspiracy claim as to this plaintiff is not supported by the evidence against any of these defendants, but no better example is the lack of evidence as to liggett. plaintiff's conspiracy theory begins with a series of meetings at the plaza hotel, and as you heard from dr. cummings, liggett did not participate in any of those meetings. then came the frank statement. mr. mitnik just told you that the frank statement, he said they kicked off a conspiracy with the frank statement, and i'm sitting over there and liggett did not sign the frank statement. dr. cummings confirmed that, and that is an easy one, it is actually signed by all the companies, and liggett's name is not there. similarly liggett was not a part of the tirc, a so-called industry wide group, and you heard evidence that the tirc in 1953 hired hill & knowlton. mr. mitnik just referred to the forwarding memo of hill & knowlton. that is not evidence against liggett. liggett was a member of the ctr. ctr was in existence for 45 years, and liggett decided to try to check it out for all three and a half years in the mid-'60s and quit and was never again a member. and funding and different things is not membership. i went through that with dr. cummings. now, i'm sure -- we have seen actually that plaintiffs sort of hang their hat on the fact that liggett was one of the many different types of businesses that was a member of the tobacco institute. you can look at the evidence, members of industry trade groups included tobacco leaf growers, wholesalers, and chewing tobacco companies. there is no evidence that anyone from liggett authorized or controlled anything that tobacco institute did. mere attendance at trade group meetings did not rise, i submit, to prove that liggett conspired to conceal information from this plaintiff. plaintiff has not presented any evidence that liggett agreed with any other tobacco company to conceal anything that harmed mr. szymanski. in fact, as dr. cummings confirmed, liggett did just the opposite. after the link between smoking and cancer became known, liggett chose its independent path from that of the other tobacco companies. in fact, liggett spent more money on cancer research than the rest of the industry combined. that is what dr. cummings agreed with me on. now, in the early 1950s, liggett hired this well-respected research firm named arthur d. little or adl, and they hired them specifically to conduct research on smoking and cancer to find out what was going on. and then after ten years of research and millions of dollars spent, liggett turned over that research to the surgeon general. liggett's submission was a huge set of documents, nine large volumes of research. plaintiff's counsel did not show you that document, though, but i showed it to dr. cummings. and liggett's submission to the surgeon general contained the very information that plaintiffs want you to believe was concealed and not known publicly. this information, including the 1961 document that plaintiff showed you before saying that smoking is cancer causing -- you know, first of all, it says liggett and myers authored that document. the fact of the matter is, dr. cummings testified to it came from arthur d. little, but that is just another factor that i wanted to clarify; it is not a liggett document. however, liggett did work with arthur d. little, and it told the surgeon general in its submission about the link -- it is right in the introduction of the submission -- of cancer and smoking. dr. cummings said the surgeon general acknowledged and was especially grateful for liggett for this research. liggett did not conceal this information, but just the opposite; it sought the public's spotlight for its work and was doing -- was actually proud of the recognition it received, and we saw evidence to that fact. and just a couple of last points. dr. cummings told us a little bit more about liggett being different. he said unlike the rest of the industry after the 1960s and all those ads, liggett's business actually plummeted, and since that time has maintained just around two percent market share. mr. mitnik said earlier that this conspiracy between all the companies resulted in sales going right on up. well, not for liggett. liggett's business went right on down, as confirmed by mr. -- i'm sorry -- dr. cummings. and decades ago liggett significantly reduced its advertising and no longer makes popular brands like chesterfield and l&m. finally, folks, the bottom line is that random documents, ads, snippets from videos, and even sympathy like i said for mr. szymanski, should not distract you from what common sense says this case is really all about, money, and ultimately the reality of the decisions jack szymanski made. please look at the evidence and use your sense of fairness and common sense in deciding if this plaintiff has proven liability against these defendants. i think you will agree the answer is no. when you consider the evidence and the law, you will not find a basis in favor of this plaintiff and against liggett, and certainly not find grounds for punitive damages. there is no evidence liggett should be punished or deterred for anything. ladies and gentlemen, i thank you for your time in considering the evidence, specifically as to my client, liggett, so thank you. mr. burton: good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen. as you know, i represent r.j. reynolds, and like everybody else here, i want to talk to you a little bit about the claims that relate to my client. i also want to thank you right now for your time and for your service and your commitment. you have come in early, stayed late, and we could not do it without you. now, before i turn to the claims against my client or the evidence of the claims against my client, i want to say that mr. cofer spent a lot of time with you going over mr. szymanski's life story, about the choices he made to smoke, about his known risks of smoking, when he knew that smoking was risky, his choice to continue smoking in the face of those risks. and i agree with that, and i'm not going to repeat it. i know you are glad about that; we do not want to hear it again. but i do want to say that i do not believe the plaintiffs have carried their burden to prove that mr. szymanski was a class member or that any addiction was a legal cause of any his injuries. so let us look at the evidence against my client. as you consider this claim against reynolds, remember his first cigarette is a chesterfield, which my clients did not make, and his first primary brand is a chesterfield, which is not my client's brand. remember as you consider the claims against reynolds that over the 40-year history that he smoked, starting somewhere here in the '50s to the '80s or the '90s, he smoked multiple cigarettes. he smoked at least 10 or 11 brands of cigarettes, all these cigarettes, but he only smoked one cigarette manufactured by american tobacco company, and that was lucky strike, and only one by camel. now, i think it was significant that mr. mitnik could not remember the names of the cigarettes. he smoked so few cigarettes representing -- manufactured by reynolds or by american tobacco company that mr. mitnik could not even remember who they were. that is how little smoking of the products of reynolds and american tobacco company that mr. szymanski had. remember as you consider this claim, as you hear this evidence, that all of the cigarettes that he smoked that were manufactured by my client were unfiltered. not filtered, unfiltered, full flavor cigarettes. as you consider this claim against reynolds, remember that he smoked those two unfiltered brands for roughly 1953, in here, to 1959, six or seven years. remember as you consider this claim that he only smoked those two brands at the same time, as you just heard, that he was smoking all these other cigarettes. and he was smoking all these other cigarettes at the rate of one pack per day at most. so what does that mean? how much -- how many camel cigarettes or lucky strike cigarettes is he smoking if he is smoking a pack a day and he is smoking six, seven, or eight brands? the answer to that is very few. as you consider this claim against reynolds, remember he quits the reynolds brands 1959/1960. the rest of his smoking career, he never regularly smokes another brand manufactured by reynolds or brown & williamson or american tobacco company. in fact, we will get to this in a moment, you saw a lot of brown & williamson documents, ask yourself why you saw those if he never, ever smoked a brown & williamson brand. now, consider also that he smoked in the '50s, he smoked in the '50s. but the surgeon general of the united states did not conclude that smoking caused disease, and did so with great difficulty, until 1964. that is six years after he is had his last reynolds cigarette. also remember as you consider this claim that dr. cummings, the self-professed general in the war against tobacco, the guy that came and sat right here and said, i want mr. szymanski to win this lawsuit. what did he say? if he quit by 1966, his risk of getting any disease would have disappeared. so why is this important? why is this important? they have the burden of proof. they have to prove by a preponderance of the evidence that the conduct of my client and the other defendants is a legal cause of mr. szymanski's injuries. if they do not do that, if you decide they do not do that, then the verdict is for the defendants. and i submit to you that they have failed to do that. and let us look and see how the evidence i just related to you helps you analyze some of those things. let us look at why mr. szymanski started smoking. we know he got his first cigarette from his mom at the table, who was a nurse, we know his dad smoked, we know his brother smoked, we know his whole family smoked. when dr. cummings and dr. henningfield, who the plaintiffs brought you, they say, as mr. cofer told you, the best indicator of whether someone is going to smoke is whether their parents smoke or whether their siblings smoke. and, remember, mr. szymanski, on that first deposition without prompting told you, i did not buy any cigarette because of any ad. so why did he pick the cigarettes that he picked? why did he pick unfiltered cigarettes, which is all that he smoked? the simple answer to that is his dad smoked, his dad was a chesterfield smoker, and that is what he smoked. he wanted to be like his dad, and that is perfectly natural. you heard a lot of testimony and you heard a lot of comment from mr. mitnik about filters and lights and all sorts of things. remember, mr. szymanski never smoked anything manufactured by any of my clients other than unfiltered cigarettes. so let us talk about how much he smoked. i touched on that briefly. he smokes about a pack a day at the same time he is smoking a whole bunch of other cigarettes for a period of six years. now, you heard some testimony about pack-years, and the way you get a pack year is you take a number of packs per day times the number of years. one pack per day for 20 years is a 20 pack-year history. now, you will remember dr. cummings said he had less than five years pack history. when mr. szymanski testified, he said i smoked them for six or seven years, so we are talking about a period of six or seven years at one pack a day. so however you cut it, it is less than ten pack-years. now, why was that important? you should remember dr. andrews. dr. andrews, when his deposition was read, and the last questions he was asked, one of the last questions he was asked was, what would the difference be if his smoking was reduced by less than -- by ten years, 25 years ago? and what dr. andrews told you is he would not have made a difference. his risk of getting the disease would have been exactly the same as it was had those years not occurred. in other words, those years that long ago did not make any difference. so ms. kaschel touched on the documents, and when i stood up before you in opening, i told you you are going to see a lot of documents. i said, pay careful attention to those documents, look where they were written, look when they were dated, and see whether they help the plaintiffs connect the conduct that they are complaining about with the claims of mr. szymanski. mr. cofer described it as two ships passing in the night. they got to connect the conduct with the claims. so when you are in the jury room and you have the notebooks back, i want you to consider three questions. why do you have so many reynolds documents, reynolds, 25 or 30 that i count, when he only smoked one reynolds brand way back here at the same time he is smoking six or seven others. he is not smoking a reynolds brand here or here or here or here or here or here. what is going on there? why do you have so many brown & williamson documents? why? he never smoked a brown & williamson brand. what is going on there? why do you have so many documents from the '70s, remember, he started smoking here, he is smoking my product here. but the documents they are showing you, they are from way over here. what is that about? i'll tell you what the answer to that is in a moment. let me address some of the documents, and i wish i had more time and i would talk to you more about it. i'm going to do a couple by category and i'm going to talk about a couple of specific documents. we talked about ads, we are not going to spend much time on it. suffice it to say that advertisements did not, did not, make mr. szymanski select reynolds, american tobacco, brown & williamson brand, they did not make him start smoking. he answered the question honestly and correctly in his first deposition, it evolved over time. but regardless of whether you decide -- how you decide that factual issue, later testimony about ads has nothing to do with unfiltered products. so reynolds' conduct was not a substantial contributing cause to why he started smoking or what brands he selected. now, these '70s and '80s documents, let us put these in perspective. he is born in 1939. by 1975 he is 35 years old, he is 35 years old. he is graduated from college, he is got his master's degree, he served in the military, he is got two children, he is fully employed, and he has not smoked a reynolds brand in somewhere between 15 and 25 years. he has not smoked a reynolds brand for 15 or 25 years, but they are seeing all these documents in the '70s and the '80s. and remember this, ladies and gentlemen, at this time he is smoking about two packs a day. well, think of it this way, every time he picks up one of those cigarettes, every single time, you know what else he picks up? he picks up the warning. every time he picks up a cigarette, he picks up the warning. a warning we know he was aware of because he told us he was aware of it in the '60s. so ask yourself, is it reasonable to believe that mr. szymanski would have listened to anything reynolds had to say in 1970 or 1980 when he had not smoked one of our brands in 25 years? use your common sense. it does not make any sense to me. now, one of the documents that mr. mitnik mentioned was a document from 1953, way back here, written by a reynolds scientist named claude teague, i think in the blurbs he showed you, i think there was a highlight from that document. it was called a survey of cancer research. and mr. mitnik suggested that, aha, what this document means that reynolds knows something that nobody else does. well, remember on cross-examination, dr. cummings had to acknowledge it was, as its name suggests, a survey. dr. teague was a new scientist, he went down to the library and researched publicly available information, information that was available to the surgeon general, available to the national cancer institute, he went and surveyed publicly available information. and on cross-examination you may remember this, i pulled out a section of that document to show that -- what dr. teague actually concluded. laura, can you pull that up, please? "in spite of observation, research and theorizing for the past 2000 years, the cause of spontaneous human cancer is still unknown. by observation and by correlation of clinical data with occupation and environment and the like, several agents causing occupational cancer have been discovered, though the knowledge of how and why these agents act is very incomplete." if you can take that down. one of the other documents that mr. mitnik showed you was a 1972 document, a planning and research memorandum about the role of nicotine. and, again, he showed you a couple of sections of that document or a couple of sentences, which you will have that document back with you in the room, and i encourage you to look at them. because it will reflect is an effort -- the beginnings of an effort by reynolds to separate the tar and nicotine ratio and reduce the tar because remember the tar is the bad stuff. the tar is the stuff that has the carcinogens; that was an approach that was endorsed by dr. henningfield, it was endorsed by the tobacco working group, it was endorsed by dr. cummings, it was the right and responsible thing to do. it is also -- it is also the beginnings of the effort that reynolds had to develop a safer cigarette. the court: you have five minutes, sir. mr. burton: okay. you remember discussions about premier and eclipse, that was the novel cigarette, the one that had heated rather than burned tobacco. it is the one that reynolds spent hundreds of millions of dollars to develop this product, reduced biological activity, reduced toxins, tests shocked the blue ribbon panel, published this book, even sent it to dr. henningfield. what did dr. henningfield tell you about that product? he told you that product was a safer product, it was a responsible thing to do. but what did the public health community do? the public health community attacked it, and they attacked it without doing any more research. did reynolds stop there? no, they manufactured eclipse at the cost of millions and millions of more dollars, lower biological activity, lower toxins, still failing in the marketplace. and remember dr. henningfield told you, a product that does not sell, a cigarette that nobody buys, is not a safer product. so why does mr. mitnik tell you all these documents and show you all these documents? mr. cofer and ms. kaschel had it right, he wants to make you mad. he wants to distract you from the gaping holes in his case. he is got to connect the dots, he cannot do it. and so he hopes to distract you by focusing not on the facts of the case. i'm going to give you some examples. he talks about the plaza hotel meeting. did he tell you that the tobacco companies went and talked to the department of justice before they met? that they told the department of justice that there were going to be lawyers involved, there was a pr firm involved, gave them the frank statement, gave them the statement of origin and purpose of the tobacco institute research council? did he talk to you about ctr and what ctr actually did, that ctr funded research at harvard and yale and florida and florida state and miami, south florida, that they funded these books. these books (indicated), compilations of worldwide data, thousands and thousands of articles on smoking and health. you will have a copy of these in the jury room, i encourage you to open the index and look at them. it involves research into the role of cancer in every single part of the body. can you pull up it up? we gratefully acknowledge grant and aid support for the tobacco industry research committee during the final stages of this project. ctr provided the funds for all of this. the surgeon general cited it, the surgeon general was a appreciative of it. he does not want you to know that ctr grantees published 6- or 7,000 articles in peer review journals and that the surgeon general cited it 6- to 700 times. dr. cummings tries to say, well, they really did not do research on tobacco. well, the surgeon general thought they did because he cited them 6- to 700 times. but most of all what mr. mitnik wants to do is to have you ignore the facts that mr. cofer and ms. kaschel spent so much time on and as they relate specifically to my client. he wants you to ignore that he started smoking because of his parents, he wants you to ignore that he selected his brand because it was his father's brand. he wants you to ignore that he only smoked nonfiltered products. he wants you to ignore that he smoked only for a very few years, and when he was smoking my product for a very few years, he was smoking a whole bunch of other products. he wants you to ignore that the two reynolds products were never a primary brand for mr. szymanski. he wants you to ignore that he quit more than 30 years -- quit smoking my brand more than 30 years before he was diagnosed. 30 years before he was diagnosed with cancer. they do not want to talk about that. the court: one minute, sir. mr. burton: and he does not want talk to about dr. andrews. dr. andrews who told you that smoking that little that long ago simply does not make a difference. so the bottom line, ladies and gentlemen, is he smoked a lot of cigarettes over the years. he smoked a number of different brands, but he did so in the face of known risks, risks that he learned in the '50s that were reinforced in the '60s, they were reinforced in the '70s and the '80s with his friends and his family. reynolds cigarettes were his first cigarette, they were never his favorite cigarette. in fact, they were just a few cigarettes for a few years, and he really did not like them all that much or he would have smoked them more. so that long ago and that small volume by the only testimony in the case, remember, dr. andrews is his treating physician, not paid to come in here and give testimony. that testimony is unrefuted. that small amount that long ago does not make a difference. so under those circumstances, ladies and gentlemen, i do not believe the plaintiffs have carried their burden of proof to demonstrate that my client's conduct was a substantial cause of any of mr. szymanski's injuries. as mr. cofer said, i do not believe they carried their burden to establish that any defendants' conduct was a substantial contributing cause to his injuries. and as a result, i ask you to return a verdict in favor of the defense. thank you. the court: mr. mitnik -- and, counsel, you went a little bit over, so i'm going to give you two minutes. he went over, so you have 17. mr. mitnik: bear with me, i'm going to talk quick because i do not have a lot of time. by the way, the comment about me forgetting the product. in pursuing maybe counsel forgot his own product. his own product was pall malls, his product, and never talked about that was one that he smoked during the initial years when engaging and having -the teenager's brain was being indoctrinated to this deep seeded addiction, he just forgot one of his own brands. let me tell you something else. all this about we are hiding something trying to make you mad, the fact that these documents are troubling is not my doing. i did not write them. i did not write them, they did, their clients did. we put up document after document after document, they pick one or two up here and say, look here. do you know what happens when you find my client is a member of the class? all this denial stops. conspiracy, done, cannot deny it anymore once we prove class membership. concealment, you can no longer pitch that. you cannot come along and say, ah, guess who was in the conspiracy in the engle findings that are binding here, once we prove what we got to prove? l&m, the poster child of wonder, conspiracy and concealment. there is a reason class membership is important, and there is a reason those findings are important, because then we put a stop to it and we get down to business of justice and accountability and truth. another day. we worked very hard when we picked people of integrity, you worked hard, and there is a level of confidence that people are not going to say if we got another day to finish an important job, we have come this far and we are this close to the finish line of something significant, then no one is going to say, oh, we will say no to punitive damages because there might be another day. this is hard work and everybody appreciates it, and we are confident that the law and the evidence is going to carry today. punitive damages we talked about are important because they are important. that is when you reach deterrence. that is where you reach punishment. we have heard about no-nics. no one would buy the no-nic cigarettes, so why take the addiction out. interestingly, they suggest nicotine has nothing to do with anything here, people just all -- it is all choice. but when they took the nicotine out of the product, no one would buy it. then you heard dr. henningfield tell you, well, there is this little small -- they went out and said, look, we tried, we tried and it was a little small effort. it sufficiently motivated? they can all take it out and you cannot switch over, and then we really would have free choice. this is an important matter. r.j.r. said, what do we have to do with anything with them? remember the document up there, this is not one they brought up or this book here, they want to put it in the front. let me put it right here so nobody misses it. do you know what is not in the stack? the document up here about for the last 50 years youth marketing is how we make our money. that is r.j.r. that goes back to the time an 11-year-old boy picked up a cigarette. do they belong here? who is trying to divert? they say if he had quit, according to dr. cummings, if he had stopped in '66, he would not have gotten the laryngeal cancer. exactly. that is the point. that is the point. he takes responsibility for his share in this, but he was a young boy when they -- they manufactured this product and manipulated this product with additives and all the things they did to make it as addictive as possible, he did not know it. they marketed it to where everybody was ingrained in society, his parents smoked, doctors smoked, eighty percent of america smoked. most doctors smoked. everybody was smoking, his parents smoked. so, oh, it is his parents' fault, why were his parents smoking. they created an atmosphere with all these glamourous ads with this product, highly addictive, that they created to be highly addictive, on purpose to make money, that has cancer causing agents. but his parents smoked. if they had not offered up a false filter fix, if they had come out and said, look, this whole controversy, we made it up. everybody on our side, their side, on the cigarette companies' side, we know this stuff is causing cancer. there are no controversies. the health care people caught up with us, they know it. it is true, you got us. you are going to get cancer. not, we do not know, we will find out, we are going to research it, we will take it off the shelf, we will do whatever it takes. that was just a made-up story. does that matter? yes. you tell somebody who is already trying to break free, let us back up. do not make it so addictive that it gets its hook in a young teenage boy that you manufacture it that way on purpose. how about that one? and then he comes along and how about telling him up straight, yes, there is no question, we do not have a big controversy, and by the way, you are an addicted smoker who has the natural denial. it is like the comment, the saying, preaching to the choir. they knew that is what an addicted smoker wanted to hear, there is no real reason to try to stop. we will tell you if there is a reason, there is not. so you do not stop at a time that it would have saved their life, at a time -- i mean not save a life, save a larynx. even today you heard the testimony from dr. cummings, we are marketing to kids. would it have mattered to him to tell the truth, to say, by the way, it is going to kill you and this filter thing, forget it, it is every bit as dangerous. they said that we have no proof that it is every bit as dangerous, the filters do not work. the 2010 surgeon general report, like you are going to forget about it. low tar, light, filters, they are not any safer. there is proof right there. we have plenty other proof we brought you. just tell the truth, they do not work, they do not work. now you have got someone maximally motivated. they know the true picture of this stuff, it causes cancer, there is no question about it. we do not need to research it and find it out, we know it. they know the truth, the filters are not a safe option, it is a false option to get you to keep smoking longer so they make more money, knowing the consequence. what is it got to do with them? everything. these two ships collided. he collided with their conspiracy and their coverup, and they have a big part in this. he has some fault, we have said it from the beginning. why did i talk so much about that? we are the only side, he is the only side that acknowledged any responsibility. they talk choice, choice, choice. how about the boardroom choices made behind closed doors by grown men for profit? i talked about them because they have taken no responsibility. you have heard it to the very end. we need you people to bring justice, accountability, on the law and on the evidence. by the way, dr. kaplan, do not forget, he acknowledged under the dsm-iv criteria that say, as manifested by, which he says does not mean what it says in plain english, maladaptive, da, da, da, leading to clinically significance, as manifested by three or more of the following. as manifested by. it does not say, as manifested by so long as we do this overarching thing so dr. kaplan could say at every single engle case that he is testified in nobody is addicted no matter how much they smoke. no, it just says as manifested by. and then they say that 80 to ninety percent of regular smokers are addicted in the very book that he sets the standard of you got to be somehow -- get a divorce or you are not addicted, lose your job or you are not addicted. if it is that standard, they would never in varied books say you hear 80 to ninety percent of regular smokers are addicted. this stuff is highly addictive, it is powerfully addictive, and that is why it is so high a percentage of regular smokers do it, and it is why they have kept the compulsive use, the addiction in it, that is where the profits come in. put up the scare tactic real quick. we hear choice, choice, choice, choice. we hear connections to caffeine and things like that, we hear 50 million people have quit. by the way, that is about one percent of the smokers in america, which happens to be massive over 50 years. that is how you get there. one percent were able to successfully stop a year, and that ads up to like a million and a half adds up over 50 years, 60 years to the big number. there are 45 million active smokers, but they parade these numbers around. you heard them here in the court, they did not start in this court. look here, this is way back -- this is in '88 when they were trying -- when the surgeon general was about to say, you see, we have caught up and found out what they put in all their documents, all their documents -- by the way, they say we talked to congress at those hearings and we said we were not sure about the intoxicating effect. they never say, they never once said, how do you square that with what they were writing for decades about how addictive it was? look at what they wrote. it is all about young, youth, youth, all through here. after years of well research, it is not been established that cigarette smoking produce the physical dependence of nicotine. remember their documents. they are celebrating it, they are working on it, they are using it, they are studying how they can get ahead with it. here it is, it is just like caffeine. that is the play book. flip over. oh, here it is. surprise. 40 million have stopped, that is a little earlier, one percent, one-and-a-half percent a year adds up, we are now up higher. ninety percent, guess what, quit cold turkey without any professional help. that is the exact message. the court: you have five more minutes. mr. mitnik: smoking is truly a personal choice. there it is, that message was sent out youth, youth, youth. because if you tell the youth 40 million quit, how hard can it be? 95 percent do, how hard can it be? it is all just choice, choice. pick it up, look at all the cancer causing stuff. pick it up, you will be all right, you will quit. it is like caffeine. it is all there. it is all there. dr. kaplan was testifying for it back when they were saying it was not addictive, when all their internal documents were -- never showed him the internal documents, and he came in and said it is not addictive. now he is got the same message. the surgeon general is giving it straight. okay. real quick. the court: five minutes, sir. mr. mitnik: yes, ma'am. addiction leading to laryngeal cancer, the membership of the class is clear cut. he is addicted. even kaplan gives addiction if you take away that ridiculous thing he drafted on it. he -- even kaplan did, the treating doctors did. the clear, not even close call and common sense stuff, if you are addicted common sense tells you one of the reasons you are smoking is the addiction. so the only question is, legal cause on laryngeal cancer, which means they keep saying but for, but for and leave out the rest of it, which is, was it a substantial contributing cause, meaning not insubstantial. how in the world was that not all those cigarettes, all those cigarettes not a substantial contributing cause. everybody said so, dr. andrews said so, dr. andrews said that. he said it early and then he said i did not hear about these others, then he said it again, it was a substantial contributing cause, probably, period. dr. fuller said it unequivocally, dr. scher said it unequivocally, and the guy they hired just said, i do not know. so there is no evidence to contradict it, that one is absolutely clear cut. there is one other instruction i want to mention to you because it deals with the issue of the alcohol, the beer. there is an instruction on aggravation of preexisting condition, aggravation of another condition. and in it it says if you can separate the two, you should, but if you cannot, then they are responsible for the whole amount. their own witness that came in here and testified, webster said, no way you can separate it. that is the one thing he said of help. no way you can separate them was his testimony. under the law, that means any issue with beer, they are responsible for, period. read that in the last line of that instruction on aggravation. then the last thing i want to talk to you about. is -- two quick things, there is the mormon, that when he was at the mormon school. they said, remember, this is a place they thought it was a sin to smoke, but they built in the midst of that, they built a smoker's area where the students went. what is that tell you about how well their conspiracy worked? if everybody on top of it being sin, it was known to everybody it was cancer causing for sure, who is going to build that? that is how powerful it was. riding on the bus, risking losing a scholarship to get a couple puffs, that is addictive behavior, clear cut. he says, well, you would smell it. in this closed courtroom he is right. that is a nice comment, except we are talking about a bus back then with no ac with windows going, somebody in the back sneaking a couple puffs, that is somebody addicted on a long bus ride. okay. what i want to finish with is -- i got a whole bunch more i would like to talk to you about, but truly i'm down to the last few minutes. the court: no, you have got one. mr. mitnik: here's what the point that i want to make is. what does responsibility mean, they ask. i can tell you what it means. they need some explaining. it means when you get down to the comparative fault on this, the comparative fault, it should be -- these are suggestions, i do not want to invade the province of the jury's collective wisdom, but as a suggestion that mr. -- i'm on the wrong page, 25 percent on each of these defendants and 25 percent on my client, they all share in the responsibility for this outcome. that is responsibility. they do not understand it; mr. szymanski does. 25 percent, 25 percent, 25 percent, 25 percent. that is a fair share of everybody's role in the conspiracy and the outcome of this, which clearly, clearly they had a cause in. and the last point that i want to make is, they talk about it is all science. it is like if you look at a big stage and there is -- everything is black and there is just a little spotlight lighting one actor in the middle of the stage. and then suddenly the lights come up from the flood lights and there are all these other actors on the stage actively participating in the play. we are asking you to turn the spotlight off and put the flood light on, please.