mr. mitnik: thank you very much. thank you very much. y'all have given a whole bunch of attention to this claim. may it please the court. the court: yes, you may proceed. mr. mitnik: we have had a lot of disputes in this case, and we are about to have a lot more. best suggestion that i can give to you people to do justice is let the law be your guide and common sense. we will get to that. we worked very hard to pick people that are open-minded and unbiased that could come into this courtroom and do a very important job in a very important case. and we are getting very close to the time for passing that torch from us. okay. let me get down to what the evidence in this case is and talk to you about it, and i want to do it through the lens of the law. the judge, i'm so happy she gave you the law before we got up to talk. because now i can refer to it, because as you know, the lawyers do not give you the evidence, and what we say is not law, and it is not evidence. the evidence came from here and through documents, through witnesses. the law came from her honor. but now that it is there and out, we can talk about it out of our mouths. so i'm going to use that as the lens through which to talk to you about all of this. i want to start with this is a case about mr. szymanski. it is. he is one of the people, one of many of that generation that lived through this 50-year coverup of conspiracy that started in a different time and place, and lived through it, got deeply addicted as a very young boy and went right through the heart of this conspiracy and was influenced at every step of the way. not all their fault, not all their fault, certainly, that is why the judge read you that instruction. does he have some accountability in this? yes, he does. and he accepts it. but that does not mean that they have none, because the things that they did had an impact, had an impact on him. and when we get to the instructions and you hear about entitlement to punitive damages and we talk about the reprehensibility of their conduct, we will also be talking about, in that context, harm to others. but we will be talking first and foremost about the harm to him. and because he lived through it and because when i'm finished talking to you about the law on the evidence, i believe it will be clear that he fits the criteria. he also presents the opportunity for something important, which is called deterrence and punishment under the punitive damages part once we have proven the proper elements under the law with the evidence. so this is an important matter. and let me start at the first of this. let me start at the first of this. because he does take responsibility, and i would suggest to you that when we talk about responsibility, the starting point, three fundamental just basic rules about responsibility are: before you are going to blame someone else -- because sometimes things are legitimately not fair to lump all of the weight of the fault on one person's shoulders; sometimes it is. and other times, like this case, it is not fair to put all the blame on one person's shoulders; there is plenty of blame to go around. and in those situations, the fundamental basic rules are before you are going to point the finger of blame, you put a mirror up to yourself first. mr. szymanski has done that. they have placed plenty of blame on mr. szymanski. there is been no mirror, and we are going to talk about it. the second rule is: if you are going to talk the talk about responsibility, then walk the walk. mr. szymanski has done just that. we are here to prove they should, too. and lastly, if you are going to talk about someone else's responsibility, do not ever be a stumbling block to them trying to deal with it. and that is what this whole conspiracy was about, to do everything they could to convince mr. szymanski and the others of that generation that were smoking that there is no real reason to try to stop. there is no real reason to try to stop. to take a real clear and present danger that is a highly motivating force and make it sound wishy-washy and water it down and way off, for one reason: keep smoking, we keep making money, knowing the consequences were cancer and disease. you could not put the genie back in the bottle. this was not about concealing that this might be dangerous. everybody had heard it. the surgeon general was hollering it, it was in the newspapers, it was on tv. there are only three stations. if you lived in this society, you heard it could be dangerous. they were not concealing it could be dangerous; that is impossible. they were concealing that they knew it was causing cancer and tried to create a controversy to muddy the waters. why? because they had had years of success. you heard from some of the evidence the defense put on. up until the scare where they all ran up to the plaza hotel -- i say all of them, all of them but l&m, who did join in the conspiracy, but they did not go to the meeting at the plaza. before they ran up there, everybody had heard cigarettes could be bad for you. it was all over; that is their evidence. and their sales were booming, but then the heat got turned up. it went from hearing it could be bad for you to the big c being confirmed in a laboratory. now the threat level went to red alert. now people were really trying to break free from addiction. their sales were going. people were saying, hum, maybe i'm not going to pick this stuff, maybe i will experiment into adulthood some other way. and it was a drop in sales and it scared them and they all got together and they did not say, let us fix the health problem, let us get scientists in here. they said how can we get our sales back to where they were? we cannot put the genie back in the bottle. what are we going to do? that is that forwarding memorandum from hill & knowlton that we have been over -- and i'm going to show you a little more of it to refresh everybody when we get to the documents i'm going to try to go through quickly -- was all about creating a controversy because that was the genius of the plan. we cannot tell them it is not there, but if we can take it back to the way it was just a few years ago when everybody heard it could be bad but nobody knew, and erase the concreteness that was coming out of laboratories and make it controversial again, it would be business as usual. that was the hope, that was the plan, that was the conspiracy. and it worked. sales took right back off. and they kept that up for 50 years. you saw the documents that say it is a holding strategy. you could not carry that off forever, but, boy, were they good at it. you see the polls, you saw the polls, were there more polls that are going back into evidence -- i'm going to show you some documents -- but what those polls show is this should have been like half the people believe there are flying saucers, half do not, i do not know the statistics, but let us just say that. if one landed out there and cnn was out there and everybody, fox news, and it was all over, 95 -- there would still be somebody who would not believe it, but 95 percent of the people would believe it within a month. that was the opportunity when all this hit, and they said, no, we are going to take the cameras away, we are going to take the proof away, we are going to make a controversy again, and instead of the polls going up, within let us say a year, to 90, 95 percent, you are going to see it is like 50 years it is out, it is out decades before it hits where it should have been immediately. it worked. and mr. szymanski lived through it and is a success story example to what they intended to do. he followed precisely that path to a t, and they say, what have we got to do with any of this? now that you have seen the documents, really, what have we got to do with any of this? convince you that the threat -- do not worry about it. he had an opportunity, he knew somebody from the family who got cancer, not from cigarettes, but from a pipe hanging on his lip, and it scared him. what do they do? the scare is called motivation. we heard motivation from dr. kaplan. but what do they do with him? everything they could possibly do to undermine it so it does not keep the energy necessary to break free from this nasty addiction. it does not get everybody like that. everybody does not have horrible addictions to it. but people that started back in that era, at that age, when they hardwiring of their brain was happening, have a terrible time with it. you heard dr. henningfield, one of the most qualified guys that you are ever going to see anywhere, talk about this subject. i mean, men that have spent their lives, and if they live through it, people from the government, from every walk about nicotine addiction turned to the men we brought you, say help us, finance it, study it, write on it, publish on it. these men know this subject. and dr. henningfield said, most people that smoke cigarettes and are heroin addicts or and are cocaine addicts will say trying to quit cigarettes was harder. no, they did not go through detox. that is part of the trick we are going to talk about. they were doing it public, to diminish and undermine and sugarcoat addiction so kids would keep starting. you are going to see the documents where they did just that. they came out and said, hah, it is not intoxicating, how can it be addictive. all that meant it does not have this horrible withdrawal so how can it be addictive. it is just like coffee. just like coffee. you are going to hear that is what they were telling the public. zeroing in on youth in the same document. that was the story, and it was an easy sell, because heroin, i mean, that is just a -- heroin, it ain't nothing like this. heroin people end up in hospitals puking and things. heroin, you are messed up, intoxicated. how can it be like these? how could it be? so it was an easy sell until you hear the truth from their own internal documents how they celebrated how people cannot quit. now, of course, it does not mean you literally cannot quit, but celebrated how -using terms like you cannot quit because compulsive use meant dollars. if you used it casually, you went on a weekend in the evening and had a cigarette, how many of these do you get sold? but if you are smoking one after another after another all day, every day, for decades, now start adding up the money. now start adding it up. but you do not get intoxicated. that just means you do not hit rock bottom sooner so you can sell it for decades. it does not mean it is not addictive, because a heroin addict comes out of detox and then he is at meetings and struggling like heck not to relapse and go back. the same thing with somebody with cocaine. they go through -- and by the way, you did not hear any kind of big withdrawal from cocaine, the same kind of symptoms. intoxicating brings it to a head, it is a natural governor. these things have no governor. but they use that to convince the kids, pick it up. whatever they are saying about they might hurt you, do not worry about it, because you know what, you are never going to smoke long enough to get hurt, you are not going to be that old man pulling an oxygen tank around, not you, because it is all just a matter of choice. 50 million people have quit, how hard can it be? it is all just a matter of choice. and you know the other ones that are still smoking, the 45 million smoking, hey, those people all just like it. they all just like it, or they are really not trying hard. so do not worry, do not worry. that is been the message, and it is worked. you saw the surgeon general today how many teenagers are out there smoking, picking it up, getting addicted, because they do not know. because now they say, okay, it can be -- it can be addictive, it can be. but powerfully addictive, highly addictive like the surgeon general and the public health try to get the message out, no way. it is like candy, cappuccino coffee. there is no intoxication. how can you compare the serious drugs? 440,000 americans have died a year. 9 million people are sick from it and died. this huge cottage industry has sprung up of cessation devices because none of them worked. but just make up your mind and leave it behind. how are all those cessation clinics -- how are all those products and new ones all the time because just make up your mind. hey, 95 percent of those 50 million quit cold turkey, kids. i know now there is no more way we can say that it is high in controversy, that it is dangerous, it can kill you. that holding strategy ran its course. now, in modern times you cannot make a controversy anymore, of course it causes lung cancer and disease. people are still picking them up. it is one of those head scratchers, until you see the evidence that few people in the world have seen, and y'all have seen it firsthand. formerly secret documents, we brought you some of them because we cannot bring you all of them. dr. henningfield said it is a snowflake on the mountain of the documents of what they were up to and about the reality, the harsh reality of the addiction. and this is important work. addiction, let me talk to you a minute about mr. szymanski. the starting point in the law here is -- i want to come back -- one of the first things her honor read to you is you may use reason and common sense to reach your conclusion, you may draw reasonable inferences from the evidence. let me just go on and talk to you about that because i'm afraid when i start running out of time, i'll never get back to it, because it is important. you do use your common sense; you do not leave it at the door. you also may draw reasonable inferences from the evidence, meaning there are two kinds of evidence, direct evidence and circumstantial evidence. direct evidence is when, for example, mr. szymanski says, no, i cannot point to the specific ad i saw, but we were inundated with the ads. and they say, what do we got to do with it as parents, let them smoke, his mom gave him a cigarette. well, you saw the evidence, the majority of doctors at that point in time were smoking. it was so -- this is the hardest thing i've asked you to do. often, every five minutes or ten minutes, someone saying you got to remember the time and place. it was different. it is so hard. if i were to pull out a cigarette in this courtroom right now -- i'm not going to, i do not have a lighter. but if i had a lighter and stood here, did not say a word, y'all would be going, the judge is going to kill him. what is he doing? back when he started smoking, we -- i do not know if her honor would, but the judge probably would have been smoking. you would have had ashtrays for you and i. we would all have been here. now, let me tell you what else the evidence is, it was a different time and place. it is not fair to judge him through today's lens. it is just not fair. people were smoking on planes, hospitals, doctors were smoking. the vast majority of men in america were smoking, women caught up not long thereafter, but the men were smoking like crazy. it was not -- people heard it might be bad, it was having no effect. huge sales. why? everybody says the same thing, glamourous, sexy, made you feel grown up, cool. now, where on earth did that come from? what do ads have to do with that? america just woke up one day and said, i cannot get enough of this sucking in and blowing out and the joy of it never wears out on me, 50 years later i'm still, there is just something so much fun about sucking in and blowing out, i never get enough of it. and america all just woke up and said, this is the coolest thing around, sucking smoke in my mouth. wow. they will tell you, what did we have to do with this case? the ads were everywhere. it was a different time and place, you could not pick up a magazine, you could not turn on a tv station, you could not go by a billboard, they were everywhere, and everybody bought into it. it was a massive effect that was not on mr. szymanski, it was on the environment, it was the society he was raised in. we go, how could his parents let him smoke in the house? everybody was smoking. so what role did that have? let me come back to the idea and the concept. there is direct evidence, he told you, we were inundated with the ads. that is direct evidence. sometimes circumstantial evidence is more powerful than direct evidence. i'll give you an example. when i was younger working at the dining room table, and i had a daughter, my daughter jennifer, who was 13 years old or 12 years old, she was not supposed to drink coca cola before she went to bed because it would get her all fired up before she went to bed. hearing rattling in the refrigerator, i'm out working, it is in the next room. i said, you are not getting into the coke, are you? no, daddy. and about 30 seconds later, come around and look, there is a big old two-liter thing of coke spewing all over. she is got a glass, ice, it is rolling off the side, foaming, it is on her nightie. and i said something stupid, i said you did get into it. huh-uh. that was the direct evidence, huh-uh. the circumstantial evidence was the coca-cola all over her and these defendants got coca-cola all over them. so let us talk about the inferences and circumstantial evidence. did mr. szymanski see a specific ad and say, i'm going to pick up that chesterfield and start smoking it like a fiend? no, but we saw the ads with the cartoons. i'm not going to replay it, but i'm sure everybody remembers the cartoon with the little chesterfield king and the guy with the ax and -that is one ad. we could have spent a month in trial showing you ads and just getting to the tip of the iceberg, ads after ads after ads. does that have an influence? it was a right of passage to adulthood, rights of passage to adulthood are supposed to be passive, not a lifelong addiction that kills. why was it a right of passage, how did it get so deeply ingrained into society? how did it get so deeply ingrained into society? what do they have to do with any of this? well, you have seen what they were up to, they belong in this courtroom. we talked about filters. what else did they do? they did not just trigger mr. szymanski. in part, smoking. does not mean he is totally free from any responsibility for picking up those cigarettes as a young boy in that environment. it is kind of hard to blame too much for that, but there is some. but for them to say, what is it got to do with us? why are we here? now, let us talk about what happens next. more information -- i'm going to run you quickly through a little time line in a minute. more information starts coming out, more information starts coming out. you have surgeon general reports coming out. you have, in his life, something that scared him, the man that he thought got -- may have gotten his cancer from the pipe, scared the heck -- i'll say heck, but y'all heard the testimony. and what happens, he switches to filters. now, not only did they drive the threat level down, they gave false alternatives. and you see from the internal documents they knew the filters do not filter. but guess what? what is a filter look like? what is a filter do? that white thing purifies. why would you put a filter if it does not purify. and you saw we have the ads with l&m with the miracle tip. this defendant clearly -- you have one of those ads while i'm talking you can pull up -- that talk about -- i cannot remember the phrase, but clearly indicating get our product, it is safe. miracle tip, best filter in america, quality for effectiveness. there is another one, though, can you flip around through those for a minute? this is it. there it is. just what the doctor ordered. just what the doctor ordered. so what is he do? exactly what that is intended to do, precisely followed it. that is why i say they got coca-cola all over them. he switches to filters. what do we have to do with this? everything. he was a success story. he switched to filters because he believed they were safer because they were telling them that they were safer. and you saw the internal records. when they get the internal records they knew that it -- called it the illusion of filtration. you see it in the internal records, they knew they did not work. you saw the public from the ftc. i confuse the surgeon general with the ftc. ftc said, these things do not work, but everybody thinks they do. but he had a choice to quit, if he had just been motivated. what does that do to motivation when you say, deeply addicted, you started when you were a young teenage boy, in your mid-teens you were deeply addicted, neuropathways changed permanently. we heard about dopamine receptors. nobody contradicted what dr. henningfield told you about permanent neuropathway changes, which are different than just the dopamine. engrained, throwing cigarettes out the window and driving back to get them, locking them in his glove box, leaving them at home, really struggling. who would understand under the circumstances of being so deeply addicted so young because of what they did, and then while he struggles they say, no more struggles, filter, and he switches. but what do they have to do with it? then more information comes out, surgeon general report comes out, things start getting a little hotter because it is a holding strategy and they cannot hold it forever; that is their own internal documents. more information is coming, more motivation is coming his way because more threat is coming his way. so now what? just let his motivation work or do we find something else to toss in the way as a stumbling block. they come up with lights, low tar, low nicotine, low, safe. what does he do? exactly what they intended. why? so he would keep buying their product and they would keep making money like all the other addicted smokers in america. they made a fortune, him and others, switched to filters. and you heard dr. henningfield tell you about the switching -- what they were doing to trick the machines. they came up with new -- let me set one thing straight. this talking about the design differences, well, that was later, not when he was smoking. one thing i want to make clear, dr. henningfield made very clear, whoa, i'm talking about the things that were done like these little holes and all to trick the machines, they came later. the design things that they engineered into that to make that product so inhalable with all the additives and the things that they did, those design things that they did to make it -- remember the slide how it used to be harder to inhale -- to make it more inhalable and putting in all kinds of things like sugar and cinnamon and whatever and ammonia, whatever, to get it down deep in the lungs, even engineering to the point molecules are engineered to fit easier and deeper to get it faster to the brain because faster to the brain means, pow, more addiction. they engineered this product, so highly engineered, it looks like, well, they just rolled this thing up -- this has nothing to do with natural tobacco. it is so highly engineered, and it was way back when he was smoking from the inhalability, addictibility. they designed it for addiction. their documents say, we are in the business of selling an addictive product. a dosage for nicotine; that is what they call it in their own documents. the perfect dosage for nicotine delivery and addictive product. then along come the lights, and they start putting the little holes in them so that the machine comes here, and it measures low tar and nicotine because it is being diluted by the air sucking in. but the hands or the lip cover the holes, and you get the full dose. that was just one of the things they did, and we went through a list of different things to get it up, to get it up. fda called and shut it down. the fda shut it down. you will not see cigarettes unless they are old that say lights anymore, because they had enough with what was happening and called it shameful. remember the document? shameful and shut it down. that is good for the next generation that is shut out. did not do him much good, he is smoking them thinking that he is much better off. let me talk to you about addiction. and one last thing because we are at that point i want to cover. we heard whole -- half this case from the defense has been spent on did he stop in '86 or did he stop in '90 -- what has it got to do with this case? not one addiction person, not one said whether he stopped in '86 or '92, did not make any difference to whether he was addicted. dr. kaplan did not say it. through all the things he said, he did not say it. dr. henningfield said -i'm sorry, dr. cummings said it would not have mattered. you heard from dr. scher, he was addicted, none of that mattered. they went through all that with him. you heard from dr. fuller, the treating doctor we read you, that he was definitely addicted. none of that -- they went through all the same stuff about when. none of it matters. there is not a shred of evidence; that means he was not addicted. from the perspective of causation, there was nobody that said the difference in those timings would have taken it from being a substantial contributing cause to not being a substantial contributing cause to his laryngeal cancer, which is the cancer that is the one that matters for class membership. the others go, so we are clear, the neck and the tongue go to his injuries separate and apart from is he a member of the class. the only cancer that matters for member of the class is the laryngeal cancer. nobody said that smoking was not the reason he got the laryngeal cancer, nobody, not even the guy they brought in here that testified live. he is just the "i do not know" guy. nobody says that. but his treating doctor who came down from duke live, dr. scher said, absolutely. dr. fuller said the smoking was a substantial contributing cause. even dr. andrews, who he happened to go to a doctor for treatment, and it turns out that guy works as an expert for cigarette companies; just one of those things, turned out that way. the court: you have used 30 minutes. mr. mitnik: thank you, ma'am. even he, at the end after everything, said that it was probably a contributing cause. nobody does it. so this change in timing sounds like a big deal; it is just not. now, let me talk to you about addiction. the first question that you have to answer for class membership -- and class membership is so important to the ultimate place we are heading in this, which is ultimately not just the compensation to mr. szymanski, but also the entitlement to punitive damages in an effort to punish and deter, to make a difference. question on a membership to the class is that we must prove that he was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine manufactured by the defendants and that his addiction was a legal cause of his laryngeal cancer. let us talk about that. was he addicted and was it a legal cause of his laryngeal cancer? that is the only one that matters to this, was it a legal cause. let us talk about the evidence on that. we have -- was he addicted? well, number one -- before we even put a witness on the stand we got common sense, two, three packs of cigarettes a day, starting at his young age, smoking down to the fingers yellow, down to the stub trying -- cutting his cigarettes in half, putting rubber bands around it. even dr. kaplan said he did not enjoy his smoking. why is he smoking? what does addiction do other than act as -- if you are addicted to a product, what does it do other than act as a reason, a cause, not the sole cause. i'm sure there are other reasons why somebody addicted to any drug does it. but if they are indeed addicted, what does the word addiction mean other than it is one of the reasons you are using the drug you are addicted to. that is what addiction means. so if he is addicted, the reason he is smoking, one of them, one of the substantial contributing causes. you heard the judge read over and over substantial contributing cause, meaning it cannot be insubstantial or insignificant; it has to be substantial or significant or meaningful. but once it reaches a cause, a cause, it does not matter that there are other causes. if it is a cause. once you are addicted, of course one of the reasons that you are smoking is the addiction. of course. so that just goes hand in hand. that does not take much proof, but -- so let us start with the addiction. because it only leaves two questions. it really only leaves two questions. it does not matter -- let me just get this out of the way. you keep hearing he could quit, he was capable of quitting. everybody addicted to every drug in the history of man, other than somebody who has some mental deficiency maybe, is capable of quitting. that is not the question. you will not hear nor did you hear, i should say, anything about was he capable of quitting. of course that is not the standard. we could not be here if it was because he ended up. as more information came and more information came, and then he had scare with the lump in the throat that turned out to be some nervous kind of stress-related thing. even dr. kaplan acknowledged that, by the way, not gerd, by the way, this thing we have been chasing around about tongues and gerd is an explanation rather than smoking -- you saw that wall of cigarettes we put up, coming over the larynx, knowing it causes larynx cancer. anyhow, we had the medical cause and was he addicted. it was the addiction causing him to smoke, which -- when you hear, was the addiction the legal cause of his laryngeal cancer, that is how addiction causes it. addiction causes you to smoke, and consequently you get laryngeal cancer. it is the smoking causes it -- addiction does not cause it in and of itself, anything; it is the addiction that drives compulsive smoking one after another that leads to the medical condition of the laryngeal cancer. so really, there are only two things to talk about here, for real. was he addicted and was it a legal cause? was it one of the causes of how he got his laryngeal cancer, one of the substantially contributing causes? let me start with addiction. what is the proof on addiction? common sense, how much he smoked and what his efforts to stop were, and acknowledgment from kaplan of all people that he did not enjoy it. there is no rationale explanation for smoking that long and switching products if addiction is not one of the -- if you are not addicted. it does not even make sense, but there is more than that. one of the most qualified people anywhere to talk about addiction is dr. cummings. he is treated 100,000 people -- i'm sorry, 10,000 people in his cessation clinic. he runs the biggest cessation clinic for cigarette smoke in new york. he is spent his life studying it. the people that come to him and ask him to study it and talk to him and advise them are the most -- you know -- i'm not going to go back through it, you heard the testimony. and he told you there is no question that he is addicted. now, let us put that on a scale, and, remember, we have to prove this by the more persuasive, more convincing force and effect of the evidence. we talked about that when we were doing jury selection, about some people want this beyond a reasonable doubt, and we can feel our evidence is beyond a reasonable doubt, but we are entitled to have jurors that hold it to the burden of more persuasive, more convincing. so let us talk about the evidence on scales. is it more convincing, is it more persuasive, is it more likely right than wrong? let us talk about it. we put on one side dr. cummings, that is a pretty heavy drop, pretty heavy drop with his credentials. then we put dr. scher on, who treats people all the time who have nicotine addictions. he is not a nicotine addiction treater, but he has patients because of the nature of his job all the time and he diagnoses it all the time, and he has no question he was addicted, no question. and he is not some guy hired by one side or the other in the lawsuit; he was a treater. now, he was paid for his time coming down here; i do not mean to mislead you. but he got involved not at the request of somebody in a lawsuit; he just happened to be somebody who was treating him up from duke. no question. so now, boom, there is more weight on here. then there is dr. fuller, not hired by anybody; just a treater that is seen him and said, there is no doubt in his mind he was addicted to cigarettes. two treaters and dr. cummings with unbelievable credentials to have opinions on. so they got -- what is their side of the evidence? we have the burden, but they presented evidence to try to overcome this weight, so who was it? kaplan. the guy who was testifying for him, in fact, it was not addicted long after the who had abandoned that, long after, and after the surgeon general abandoned it, long after his own dsm-iv book that comes from the american psychiatric association abandoned it. he was testifying in court, i'm using a different old archaic opinion that says -- and then had a time period when you could no longer say it was not addicted, they reached a point they just could not -- it was now on their website, it was past that point. everybody is addicted, but it did not matter because it is like coffee. well, the cause, okay, they are addicted. then the label addiction matters. engle comes out; it matters. now if he says you meet criteria for addiction -- we are very close if you have the medical causation of being in the class membership. and here come the findings of conspiracy, of concealment, of a defective product, of negligence. now suddenly, just to say, all right, you are addicted, but it does not matter, so what, now it matters again. it mattered here; it matters again. and now not a single out of 10 or 11 people he is seen now that it matters in engle case, none of them meet the criteria. $750,000 he is been paid. he started working with the cigarette companies when he was relatively fresh out of med school and spent his whole career with them and it is a big chunk of his income. i think it was twenty percent. that is what you put on the other side of the scale, fuller, scher, cummings, kaplan. really? that would tilt it back so it was not more persuasive, more convincing he was addicted. then you add the common sense; of course he is addicted. they will not say it. so then let us go -- and addicted means one of the reasons you are smoking is -- so that takes us to the smoking, did the smoking, therefore, did the addiction contribute, was it a, not the, a legal cause of his laryngeal cancer? for these purposes, we are not talking about the tongue and the throat; just the laryngeal. was it a legal cause? what is the evidence there? his treating doctor -- from duke, dr. scher, absolutely, yes, laryngeal was. dr. fuller, sure, it was a substantial contributing cause. they brought someone in who was the "i do not know" guy. he did not say it was not; he just said, i cannot tell, we have other factors. the "i do not tell" guy they hired and paid and works for them, hired by them, does not work for them, hired by them, not just in this case. and then dr. andrews who also gets hired by them who in the end said it was probably was a contributing cause. so where is the evidence that laryngeal -- all those cigarettes poured down those throats all those years, common sense. so now we stack all the evidence again, this one, where is the evidence at all that says it was not a substantial contributing cause? they can talk about whether alcohol was a causative factor. it does not matter if there was another cause of it, it does not matter. and they know -- they know drinking and smoking goes hand in hand. here they are arguing that means he did not -- nobody said that smoking was not a substantial contributing cause, and it does not matter that there could be some additional factor from the alcohol, so long as -- and you get no instruction that said, by the way, if the drinking had something to do with it, we lose, mr. szymanski loses. there is no instruction. the instruction is was it a contributing cause, was it a legal cause, meaning a substantial contributing cause. there is no evidence that it was not. the best they can do is, i do not know, compared to that stack of evidence that was. so that issue of us being a member of the class is really the easiest part of your job; that is just clear cut. so now you are a member of the class. where do we go from there? let me run through these quickly and then i want to show you a little of this. i do not want to just talk and not show it all, but i want to finish a little bit on this. the findings they come, boom, into the courtroom from that the judge -- i'm not going to go back through the history. you heard how they come here and they are binding on us once we prove class membership, then the rest of your decisions are based on them once we have proven those things. we still have to prove that these things were a substantial contributing cause to his injury. we still have to prove that, but the findings come and we take that step next. and those findings, they are the longer ones, but the judge read you the shorter ones also, and they are just simpler, so i'm going to use those. that these defendants, all three of them, were negligent, and she instructed you they did not use reasonable care, two, manufactured and distributed a product that was defective and unreasonably dangerous. defective and unreasonably dangerous, that is it, once we are a member, that is no longer up for debate. that they, three, concealed material health information about cigarettes. that includes, as you know, from the longer version, the health dangers, as well as addiction. they concealed, that is done, they did once we are a member. four, that these three defendants conspired with one another and other corporations and entities to conceal such information, all of which caused injury to john szymanski, if we prove that. it caused injury, it is not part of the finding, we have to prove that. that they conspired, they got together and agreed just like we laid out for you, they got together and agreed and conspired to conceal the very things we are here talking about. that is a done; cannot say no once we are a member. so let us talk about how that pauses. the instruction is the same on all of them, that it has to be a legal cause. it can operate in combination with some other act or some other cause. if such other cause occurs -- there is a lead-in that says it is continuous act but for -- there is some other language. but because we have a situation where you can have more than one cause, we then go to it need not be -- it can act in combination with some other cause if such other cause occurs at the same time as the addiction and the addiction contributes substantially from producing the harm. other findings that nicotine in cigarettes is addictive, not can be, is addictive, another finding that comes once we prove class membership. and smoking cigarettes causes laryngeal cancer, oral cavity tongue cancer, and squamous cell cancer, those findings come once we are class member. i want to take you to just to one other legal cause one before i leave these because i believe it is significant because when we get to concealment -- when we get to concealment and we get to the very important conspiracy where we have to show legal cause that, once we are a class member, yes, they concealed and, yes, they conspired to conceal, we have to show there was a legal cause, was a contributing cause to his harm. i need to talk to you about those just a little bit. i'm going to try to do this quickly. the issue for you to decide on john szymanski's claim for concealment is whether the concealment or omission of material information concerning health risks and the addictive nature, then it goes on, was a legal cause. i'm going to come back to that; just hold for a moment that what they omitted or concealed was material information. i want to seize on the word "material" because there is a definition coming up what that means that is critical to your determination. then it goes on and says that, in order to be regarded as a legal cause of damages -- now we are talking about the conspiracy part -- you have -- you must show the plaintiff that he relied on the statements or, or, and this or is important, because in concealment, you cannot very well rely on something you did not know about. all these documents we were showing you, you saw confidential, secret, he never saw them. he saw them in the courtroom and told you what his reaction was to know of those things when he first saw and heard of them. so of course he cannot rely on something he did not see, so there is an or because we are in a concealment case where someone was hiding things. and it says, or liggett group -- and it lists all of them, philip morris, reynolds, or liggett -- or they omitted material information concerning the health effects of cigarettes or their addictive nature or both made at any time during or after december 1953. so it is or because it was the relied language, but then we get to what fits the facts of this case, which is or they omitted material information concerning health effects of the cigarette, or their addictive nature. now, we know they concealed those things; you saw all the documents. so when we get to did it cause harm to him, we are down to -- in showing legal cause, we have to show that it was material information that was concealed from him. that deals with the concealment as well as the conspiracy. and then that -- in determining, you do materiality and then it is the concealment contributes substantially producing the harm or loss, that same language we talked about. the word "material" is defined by a material fact is that of such importance that a reasonable person would consider the same significant in their decision-making process. would a reasonable person consider the same significant in their decision-making process? that is it. that is all it takes, and it is material. would this man have considered it -- that is not right, it is not this man. would a reasonable person -- it is not a subjective just him, would a reasonable person have considered the things concealed significant in their decision-making process? for goodness sake, do we not meet that one? all these things i'm about to show you and you have seen already, someone deciding want to know -- not only know what they knew about the health threats, what they knew about the addiction and how they were celebrating it, but what they were up to. a reasonable person -- you have got this -- y'all got together and said all this stuff to convince me to keep smoking? you conspired and hid things and went through this whole 50-year conspiracy and spent all that money? if i had known that, if i had seen those documents, would that have been material, would a reasonable person have wanted to know that, considered it significant in making their decisions? of course. you are going to have all the 95 exhibits that we put into evidence. i want to highlight a few of them -- where am i? mr. stevens: almost an hour. mr. mitnik: i need to speed up. take you through a few of these. forwarding memorandum, that is the hill & knowlton -- i'm not going to pull that out because it takes too long to do it. but that is the one they said we are going to drive our cars and have fun and go back eating and driving and -- leave it to the scientists to worry about. and it laid out they are going to create a controversy. then we have got the next document where moreover -- i'm sorry, also in the forwarding memorandum, the one that says by -- one of the research directors for the company said, words to the effect, thank goodness -- it is fortunate for us that cigarettes are a habit they cannot break. way back when this started. then, moreover, nicotine is addictive. we are then in the business of selling nicotine, an addictive drug effective in the release of stress. and then here they are talking about, let us come up with a triple, quadruple, quintuple filter capable of removing whatever constituent smoke currently suspect while delivering full flavor, and incidentally, a nice jolt of nicotine. next. research planning memorandum on the nature of tobacco and the crucial role of nicotine therein. that document includes: thus tobacco -- i'm sorry, tobacco product is in its essence a vehicle for delivery of nicotine. one of the documents that i do not have time to talk with you about -- happily, the tobacco industry and nicotine is both habituating, unique in it -- hence no other material or combination provides equivalent, quote, satisfaction. next. it is the sine qua non, meaning the essence. nicotine is the essence of smoking. and if they uniquely stand by the allegations of the critics towards reduction in the limitation of the nicotine, then we shall eventually liquidate our business. if nicotine is not a powerful addition, as the surgeon general says, highly addictive like the surgeon general says, if it is really not, then why is -- they can take nicotine out. they can grow leaves without nicotine. they have been able to take nicotine to low enough levels as nonaddictive, but it is there. and the danger of the nicotine is this, there are carcinogens in the smoke that can kill. what makes them bad is a lot of exposure. they would love to get the bad stuff out but cannot, because if you get the bad stuff out then there is that stuff. they cannot. but they can take the nicotine and the addiction out, they can take the addiction out, then you would not have compulsive use and the sales would dwindle. it is the combination of the all-day every-day day-after-day for decades that causes all these horrible diseases; that is what comes with addiction. that is why it is so dangerous. and they know it and they will not take the addiction out because the addiction drives the sales. next. as part of the investigation of new smokers -- now we are talking about young adults, young adults. the purpose of the research to gain insight and the perceptions, and here they are studying what the kids say. once become regular smokers, young people felt they were not addicted. many talked about first trying cigarettes before the age of ten. in fact, through our criterion for participation of one half a pack per day, virtually all the respondents claim to smoke a full pack or more per day. in light of this, it was surprising -- they are denying that it is a habit, and then it goes on -- many respondents indicated they were not addicted to smoking, that they could stop anytime. there it is. in spite of this habit denial on the part of the respondent, it became apparent that the traditional patterns of smoking were ingrained in them at this point. that is addiction. this is them behind the scenes talking about youth. a third type -- they are talking about youth still. quite certain they would stop someday when he is old enough to really have to worry about it. ironically, one of the respondents who fell in this category and spoke of a parent who was dying of emphysema and cannot stop smoking, but they still think they can beat the addiction. in discussion how smokers can limit the risk of serious disease without actually giving up smoking, they clearly recognize the role of high filtration cigarettes. this is 1974. this is a study they are talking about, a study that they did. when all the smokers in an entire town in iowa were pressured to quit smoking as part of an experiment, few really did. even under seemingly tremendous peer pressure, only 3.9 of the females and 14.2 of the males could remain quitters for seven months. that is how they talk about it. now, this, of course, is never -- dr. kaplan has never seen this. this is long before dr. kaplan said this is not addictive, when he was testifying back here, and now trivializing it. next. and at the end -- my voice is going, i'm letting you read -- but at the end, only an exceptional two and a half smokers occasionally intermittently -- nearly all regular smokers are nicotine dependent. does that sound like dr. kaplan? no, but it sounds like dr. cummings. and who is agreeing with dr. cummings? this is not dr. cummings' document; it is their formerly secret documents, saying just what dr. cummings said and got cross-examined on. if it were not for nicotine in tobacco smoke, people would be little more inclined to smoke cigarettes than they are to blow bubbles or light sparklers. next. physical dependence involves changes which are physiological. first, this is shown by a smoker's tolerance to the effects of nicotine. this is due to changes in the synapse. that is how they talk about it in private. the court: you have used an hour, sir. mr. mitnik: thank you, ma'am. this one is important. he is always aware that he is not the addictive smoker, the addictive smoker -now, when is this? '74. you remember the clip that we showed of the heads of tobacco in front of a big hearing and every one of them said, i, too, do not believe that nicotine is addictive. this is '74; that was in '94, 20 years later. now, of course, these documents were not out. the addictive smoker suffers when he is without a cigarette. he thinks only a cigarette will reduce his suffering. suffering. and there is no substitute. but it is just like candy, coffee and cappuccino. very few customers are aware of the effects of nicotine, its addictive nature, and that nicotine is a poison, formerly secret document. however, can we -cannot ever be comfortable selling a product which most of our customers would stop using if they could. that is to say, if the exit gate from our market should suddenly open, we could be out of business almost overnight. that is the surgeon general report that we talked about, like heroin and nicotine. keep going. keep going. we are now getting into what they knew about the dangers of the compulsive smoking that comes, the lung cancer. they knew it. next. this is l&m, l&m. it says what do we do? 1961, l&m. there are biologically active materials present, these are cancer causing, cancer promoting, poisonous, stimulating, pleasurable, and flavorful. but we do not know, we are going to wait until the scientists figure it out. we have got the best and brightest and if they ever find it, we will remove it. next. the writer has been requested to make new comparisons of the hazards arising from smoking with that arising from a fatal automobile accident. these estimates are for our own information, not necessarily for presentation to the surgeon general committee. next. here we go, internal document. let us talk a little about this free choice. some emphasis is now being placed on habit forming capacities. to some extent the argument revolves around free choices being negated on the grounds of addiction. the threat is that this argument will increase significantly to further restrictions on our product and greater danger in litigation. they do not want anyone to know about addiction because then you cannot say it is all in your choice, all your choice. because they have exploited out there to the market, and i'll show you in the document, they have exploited an american ideal called choice. in america we love choice, we pump our chest, we ought to. but this is restrained choice. this is something where you have an addiction that has been engineered into that product through inhalability that corrupts the natural process of choice. it diminishes it. it does not leave you a zombie with no choices, but it has significant influence on, quote, free choice. it is constrained choice. and they do not want it out. if it is out, then you cannot say, it is all their choice. and out in the marketplace, to kids, you are going to see, out to the marketplace, when addiction comes up, they call it a scare tactic. it is your choice, buzz word, because choice is, hey, i'm a young kid, i'm thinking about it. it is all just a matter of choice. i'm an american, it is a choice to start and a choice to stop whenever i want. next. while the propaganda blast was tremendous and the penetration of the public opinion was widespread. it was not as bad as we thought, we must plan, psychological crutch. next. strategies, here we are in '67. re-establish the cigarette company. we do not want the controversy slipping. we are going to act as the conscience and concern of the industry. we are going to find true facts. and you have seen that they have the true facts, l&m document from '61, cancer causing, poisonous. program must be massive; it was. it was huge. they spent a billion dollars or more. next. here they are in '72 congratulating themselves on how well it worked, nearly 20 years and the industry has employed a single strategy. while the strategy was brilliantly conceived and executed over the years, helping us to win important battles. on the contrary, it is always been a holding strategy, consisting of creating doubt about the health charge without actually denying it. man, did it work, and what is it got to do with him? he got caught up in it? he lived through that generation, he lived through this exact thing. he was a success story. next. here is the targeting youth, they are coming up with this "meet the turk" campaign because now they are competing to get in the youth market. one is ahead of the other, we have to come up with something else for the 14-to-24-year-old group. started smoking regularly at 14, but what is anything got to do with it. the importance of young smokers, adult smokers, the critical factor in growth decline of every major brand over the last 50 years, they will continue to be as important into the future. and you heard dr. cummings say tell you right from there, and that is 50 years back from '84, right back to them. this may be an '84 document, take 50 years off, we are back into 1934, right in the heart of him smoking. here you are, 67 percent have started smoking by 18, only 5.4 when they get over 25. if they slip through and get a little older, they hardly start smoking as regular smokers. next. realistically, if we are going to survive, we have to get our share. self-image enhancement, why would he be -- what have we got to do with him feeling grown up and good for smoking? next. next. this is surgeon general 2010 talking, you have seen it several times, talking about 4,000 teens smoke a cigarette for the first time. this is nearly 1.5 million youth a year, as much as philadelphia. they try cigarettes, do not know how easy it is to become addicted. nicotine addiction is so powerful, every day about a thousand teens become daily smokers that is 2010. this is important business. next. next. the smoking patterns of teenagers are particularly important to who? philip morris. here we go. in 1989, surgeon general report. they are talking about all the young kids and they are talking about nicotine addiction, and the two factors that they list there, age of initiation, age -- someone asked a question of dr. kaplan, does it matter if you start younger? he said, well, length of time but not young. here is the surgeon general of the united states of america with all the people that come in and study it and help, like dr. henningfield and dr. cummings, yes, it is the age -- the young ones have a harder time stopping and they go after the young ones and they get addicted young. and as a result, that refutes the addiction and the age refutes the argument that smoking is a matter of free choice. most smokers start as teenagers and then become addicted. not that they have no choice, but in this courtroom, we are not talking no choice. our burden of proof is not that he had no choice; our burden of proof is did the addiction -- was it a cause, a cause, a meaningful cause of why he quit smoking? mr. cofer: objection, a legal cause. mr. mitnik: a legal cause, meaning a cause, not the cause, and a legal cause meaning that it is substantially contributing to smoking, not insubstantial, not insignificant, but a cause, not the sole cause. next. smoke screening. here they are bragging again. they have had it -- remember the frank statement, the one they sent out all over america, that kicked off the conspiracy, we are going to -- it is our job to listen to the surgeon general, agree with the surgeon general, we are going to work with the surgeon general. they are calling him the opponent. the tobacco industry that they set up -- and these defendants were all part of a conspiracy, and this is -- remember, you hear about -- that we heard dr. cummings talk about how these groups were used to promote the conspiracy plan. and here they are. it is a shield. this is what they are saying behind. publicly these are these brilliant scientists working to find the truth; they are a shield. special projects, remember, that is the one l&m was in financing, along with everybody else. bill shinn feels special reports are the best way that money are spent. ctr acts as a front. next. here's how many people they have sent out and it is just this wall of information that dr. cummings talked about, the wallpaper effect. 1982, they are talking about a less mutagenic cigarette, meaning less cancerous cigarette. and maybe there is somebody that can come up with it. but then you cannot do it because it might look bad. he also said, although i cannot recall his exact words, that our medical scientific witnesses all will say whatever we want them to say, clearly implying, if not stating, that they lack credibility and integrity. they are talking about their own. this is the one you remember about should -- the scientists saying, we cannot tell the surgeon general we put ammonia in our cigarettes. and he is raising cane about it. and they did not put it in. they got them to say, well, did not the surgeon general -- yeah, it got in the report that included everybody else, somebody else revealed it to the surgeon general, so it is on the summary; they did not. more filter brands and delivery. the tobacco industry has reacted to the challenge. this is how they responded. more filters and more low tar, filters and low tar. is there a connection? yeah. coca-cola. in most cases, however, the smoker of a filter cigarette was getting as much or more nicotine and tar as he would have gotten with a regular cigarette. he had abandoned the regular cigarette, however, on the ground of reduced risk to health. this is what they are saying about filters; he do not know it. the conspiracy, was that material -- is that material to a reasonable person? is that material to a reasonable person? if someone had heard that and you are deciding am i just going to switch to something i think is safe because i'm having such a struggle here, rather than engage full force because i have no other choice, did it matter? okay. this is the surgeon general right now, people thinking low tar and lights work, they are less dangerous, they flat out are not. here's liggett and myer in '78, our conclusion is the presence of additives or fillers in cigarette, it does not make a difference. did everybody run out and say, i want everybody to know about our product? no. let me talk to you a minute about -- because i want to save a little bit of time. i want to talk to you about compensatory damages. we have the part of this case which is the proving entitlement to punitive damages, entitlement to punitive damages. i'm going to come to that in a moment. let me just start for -- about the compensatory damages for mr. szymanski. we do not with compensatory damages -- it is not about how much are you going to give; that is not the way the law is set up. you heard it from the judge. it is what is a fair value, what is fair and reasonable based on the evidence of what was lost, what was taken? you put the harms and losses on one side and the amount of money on the other side to bring it into balance. too much is overcompensation; too little is undercompensation. the idea is to use your collective wisdom based on the evidence, common sense, and fairness, and try to say what is a fair amount, weighing those harms and those losses. we do not do eye for an eye justice; we do not take someone else's larynx. that is not the way we do it in america; this is the way we do it. the measuring stick of justice for compensatory damages, as well as punitive, is money. and let us talk about it. what is fair compensation for what was lost by mr. szymanski? first of all, this instruction -- we know certain parts of it -- here we go, this is the verdict form. part of this is easy. let me run through this real quick. the court: you have 30 minutes left. mr. mitnik: yes, ma'am. was he addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine? if so, was addiction a cause, a legal cause of his laryngeal cancer? that one we talked about is straightforward, yes. state whether there was negligence was a legal cause of his injuries as to each defendant. they all belong here; they are all part of the conspiracy. he smoked products of every one of them. he started out and got initiated on the products of the chesterfield, which is l&m. during those critical formative years when he was vulnerable as a young boy, he smoked the chesterfields, and he also smoked the lucky strikes, which were r.j. reynolds. those were the initiation brands that got this thing hooked into him so deep at such a young age. they are here because they belong here. and camels as well, which are also r.j. reynolds. then he switched the filters with l&m; that was the beginning of the filters. you will see he also switched then to the marlboros filtered when they were pushing a big campaign -- you heard about it from dr. cummings. at that very time, he switched over then to -- which is a philip morris product, the marlboro, and then switched to the lights when all this nonsense was going on with lights, and around the time that he had the lump in his throat, went right over to the lights. that is philip morris; they were marlboro lights. so they are all here for a reason, they all share in, yes, there was -- it was a legal cause, looking at both the direct evidence and the circumstantial evidence and inference, no question, certainly more persuasive, more convincing that that contributed in a meaningful way to the outcome here. you have a similar question on the same defendants under the defective and unreasonably dangerous. once he is a member of the class, it was defective. that is not the question. the question, was the detective nature the way it is manipulated and the addiction that is in it, the addiction that is in it. is that a legal cause? yes. state whether the concealment or omission of material -- there is the material again -- where reasonable person considered it to be significant making a decision about health effects and addiction, was that -- the concealment of it, was that a cause, did it substantially contribute? we talked about that; it is yes. was there an agreement to conceal? and this is very important. was there an agreement to conceal or omit material information about the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes or both that was a legal cause of mr. szymanski's injuries. we have gone through that. was it a substantially contributing cause, was it a material fact that a reasonable person would have considered significant in making their decision? clearly the answer is yes. then we talked about percentages of fault between the defendants. these are -- i'm sorry, that is my sorry writing there, but that number, believe it or not is a three. 53,083, that is the stipulation the judge read to you as to what -- there is no dispute over, if we prove our case, those were his medical expenses in the past, and that was his loss of income was the $521,800 was the loss of earnings from his -he was a speech therapist. those are agreed upon, not much we agree on, but worked this part of it out. they have say they owe it, but if we prove what we need to prove, those numbers are correct. what is the amount of damages sustained by mr. szymanski for pain and suffering, disability, physical impairment -- and i put these marks here for a reason, i'm going to come back to it -disfigurement, mental anguish, inconvenience, and loss of capacity for the enjoyment of life in the past and in the future. let me talk to you about that for a minute. i mean, that is what i'm talking about when you talk about because these are stipulated numbers, fair compensation, what is fair and reasonable and circumstances -- of these circumstances, and let us talk about it because these things break up into really -- there are really six categories here: pain and suffering, disability, physical impairment, disfigurement, mental anguish, inconvenience, and loss of capacity for the enjoyment of life in the past and the future. there is six separate categories, and each and every one of them is to be considered in determining a fair amount of compensation. but the truth is, if you really look at them, they really break into three significant meaningful categories. it really reduces to three rather than count each one separately. if you look at these logically, there is the pain -talking about going through the surgery and the physical pain of going through that. you have the pain of that; you also have, when you look at these in a lump, you have disability and the physical -- the physical impairment. those make the pain, the disability, and the physical impairment logically go together. i'm going to talk to you about that in a minute. i want to break this up so it makes some sense when i talk about it. the disfigurement and mental anguish really go hand in hand in this kind of a separate category i suggested as a logical way to sort through this. and then there is inconvenience and loss of capacity for the enjoyment of life; that really fits separate. and let me explain what i mean to you about that. because each one of these need to be weighed by the jurors collectively using the wisdom in trying to do what is fair and reasonable under the circumstances. let me talk pain and suffering, disability, and physical harm. the pain, having to go through the surgery, the physical pain of the surgery -- now, we are now talking -- we have talked clearly about the laryngectomy, the larynx cancer was the only thing i talked about up to this point. we are now into the harm part, not class membership stuff. we are now talking about the others then become relevant here. and let me talk to you about that. but we start with the laryngectomy because the truth is, that was the biggest problem, it is the majority of it. he has been cured of the cancer, he is cancer free from that. he has this left; he is got the scar on his neck from this. the tongue, nobody wants to go through those surgeries and all, but the primary lasting long problem is he does not have a larynx. so i'm going to focus mostly on that part of the case, which is really the clearcut straight part. the rest of it falls into place when you look at the evidence more persuasive, more convincing. let me talk about it briefly. the pain part. is it pain going through and just suffering through the acuteness of the surgery, then you talk about the disability of it. he loved his job. we have got the economic loss here, but the economic loss of how much he made is just a drop in the bucket when you talk about this man loved his job. you are talking about now the disability that has the effect from the noneconomic side of it. somebody whose self-worth, identity, somebody who is got a job that he feels really good about the people he is helping, he feels like he is really making a difference, somebody who grew up with a speech impediment, wanted to help others, somebody that became a speech therapist, got a master's degree, drove a long way to go to work. you could feel it off the stand, took great pride in what he was able to do. some people go to work -- it is okay. some people go to work and say, i wish i had a better job, a different job, i do not like my job. some people are blessed and have the opportunity to do something they love and excel at and it makes them feel good. that is gone. that is just gone. and the loss of a pure income does not deal with that being gone. that is the disability side of that particular aspect. then let me talk to you about the physical impairment part of it. the physical impairment of it includes, you heard the coughing, the coughing and the choking and no larynx, that is the physical part. he does not breathe through here; that is serious stuff. and it is forever; it is permanent. it is forever. so the pain and suffering, disability and physical -- physical impairment fit there. let me now talk to you about the next step in that which is the disfigurement. i want to go to this part, disfigurement and mental anguish. well, the disfigurement you have seen it. i mean, he is covering it up, and he does a pretty good job of it, but he is got a big hole there that he deals with with the disfigurement from it. and the neck part of it, which is -- you know, you saw it, i do not want to carry on about it. and the mental anguish. mental anguish being, i got cancer, that blow, i got cancer. getting out and feeling good, and a blow, i got cancer. that is a lot of mental anguish. those two go hand in hand. and then the disfigurement and that mental anguish of the horrible news that comes from it and the consequences of that. and then the last is the inconvenience and loss of capacity for enjoyment of life. and let me talk to you about that. you can say inconvenience and that can sound trivial, but it is not trivial when you think in terms of somebody who -- in terms of somebody who in the shower has to worry about getting water in it because he can drown in the shower, out in the rain. having to cover this, undo the flap, and put your finger on it. that is not a trivial inconvenience; that is significant. and that dovetails into the enjoyment of life. you heard the evidence that he is a man that was a social outgoing guy. you heard -- basically, these were not the words, but when you heard different people talk about he is a nice guy, and he liked being out and around people heard and talking and intelligent and loved to be talking. and now we talk about enjoyment of life. it is isolation. it is isolation. it is i'm a social guy, what do i do -- what do i do if i'm mr. szymanski and i'm out, there is someone who seems nice, i'm going to go talk, well, am i going to talk to them, or do i walk by? sit around talking about, did you like that movie, did you like the t v show, what did you read here, let us chat about it. i'm a reader, i'm an intelligent guy, i like people, i like talking, what happened on the football game? every one of those conversations, and it is not just the whispering. you saw the effort it takes. he is got to prepare himself, gear up for it, get it out, and then rest again and prepare to do it again. that is forever. that is significant impairment on enjoyment of life. it is isolation. now, how do you put that under this law in a fair way? i would suggest to you that a logical fair way to approach it, rather than just throw something out, is to use some kind of hourly rate. we know that he has 12 years left in his life -- we do not know, but the prediction and the life expectancy tables are 12 years. we know he is cured of the cancer. we know it is been 18 since he had the laryngectomy; that is 30 years. so if you take -- and it says past and in the future. if you take that, that is 30 years. well, people live their life one day at a time, they live it one hour at a time. we do not jump forward and say, i'm having such a bad time, i'm going to jump to the afternoon. it does not work that way. if you take his waking hours, and you could include his sleeping hours because i'm sure with that thing rolling around, it is a problem sleeping and coughing and hacking and waking up and all that stuff. but just take waking hours, if you take the waking hours, leave eight hours a day out, take the waking hours, and you take that over those years of his life in the past and in the future, that -- and you apply $10 an hour to each -- not each of the six categories, not each of the six categories, then you are of the $60 from each, but if you applied and broke this into the logical three categories, $10 each of those categories over his lifetime adds up to over but roughly, to round it down, $5 million. no larynx for the rest of his life and the profound impact that it is had on him. i suggest, although it is up to you -- all we do is make suggestions and try to be helpful in this process to rely on the law in some kind of measuring sticks that makes sense. the last thing before i sit down is the entitlement, the punitive damages. in the entitlement to punitive damage part of this case that is very significant part of this matter involves -- you answer the questions -- let me just touch on it. we proved -- you heard the judge read where it is putting -- there is a disregard for the well-being, a disregard for the well-being of others, whether there is reprehensibility in the conduct. yes, this case involves mr. szymanski, but on the reprehensibility part regarding entitlement to punitive damages where the burden is a bit higher, but -- and the judge read it to you, but on these facts we clearly meet it. on the reprehensibility, you are entitled to also look at the harm all those others that were similarly situated and, again, he suffered the same kind of harm over those years. mr. cofer: objection, your honor, that is not for this phase. the court: overruled. mr. mitnik: for entitlement, this is important stuff. and i ask you -- i'm going to save a few minutes to talk to you at the end -- listen to them, and ultimately we are going to all do justice based on the evidence. the court: okay. why do not we take a break? all right. members of the jury, we are going to take a recess. you are not to begin deliberating or discussing until you have heard all my instructions, which i have a few more to give you, and you have heard the final argument of the defendant and the rebuttal argument of the plaintiff. but they each -- it is been a long trial and we have given them some additional time on their final arguments. so we are going to go, you know, quite a while here, so we are going to take a 15-minute break. so you will remain in the jury room on this one; that does not appear to have been a problem with any of you. and so if maybe you can have a snack or something like a cup of coffee and we will come back and we will go to the defendants' final argument. okay. do not talk about the case now. okay. thank you. mr. mitnik: bear with me, i'm going to talk quick because i do not have a lot of time. by the way, the comment about me forgetting the product. in pursuing maybe counsel forgot his own product. his own product was pall malls, his product, and never talked about that was one that he smoked during the initial years when engaging and having -the teenager's brain was being indoctrinated to this deep seeded addiction, he just forgot one of his own brands. let me tell you something else. all this about we are hiding something trying to make you mad, the fact that these documents are troubling is not my doing. i did not write them. i did not write them, they did, their clients did. we put up document after document after document, they pick one or two up here and say, look here. do you know what happens when you find my client is a member of the class? all this denial stops. conspiracy, done, cannot deny it anymore once we prove class membership. concealment, you can no longer pitch that. you cannot come along and say, ah, guess who was in the conspiracy in the engle findings that are binding here, once we prove what we got to prove? l&m, the poster child of wonder, conspiracy and concealment. there is a reason class membership is important, and there is a reason those findings are important, because then we put a stop to it and we get down to business of justice and accountability and truth. another day. we worked very hard when we picked people of integrity, you worked hard, and there is a level of confidence that people are not going to say if we got another day to finish an important job, we have come this far and we are this close to the finish line of something significant, then no one is going to say, oh, we will say no to punitive damages because there might be another day. this is hard work and everybody appreciates it, and we are confident that the law and the evidence is going to carry today. punitive damages we talked about are important because they are important. that is when you reach deterrence. that is where you reach punishment. we have heard about no-nics. no one would buy the no-nic cigarettes, so why take the addiction out. interestingly, they suggest nicotine has nothing to do with anything here, people just all -- it is all choice. but when they took the nicotine out of the product, no one would buy it. then you heard dr. henningfield tell you, well, there is this little small -- they went out and said, look, we tried, we tried and it was a little small effort. it sufficiently motivated? they can all take it out and you cannot switch over, and then we really would have free choice. this is an important matter. r.j.r. said, what do we have to do with anything with them? remember the document up there, this is not one they brought up or this book here, they want to put it in the front. let me put it right here so nobody misses it. do you know what is not in the stack? the document up here about for the last 50 years youth marketing is how we make our money. that is r.j.r. that goes back to the time an 11-year-old boy picked up a cigarette. do they belong here? who is trying to divert? they say if he had quit, according to dr. cummings, if he had stopped in '66, he would not have gotten the laryngeal cancer. exactly. that is the point. that is the point. he takes responsibility for his share in this, but he was a young boy when they -- they manufactured this product and manipulated this product with additives and all the things they did to make it as addictive as possible, he did not know it. they marketed it to where everybody was ingrained in society, his parents smoked, doctors smoked, eighty percent of america smoked. most doctors smoked. everybody was smoking, his parents smoked. so, oh, it is his parents' fault, why were his parents smoking. they created an atmosphere with all these glamourous ads with this product, highly addictive, that they created to be highly addictive, on purpose to make money, that has cancer causing agents. but his parents smoked. if they had not offered up a false filter fix, if they had come out and said, look, this whole controversy, we made it up. everybody on our side, their side, on the cigarette companies' side, we know this stuff is causing cancer. there are no controversies. the health care people caught up with us, they know it. it is true, you got us. you are going to get cancer. not, we do not know, we will find out, we are going to research it, we will take it off the shelf, we will do whatever it takes. that was just a made-up story. does that matter? yes. you tell somebody who is already trying to break free, let us back up. do not make it so addictive that it gets its hook in a young teenage boy that you manufacture it that way on purpose. how about that one? and then he comes along and how about telling him up straight, yes, there is no question, we do not have a big controversy, and by the way, you are an addicted smoker who has the natural denial. it is like the comment, the saying, preaching to the choir. they knew that is what an addicted smoker wanted to hear, there is no real reason to try to stop. we will tell you if there is a reason, there is not. so you do not stop at a time that it would have saved their life, at a time -- i mean not save a life, save a larynx. even today you heard the testimony from dr. cummings, we are marketing to kids. would it have mattered to him to tell the truth, to say, by the way, it is going to kill you and this filter thing, forget it, it is every bit as dangerous. they said that we have no proof that it is every bit as dangerous, the filters do not work. the 2010 surgeon general report, like you are going to forget about it. low tar, light, filters, they are not any safer. there is proof right there. we have plenty other proof we brought you. just tell the truth, they do not work, they do not work. now you have got someone maximally motivated. they know the true picture of this stuff, it causes cancer, there is no question about it. we do not need to research it and find it out, we know it. they know the truth, the filters are not a safe option, it is a false option to get you to keep smoking longer so they make more money, knowing the consequence. what is it got to do with them? everything. these two ships collided. he collided with their conspiracy and their coverup, and they have a big part in this. he has some fault, we have said it from the beginning. why did i talk so much about that? we are the only side, he is the only side that acknowledged any responsibility. they talk choice, choice, choice. how about the boardroom choices made behind closed doors by grown men for profit? i talked about them because they have taken no responsibility. you have heard it to the very end. we need you people to bring justice, accountability, on the law and on the evidence. by the way, dr. kaplan, do not forget, he acknowledged under the dsm-iv criteria that say, as manifested by, which he says does not mean what it says in plain english, maladaptive, da, da, da, leading to clinically significance, as manifested by three or more of the following. as manifested by. it does not say, as manifested by so long as we do this overarching thing so dr. kaplan could say at every single engle case that he is testified in nobody is addicted no matter how much they smoke. no, it just says as manifested by. and then they say that 80 to ninety percent of regular smokers are addicted in the very book that he sets the standard of you got to be somehow -- get a divorce or you are not addicted, lose your job or you are not addicted. if it is that standard, they would never in varied books say you hear 80 to ninety percent of regular smokers are addicted. this stuff is highly addictive, it is powerfully addictive, and that is why it is so high a percentage of regular smokers do it, and it is why they have kept the compulsive use, the addiction in it, that is where the profits come in. put up the scare tactic real quick. we hear choice, choice, choice, choice. we hear connections to caffeine and things like that, we hear 50 million people have quit. by the way, that is about one percent of the smokers in america, which happens to be massive over 50 years. that is how you get there. one percent were able to successfully stop a year, and that ads up to like a million and a half adds up over 50 years, 60 years to the big number. there are 45 million active smokers, but they parade these numbers around. you heard them here in the court, they did not start in this court. look here, this is way back -- this is in '88 when they were trying -- when the surgeon general was about to say, you see, we have caught up and found out what they put in all their documents, all their documents -- by the way, they say we talked to congress at those hearings and we said we were not sure about the intoxicating effect. they never say, they never once said, how do you square that with what they were writing for decades about how addictive it was? look at what they wrote. it is all about young, youth, youth, all through here. after years of well research, it is not been established that cigarette smoking produce the physical dependence of nicotine. remember their documents. they are celebrating it, they are working on it, they are using it, they are studying how they can get ahead with it. here it is, it is just like caffeine. that is the play book. flip over. oh, here it is. surprise. 40 million have stopped, that is a little earlier, one percent, one-and-a-half percent a year adds up, we are now up higher. ninety percent, guess what, quit cold turkey without any professional help. that is the exact message. the court: you have five more minutes. mr. mitnik: smoking is truly a personal choice. there it is, that message was sent out youth, youth, youth. because if you tell the youth 40 million quit, how hard can it be? 95 percent do, how hard can it be? it is all just choice, choice. pick it up, look at all the cancer causing stuff. pick it up, you will be all right, you will quit. it is like caffeine. it is all there. it is all there. dr. kaplan was testifying for it back when they were saying it was not addictive, when all their internal documents were -- never showed him the internal documents, and he came in and said it is not addictive. now he is got the same message. the surgeon general is giving it straight. okay. real quick. the court: five minutes, sir. mr. mitnik: yes, ma'am. addiction leading to laryngeal cancer, the membership of the class is clear cut. he is addicted. even kaplan gives addiction if you take away that ridiculous thing he drafted on it. he -- even kaplan did, the treating doctors did. the clear, not even close call and common sense stuff, if you are addicted common sense tells you one of the reasons you are smoking is the addiction. so the only question is, legal cause on laryngeal cancer, which means they keep saying but for, but for and leave out the rest of it, which is, was it a substantial contributing cause, meaning not insubstantial. how in the world was that not all those cigarettes, all those cigarettes not a substantial contributing cause. everybody said so, dr. andrews said so, dr. andrews said that. he said it early and then he said i did not hear about these others, then he said it again, it was a substantial contributing cause, probably, period. dr. fuller said it unequivocally, dr. scher said it unequivocally, and the guy they hired just said, i do not know. so there is no evidence to contradict it, that one is absolutely clear cut. there is one other instruction i want to mention to you because it deals with the issue of the alcohol, the beer. there is an instruction on aggravation of preexisting condition, aggravation of another condition. and in it it says if you can separate the two, you should, but if you cannot, then they are responsible for the whole amount. their own witness that came in here and testified, webster said, no way you can separate it. that is the one thing he said of help. no way you can separate them was his testimony. under the law, that means any issue with beer, they are responsible for, period. read that in the last line of that instruction on aggravation. then the last thing i want to talk to you about. is -- two quick things, there is the mormon, that when he was at the mormon school. they said, remember, this is a place they thought it was a sin to smoke, but they built in the midst of that, they built a smoker's area where the students went. what is that tell you about how well their conspiracy worked? if everybody on top of it being sin, it was known to everybody it was cancer causing for sure, who is going to build that? that is how powerful it was. riding on the bus, risking losing a scholarship to get a couple puffs, that is addictive behavior, clear cut. he says, well, you would smell it. in this closed courtroom he is right. that is a nice comment, except we are talking about a bus back then with no ac with windows going, somebody in the back sneaking a couple puffs, that is somebody addicted on a long bus ride. okay. what i want to finish with is -- i got a whole bunch more i would like to talk to you about, but truly i'm down to the last few minutes. the court: no, you have got one. mr. mitnik: here's what the point that i want to make is. what does responsibility mean, they ask. i can tell you what it means. they need some explaining. it means when you get down to the comparative fault on this, the comparative fault, it should be -- these are suggestions, i do not want to invade the province of the jury's collective wisdom, but as a suggestion that mr. -- i'm on the wrong page, 25 percent on each of these defendants and 25 percent on my client, they all share in the responsibility for this outcome. that is responsibility. they do not understand it; mr. szymanski does. percent, 25 percent, 25 percent, 25 percent. that is a fair share of everybody's role in the conspiracy and the outcome of this, which clearly, clearly they had a cause in. and the last point that i want to make is, they talk about it is all science. it is like if you look at a big stage and there is -- everything is black and there is just a little spotlight lighting one actor in the middle of the stage. and then suddenly the lights come up from the flood lights and there are all these other actors on the stage actively participating in the play. we are asking you to turn the spotlight off and put the flood light on, please. the court: okay. members of the jury, you have now heard all the evidence, my instructions on the law that you must apply in reaching your verdict and the closing argument of your attorneys. you will shortly retire to the jury room to decide this case. before you do, i have a few last instructions for you. during deliberations, jurors must communicate about the case only with one another and only when all jurors are present in the jury room. you will have in the jury room all of the evidence that was received during the trial. in reaching your decision, do not do any research on your own or as a group. do not use dictionaries, the internet, or any other reference material. do not investigate the case or conduct any experiments. do not visit or view the scene of any event involved in this case or look at maps or pictures on the internet. if you have to happen to pass by the scene, do not stop or investigate. all jurors must see or hear the same evidence at the same time. do not read, listen to, or watch any news accounts of this trial. you are not to communicate with any person outside the jury about this case. until you have reached a verdict you must not talk about this case in person or through the telephone, writing, or electronic communication, such as a blog, tweet, or e-mail, text message or any other means. do not contact anyone to assist you, such as a family accountant, doctor, or lawyer. these communication rules apply until i discharge you at the end of the case. if you become aware of any violations of these instructions or any other instruction i have given in this case, you must tell me by giving a note to the bailiff. any notes you have taken during the trial may be taken to the jury room for use during your discussions. your notes are simply an aid to your own memory, and neither your notes nor those of any other juror are binding or conclusive. your notes are not a substitute for your own memory or that of other jurors. instead your verdict must result from the collective memory and judgment of all jurors based on the evidence and testimony presented during the trial. at the conclusion of the trial, the bailiff will collect all of your notes and immediately destroy them. no one will ever read your notes. in reaching your verdict, do not let bias, sympathy, prejudice, public opinion or any other sentiment for or against any party influence your decision. your verdict must be based on the evidence that has been received and the law on which i have instructed you. reaching a verdict is exclusively your job. i cannot participate in that decision in any way, and you should not guess what i think your verdict should be from something i may have said or done. you should not think that i prefer one verdict over another. therefore, in reaching your verdict you should not consider anything that i have said or done, except for my specific instructions to you. pay careful attention to all the instructions that i gave you, for that is the law that you must follow. you will have a copy of my instructions with you when you go to the jury room to deliberate. all the instructions are important, and you must consider all of them together. there are no other laws that apply to this case, and even if you do not agree with these laws, you must use them in reaching your decision in this case. after you have decided what the facts are, you may find that some instructions do not apply. in that case, follow the instructions that do apply and use them together with the facts to reach a verdict. when you go to the jury room, the first thing you should do is choose a presiding juror to act as a foreperson during your deliberations. the foreperson should see to it that your discussions are orderly and that everyone has a fair chance to be heard. it is your duty to talk with one another in the jury room and to consider the views of all the jurors. each of you must decide the case for yourself, but only after you have considered the evidence with the other members of the jury. feel free to change your mind if you are convinced that your position should be different. you should all try to agree, but do not give up your honest beliefs just because the others think differently. keep an open mind so that you and your fellow jurors can easily share ideas about the case. i will give you a verdict form of questions you must answer. i have already instructed you on the law that you are to use in answering these questions. you must follow my instructions and the form carefully. you must consider each question separately. you must answer the questions in the order they appear, starting at the top, going to the bottom. after you answer a question, the form tells you what to do next. and i'll now read the verdict form to you. in the circuit court of the 20th judicial circuit in and for lee county, florida. john szymanski, plaintiff, versus r.j. reynolds tobacco company -- and it says et al. but it includes the other two defendants, liggett and philip morris. case number 07-ca 015501. did i read that right? 07 ca 15501. verdict, we the jury return the following verdict. one, was john szymanski addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine? and if so, was his addiction a legal cause of his laryngeal cancer? two blanks, a yes and a no. you need to check one of those boxes. after you complete question one, look at the instruction. it says, if you answered no to question one, your verdict is for the defendants, and you should proceed no further except to date and sign the verdict form and return it to the courtroom. if you answered yes to question one, please answer questions two through five. number two. state for each defendant whether its negligence was a legal cause of john szymanski's loss, injury, or damage. liggett group, llc, a yes and a no. philip morris usa, inc., a yes and a no blank. r.j. reynolds tobacco company, a yes and a no blank. you then go to question three. state for each defendant whether the defective and unreasonably dangerous cigarettes placed on the market by each defendant were a legal cause of john szymanski's loss, injury, or damage. again, you have a yes and a no for each defendant. liggett group, llc, yes, no. philip morris usa, inc., yes, no. r.j. reynolds tobacco company, a yes blank and a no blank. number four. state for each defendant whether the concealment or omission of material information about the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes or both were a legal cause of john szymanski's injuries. again, for each defendant, liggett group, llc, a yes and a no blank. philip morris usa, inc., a yes and a no blank. r.j. reynolds tobacco company, yes and a no blank. number five. state whether the agreement to conceal or omit material information about the health effects or addictive nature of smoking or both was a legal cause of john szymanski's injuries. a yes and a no blank. then your next instruction, if you answered no to all the questions 2, 3, 4, as to all of the defendants and no as to question five, your verdict is for the defendants and you should not proceed further except to sign and date the verdict form and return it to the courtroom. if you answered yes to any of questions 2, 3, 4, or 5, please proceed to the remaining questions on this verdict form. number six, please state the percentage of any fault that was a legal cause of john szymanski's injuries that you charge to that party for legally causing john szymanski's loss, injury, or damage. if you answered no to questions 2, 3, and 4, for one of the defendants, you should enter a zero for that defendant. and then it has liggett group, llc, philip morris usa, inc., r.j. reynolds tobacco company, and john szymanski. there is a blank with a percentage sign, and it tells you the total of the percentages must be one hundred percent. number seven. what is the total amount of damages sustained by john szymanski for the expense of hospitalization and medical and nursing care and treatment necessarily or reasonably obtained by john szymanski in the past? it has a dollar sign blank. if you get to question seven, you can go back and look at your instructions and look at the stipulation of the attorneys. number eight is the same. what is the total amount of damages sustained by john szymanski for any earnings lost in the past, dollar sign, blank, and there is a stipulation on that if you get to that point. number nine. what is the amount of any damages sustained by john szymanski for pain and suffering, disability, physical impairment, disfigurement, mental anguish, inconvenience, and loss of capacity for enjoyment of life in the past and in the future? it has two blanks, a, in the past, dollar sign, blank. b, in the future, dollar sign, blank. then it says what is -number ten. what is the total amount of damages sustained by john szymanski? and it tells to add lines -- the numbers you have on lines 7, 8, 9 a and 9 b. then it instructs you, in determining the amount of damages, do not make any reduction because of the fault of john szymanski. the court in entering judgment will make any appropriate reduction in the damages awarded. number 11, under the circumstances of this case, state whether you find by clear and convincing evidence that punitive damages are awarded against each defendant. and then again it names each defendant. and if you find that for that particular defendant, liggett group llc, you would check yes or the no, whatever you decide with respect to each defendant. philip morris usa, a yes and a no blank. r.j. reynolds tobacco company, a yes and a no blank. and then it says please sign and date the verdict form, so say we all, this blank day of blank, 2011, the foreperson then signs their name, prints their name underneath that. now, your verdict must be unanimous, that is your verdict must be agreed to by each of you. when you have agreed on your verdict, your foreperson must write the date and sign it at the bottom and return the verdict to the bailiff. what you will do is just knock on the door, there will always be the bailiff in the courtroom when you are in the jury room, and anytime you knock on the door the bailiff is going to come to the door. if you have a verdict, just say we have a verdict, do not tell the bailiff anything about it. the bailiff will convene everybody and you will be escorted back to the courtroom for your verdict to be read. if at any time you need to communicate with me, you have to do it in writing. just take a card or piece of paper and whatever it is you have, whatever question, even if you want to go outside and take a break, which you can do, but now that you are deliberating, you have to remain together. so if you decide you want to go outside, you cannot deliberate outside, you can only deliberate in the jury room. but the bailiff will escort you outside and you would all remain together. and you are going to receive your lunch, i believe. and did i read all these correctly?