closing argument mr. shields: good afternoon. this case is about addiction. as dr. david burns, our first witness, told you, and as the 2010 surgeon general's report confirms: nicotine addiction is the fundamental reason smokers persist in smoking and persisting in smoking is what causes diseases such as copd. now, helen taylor was just 14 years of age when she started to smoked with her friend jane. she thought it was cool. she thought it was glamorous. she thought it made her look more adult. it made her look more like the older girls that worked at the beauty shop where she worked part time on saturdays. back then, it was different. it was normal to smoke. to helen and jane, it seemed like everyone around them smoked; their friends, their parents, their teachers, even the priests. ads for cigarettes were everywhere. it was like wallpaper, on television, magazines, newspapers with celebrities and athletes, and even doctors endorsing one brand of cigarette over another. helen, when she started, smoked a few cigarettes and then smoked more and more, and by the time she was a junior or so in high school, she was a regular daily smoker. by the time of her senior year when she got married at age 17, she was smoking about a pack a day. and that increased over the years until she got as high as over two packs a day and sometimes even three packs a day. she was addicted. and when she was diagnosed with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease in 1996 and the doctors told her, her very life depended upon quitting smoking, she seriously tried to quit and struggled with numerous quit attempts for the next almost 18 years, using everything available to try to help her quit. she finally succeeded in march of this year. john, michael and i are proud to represent helen taylor in this claim against reynolds tobacco company for her injuries. we want to thank you for your attention throughout this. i know it is been a long process. there is been a lot of complicated evidence. you have been very attentive. you have listened closely. we could not have asked for more. so we thank you again for your service. this closing argument is our last opportunity to explain to you what the evidence is, what our contentions are, and how it all fits together. as you know, this case grows out of a class action lawsuit started a long time called the engle class action where a limited number of representatives brought a suit on behalf of all florida smokers who have suffered of medical conditions and diseases caused by their addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine. well, that trial occurred in 1999 and the jury returned a verdict finding, given the facts that gradually worked its way up to the florida supreme court and these individual cases such as this case were then authorized to proceed. and that is the reason why it is so many years later that we are finally in front of you in connection with helen's claim. as i was organizing my thoughts last night, i thought what is the best way to explain our claim? what is the best way to review the evidence? and it occurred to me that what made the most sense was to follow the verdict form that you would be given, what you would have to fill out when you go into deliberations, and work through that with you and talk about the evidence in regard to the various issues on the verdict form. there are four primary issues that are raised by the questions on the verdict form. the first issue and the most important is whether helen taylor was a member of the engle class, the class membership issue. to be a member of the class, we must prove that helen taylor was addicted to cigarettes, that smoking because of her addiction caused her disease, and that she was diagnosed and manifested the symptoms of disease before november 21, 1996. if helen was a member of the class, then she gets the benefits of the finding of that first trial. you as a jury, as the court has instructed you, are bound to apply those findings. the second issue that you will need to address and that is set out on the verdict form deals with what is called specific causation. the first part of that issue is whether reynolds' cigarettes were a cause of mrs. taylor's disease. mr. hohnbaum: objection, your honor. misstates the law. the court: overruled. mr. shields: it does not have to be the element cause. there can be more than one cause. the court will instruct you about concurrent cause. it is sufficient that reynolds -- smoking reynolds cigarettes was a substantial contributing cause, as the court will instruct you -- mr. hohnbaum: objection, your honor. misstates the law. we request a sidebar. (a sidebar conference was held outside the hearing of the jury.) mr. hohnbaum: instruction requires us to be but for cause, so saying it is a substantial cause is insufficient. it has to be a but for cause. mr. shields: that is why i said the court will instruct you. your honor, are we going to play the game? the court: i sure hope not. let me just tell you, and he said as the court will instruct. if you guys want to get down to the actual letter of the instructions, that is fine. and if you are going to jump up and object, i cannot stop it. i'm not going to like it, but i cannot stop it. but what i will do is i will stop you from talking about the law at all. and i'll read the law to the jury and you guys will not refer to it. can you talk about the facts, kind of glance by the law? it is argument, i get it. but i do not want to start off -- we are into this less than five minutes and you get up twice. i cannot stop it. if you want to object every time he makes a statement, go ahead. but i would prefer we kind of let each other make your argument. i'll read them the law. i think juries are pretty smart. they are going to take it back. they are not going to soak this in right now and, oh, that man said this, they are getting concepts. they are not going to remember these things verbatim. so that is just my -- mr. hohnbaum: judge, i appreciate that and i'm fine with that. obviously, i do not want to be in a position where i have not objected to him misstating, and i spend my whole argument and you must state the law and i'm in a position, well, you did not object. i've been in that situation a few times. if that is going to be the lay of the land, that is the lay of the land. the court: well, he gets two anyway, and whether he wants more than two or not, it depends how many you get. try to keep it as even as i can. mr. hohnbaum: i understand where the court is going, that is my preference too, but i do not want to be in a position -- the court: i get it, i get it. mr. hohnbaum: i thought we were just going to go instead of everything going we ground down. the court: i understand. so -- well, i guess give him a little leeway. if it gets a little egregious, jump up. i expect he will do the same. mr. hohnbaum: fair enough. (the sidebar conference ended and proceedings took place in open court as follows:) mr. shields: we were talking about the specific causation issue in overview. there is a second part of the specific causation issue you will need to decide, and that is in connection with conspiracy and fraudulent concealment claims, and specifically whether mrs. taylor relied upon their fraudulent concealment of material information. the third major issue as set out in the verdict form and you are going to need to decide is called comparative fault. under florida law, fault is not an all or nothing proposition. that is, even if a plaintiff is at fault, a plaintiff may still be able to recover. you in those circumstances, however, would compare the fault of the plaintiff to the fault of the defendant. that issue of comparative fault will be given further instruction by the court. but let me be clear from the very beginning, we acknowledge that helen taylor had some measure of fault in not quitting smoking sooner. but it was in combination with the fault of r.j. reynolds in various misconduct we will talk about in more detail over decades. we acknowledge that. r.j. reynolds does not. mr. hohnbaum told you at the beginning of this case that reynolds has zero responsibility. a large part of this case is determining what responsibility they have and comparing it to what responsibility helen taylor has. the fourth area we will need to talk about is damages. there are two types of damages; compensatory damages such as lost wages, medical expenses, so forth that we talked about and provided evidence on. but there is also the question of whether to award punitive damages. punitive damages is designed to deter and punish misconduct. so those are the four issues that you are going to have to deal with. they are set out in various questions in the verdict form. let us talk about each in more detail. first, class membership. the class membership issue will be addressed by the court and will be given -- you will be given an instruction as to what constitutes class membership. we can bring up the instruction. the instruction basically gives three things that you are going to have to deal with. one is the question of whether helen taylor was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine; two is whether her continued smoking was because of her addiction to cigarettes; and three is whether the smoking-induced disease of disease was manifested on or before november 21, 1996. there is compelling evidence to the first, that helen taylor was addicted to cigarettes that contain nicotine. our first witness in regard to that was dr. burns. dr. burns is a leading expert on addiction in this country. he is the author of the chapters on addiction in the two leading textbooks used by all medical schools in this country. he is the author of every surgeon general's report -- author and the reviewer of every surgeon general's report since 1975. he has written extensively about addiction. and what he told you was, first, addiction is a brain disease; second, cigarettes are addictive, and nicotine is the reason cigarettes are addictive. nicotine is the fundamental reason smokers continue to smoke. and he showed you how difficult it was for addicted smokers to quit. this is one of the charts that he used. what the chart showed is that about eighty percent of daily -- of smokers are daily smokers, about little less than seventy percent want to quit, and a little more than fifty percent try to quit each year, but only 6.2 percent are successful within six months. meaning that of those fifty percent that try and quit, most of them are going to relapse within the first six months. and then if you look at the longer run of saying one year, only 3 percent of smokers who try to quit remain quit for one year. and he explained the reason why that occurred is because of this trapping cycle of addicted cigarettes. he gave you this example under figure 18 of how an addicted smoker goes through this process of trying to quit, working up to quit, and all of the things that intercept them from being able to accomplish it. filters, low tar, lights, the kinds of claims that the cigarette companies were making, and the likelihood that an addicted smoker would want to believe it. and he gave you another example of that in a figure which showed the competing pressures that occur on whether to quit or not to quit, and the effect of the campaign to convince smokers that they should continue to smoking by the cigarette companies versus the campaign of the public health community to try and get smokers to quit. and he explained how that process of denial, doubt, controversy pushes the addicted smoker to continue smoking. all of that is confirmed by the 2010 surgeon general's report which sets out in detail the reason smokers do not succeed in quitting is nicotine addiction. you take nicotine out of cigarettes and people will not continue to smoke them. you take the amount of nicotine necessary to sustain addiction out of cigarettes and smokers will not continue to smoke. there is a threshold level known by the tobacco companies and they make sure they have that level to keep smokers addicted so that they can keep selling their product. dr. burns specifically told you that cigarettes are engineered and designed to create and sustain addiction. now, there is absolutely no evidence to the contrary. they did not put on any witness to deny that they created and sustained addiction by manipulating and engineering their cigarettes to make sure they were addictive, to make sure they had the threshold level. dr. burns then analyzed whether helen taylor was addicted. and he told you all the considerations that he looked at which are set out in the surgeon general's report in 2010, whether she was a compulsive smoker, what quit attempts she made, how long she smoked, how much she smoked, all of those factors were considered by him, and the leading authority in the country on addiction said, in my opinion, helen taylor clearly was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine. now, the evidence of her smoking history supports that as well, starting with the fact that she started smoking at age 14, when she was young, as do most smokers, they start -- virtually ninety percent of smokers start as teenagers. and her and a friend, jane, became regular smokers, gradually increasing the amount they smoked. she smoked around her mom. she smoked at school. she smoked in front of teachers. she smoked in a designated smoking area at school, as did the other students. and when she got married at 17, she smoked even more and more. you recall what michael said: smoking was their way of life. she smoked all the time. their life was built around their smoking. now, she made numerous attempts to quit, and they are documented in the medical records. go through the medical records, it is not just dr. kennison, but it is the other medical records as well document her request for assistance for smoking, her prescriptions for medications, the fact that she is trying to quit smoking. all of that is in those extensive medical records. she did literally everything you can do to try and quit smoking. she used nicotine patches, nicotine gum, nicotine lozenges. she had hypnosis. she went to psychotherapist, dr. kennison, and had treatment and came in to see her to help stop smoking. she attended two multi-week stop smoking schools. she had wellbutrin prescribed for her. ultimately, chantix prescribed for her. she used an electronic cigarette. there was nothing left that she could do that she did not attempt to do to quit smoking. and she failed and failed and failed. and each time that she tried, she went through severe withdrawal symptoms. she described those symptoms for you: irritability and anger, anxiousness, inability to concentrate, restlessness, inability to sleep. she summed it up by saying she just felt like she was dying. she would break down and cry and say, "it is better to die than feel like this." that is severe addiction. and it is borne out by all of the evidence. yes, there were times that she told doctors that she did not want to quit, and there were times she told doctors she enjoyed it. that is part of the denial process and that she explained it was part of the process, she knew she would quit -- should quit. she tried. having a further conversation with them was not going to help anymore. and consequently, the easiest way to do with it is say, "no, i do not want to talk about it anymore."that is part of the denial process of the addicted smoker. you not only have dr. burns' testimony, you have dr. kennison's testimony about what she diagnosed her as being nicotine dependent. you need to compare dr. kennison, dr. burns, and dr. frazier to the one expert that the defendants offered on this question on addiction, dr. ticknor. dr. ticknor testified that he did not believe she was addicted. michael, let us go forward to the burns particular slide. and in thinking about dr. burns and dr. ticknor, think about the credentials of the two. here is dr. david burns, the leading expert on addiction in the country, graduate of harvard medical school, worked for the national clearinghouse on smoking and health, major role in every surgeon general's report since the '70s, done work for the national cancer institute and the world health organization, highly published, and is the author of the leading texts on addiction. and then there is dr. christopher ticknor. never written anything on addiction, never asked to be on any panel for the surgeon general or any other professional organization, never done any studies, never done any analysis, never participated in any clinical studies for nicotine addiction, and he is not certified in addiction medicine. he is not certified in addiction medicine because he never went through an addiction medicine training program. he had no specialty training in addiction medicine at all. he also claims to be affiliated with the university of texas health science center in san antonio, but admits he is not listed as a faculty member, adjunct faculty member or any other role in connection with their website. more important, dr. ticknor in order to reach the opinions he wants to reach misstates what the requirements of dsm v are. he says if there is a separate requirement for clinical significance. and you can read, as we did this morning, exactly what it says. it does not say "and," and it does not say what he attempted to suggest was required. what he did was define addiction so that virtually no one would qualify. and remember the end of my cross-examination of him, in which basically said in order to meet all of these requirements, you are going to have to be psychotic, schizophrenic, mentally retarded, severe mentally disabled so that you are unable to form the intent to quit before he would ever call you addicted or say that addiction had anything to do with your continued smoking. that is not what dsm v says. that is not what the surgeon general's report says. that is not what the experts in the field say. ask yourself one question: why is it that the only person that would come testify or that they brought to testify was not a specialist in addiction, not someone certified in addiction medicine, not a doctor in florida, but go out to san antonio, texas, and get a general psychiatrist who does not have any credentials and have him come in and say that she was not addicted? the second part of addiction is whether she continued to smoke because of her addiction. the evidence is overwhelming that mrs. taylor continued to smoke because of her addiction. that is all that is required. we saw the charge you will get on what class membership means and the language of because of is the reason one continued to smoke. and if you find that helen taylor continued to smoke because she was addicted, then that element of class membership requirement is met. it does not have to be the only reason she continued to smoke. she can enjoy smoking which is part of what the whole process of addiction is about. she can have other reasons why she liked to smoke. but if addiction is one of the reasons she continued to smoke, because of addiction, then we have met the requirement for class membership. and you will hear a lot about choice and whether she chose to smoke. the issue is not whether she chose to smoke. the issue is whether she was addicted and whether that played a role in her continuing to smoke. whether she chose to smoke may go to the question of comparative fault, but not whether she is a member of the class. the final requirement for class membership was that she was diagnosed with copd by november 21, 1996. and you have heard a lot about this in the trial. let us review again the available medical records and what they show. the first important medical record is july 22nd, 1996. obviously before november 21, 1996. and it is the record in which helen taylor comes in to university medical center as an outpatient complaining of shortness of breath, and the impression of the physician is that she has chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. you will have that record. you can read it. that is the diagnosis. it is what is signed off on, not only by the resident, but by the attending physician who was supervising her. it also indicates that they were doing a chest x-ray and we will see the results of the chest x-ray on the next document. but the important point is that the diagnosis and impression in july was chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. if there is any question about that, we go to the next one, october 16, 1996, obviously before november 21. and, again, she is diagnosed specifically with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. she is given medication for disease. she had a chest x-ray which showed a hyperinflated lung which is one of the findings supporting disease. and her major complaint is that she had shortness of breath upon exertion which is one of the fundamental symptoms of disease. and one thing to note about both of these documents, neither of them indicates that she had any prior history of shortness of breath, that she had seen a doctor before for shortness of breath, that she had any prior diagnosis. and that is the way it works. you go in and see a doctor, they take what is called a history. what are your complaints? have you been treated for them before? have you been diagnosed before them before? there is nothing about any prior diagnosis. there is nothing about asthma. there is nothing about any prior shortness of breath. there is no history whatsoever. and that is significant. we will talk about that in a moment. the next thing after this october 16 is in february she is hospitalized, and she is admitted for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease exacerbation. and the diagnosis when she leaves the hospital after she is been treated and hospitalized is that she had chronic obstructive pulmonary disease exacerbation. she then has, in march, pulmonary function test to define, as dr. burns says, the extent of her pulmonary obstruction. we do not have copies of that report. that report is gone. what we do have is a medical report that sets out the results, december 9th, 1997. that document shows that she had moderate obstructive pulmonary disease that did not respond with bronchodilators, what is normally as the general way you distinguish asthma from disease. now, you clearly then have a diagnosis of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease before november 21, 1996, but the defense expert dr. schroeder says it was not copd, it was asthma. and he says that despite the fact that there is no prior history of asthma, that the diagnosis does not say asthma, that the pulmonary function tests do not show any reversal from bronchodilators the way you determine asthma versus disease. and most importantly, he ignores all of the hospitalizations that have occurred thereafter. and we showed you those at the beginning of the case. let us bring up that list. this list is several pages long. it is not every time she was diagnosed with copd, it is just the major times. if you worked your way through the medical records, time and time again she is diagnosed with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease exacerbation, starting in july of 1996 running through 2014. over and over again, doctor after doctor. at least three board-certified pulmonologists; dr. bagnoli, dr. cury, and dr. laos. yet, we have a doctor come in from california who is made almost a million dollars testifying for them in other cases who says, "oh, no, they are all wrong, it was asthma. it was asthma she had as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease." why that whole thing about saying it is asthma instead of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease? in order to avoid her qualifying to the class. he admits she has chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. he admits it is caused by smoking. but he wants to push it farther back in time. and why push it father back in time? so she would not qualify for the class. that is all that is about. and to do that, he has to ignore dozens of doctors who have treated her and diagnosed her as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, including board-certified pulmonologists. and he has to ignore the fact that the tests showed over and over again that it was not reversible which is what you would expect if it was asthma instead of disease. let me show you one of those, and that is the report from dr. laos of june 10, 1994 -- 1999. this is a university of florida professor of pulmonology who was brought in as a specialist in 1999 when she was hospitalized to perform pulmonary function tests to confirm that she had disease. read that document. what it says is it shows that the test indicates she has disease. he indicates that she has a history of it for the last four years. nowhere in there does he suggest any possibility of asthma. it is chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. the experts all reach that conclusion. one of them was dr. bagnoli. dr. bagnoli is her treating physician. he diagnosed her as suffering from chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. and he went back and looked at all those records and told you under oath that she was diagnosed and had chronic obstructive pulmonary disease before november of 1996. so the conditions for class membership clearly have been met. let us go, then, to the second issue, the issue of causation. there is no dispute here that smoking was the cause of helen taylor's disease. their only expert on that, dr. schroeder, admitted that she had chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and that it was caused by smoking. but reynolds claims that it was not their brands that caused it. and the evidence gets a little bit confusing here. helen was quite candid with you and said to you it is hard to remember going back with any decision, but before 1996, there was about an equal division between the winston and marlboro. the evidence we have is that from 1958 to 1961, she smoked several brands; pall mall, winston, her friend jane said they smoked, lucky strike. all of those are reynolds brands. either because reynolds had manufactured them at the time or they bought the company that did, and the court will instruct you they are responsible for that company's brands as well. only one, l&m, did she smoke some during that time is not a reynolds brand. and then following that from 1962 forward, her principal brand was winston for a long period of time. she says she thinks it was about an equal period of time with marlboro before 1996. she has testified at various times of estimates of maybe it was up to '72, maybe it was up to 1979. the fact is if you look at the '72 period and you look at the '79 period, it is a substantial amount in either event. if you took the 1979 period as to when she switched to marlboro, then the majority of her use is winston and the brands manufactured by reynolds. twenty-one years versus 16. if you take '72, it flips. but in either event, it is pretty close, as helen said, to being a similar amount of time between two brands. dr. burns is the only witness that addressed whether that was sufficient to be a cause, as the court will instruct you, of her disease. and what he testified to was that her smoking of reynolds brands caused the injury to her lungs, which was then part of the additional injury caused by smoking marlboro that resulted in disease. the question of causation is what is called concurring cause. we believe that the court will instruct you on what is called substantial contributing factor, that is that there can be more than one cause, it could be both marlboro and winston and other brands, if in the normal course of events it leads to it and each is a substantial contributing factor without which the event would have occurred. that is exactly what dr. burns told you. remember his analogy of the tractor-trailer with two trailers behind it? and he said it is going over the bridge and the bridge collapsed. if you used reynolds' argument, they would say, "we are the first trailer, philip morris with marlboro is the second trailer. and if you took away our trailer, she would not have had it. so we were not the cause." and philip morris would say, "well, if you took away our trailer, she would not have had it, and we are not the cause." so, as dr. burns said under that analysis, the bridge did not collapse. well, the bridge did collapse. she did get disease. the question is whether each was a substantial contributing factor, and if you took it away, whether she would have avoided the disease. that is exactly what dr. burns told you. there is no testimony to the contrary. the only other testimony came from dr. schroeder when he testified yesterday that had she quit in 1972, she may have avoided copd, she may not have gotten it when she did. but the issue is not if she quit. she did not quit. she continued to smoke. she did get copd. so the question is: what caused it? what contributed to causing it? and the only one who answered that question was dr. burns. he says that reynolds brands contributed to causing it using this analysis. he also said there is a second reason that reynolds brands caused it, and that is she got addicted to smoking cigarettes that were manufactured by reynolds. and if she had not been addicted, she would have never continued to smoke. she would not have smoked any marlboro to begin with. it is a real simple concept to understand. almost all smoking starts as a teenager. it is rare anybody starts to smoke the first time over 21 years of age, and almost nonexistent that people start smoking for the first time when they are 25. had she not smoked the reynolds brands and become addicted, whether it is 1972, whether it is 1979, whether it is a later period of time, she would never have picked up the marlboros to begin with because she would not have been addicted to the cigarettes to begin with. and that is exactly what dr. burns said. it is both because she was addicted that the marlboro -- that the reynolds brands were a cause, and because it worked in combination with the marlboro brands, both were substantial contributing factors, both contributed to causing her disease and peripheral vascular disease. the remaining issue dealing with the question of causation is the question under the two other counts; conspiracy, fraudulent concealment of whether helen taylor relied upon the conduct of reynolds and the other conspirators. for that, we are going to have to review the evidence relating to that. and what we told you at the beginning of the case was that an overview of the misconduct was quite simple. one, they targeted kids; two, they engineered cigarettes to make sure that they created addiction and that they kept people addicted so that they would continue to smoke. and three, they entered into a conspiracy among -- with each other to keep addicted smokers smoking by denying the hazards of cigarettes, by claiming there was doubt about the scientific evidence, by reassuring smokers that if there was anything hazardous in cigarettes, they would find it and take it out when they knew what was in there and they knew they could not possibly take it out. the evidence that they targeted kids is overwhelming. and you have not heard one piece of evidence, any testimony whatsoever from reynolds denying it. the best evidence that they targeted kids is the simple fact of what they say in their internal documents. dr. krugman was the principal person who talked about this issue. and dr. krugman told you that he had reviewed their internal documents, and as a result of which, it was absolutely obvious that they were targeting kids. and among the documents that we showed you was first the fact that they had studied the 14- to 17-year-old market. why do you study 14- to 17-year-old smokers? so that you can figure out how to keep -- get them to buy your cigarettes. you have got a whole series of documents starting in 1950s and running through the 1990s in which they are studying 14- to 17-year-olds and why they smoke. they also, we showed you specific documents from them where they indicated that what they were going to do was increase their franchise of the 14- to 17-year-old market. if you go to this particular document, perhaps the most important one. it is the 1975 marketing plans presented to the board of directors of r.j. reynolds at hilton head island about 1974 about their plans for 1975 and the years that follow. and their plan was to increase what they called their young adult franchise, but that young adult franchise went down to age 14. the documents that show they targeted kids are just overwhelming. their internal documents clearly confirm that they were targeting children. in addition to that, dr. krugman told you about all the money they spent on advertising in order to create images and pressure on children to smoke. he told you that they adopted a cigarette advertising code in order to suggest that they were not targeting kids and that they routinely violated it with their ads. and he showed you some examples of their ads. if you can bring up that composite, michael. you will have in evidence a composite of ads that we showed you. and these ads are just absolutely clear that they are targeting children, both because of where they are located, because of how they look, and because of the content of the ad. dr. krugman went through them and analyzed them and had looked at them and said how, for example, do you look at this camel lights ad of joe camel playing pool with his hat on backwards with a cigarette in his hand and say that the purpose of that ad is not to try and influence kids to smoke? that is clearly what they were doing, as their own internal documents indicate. secondly, in addition to -- well, the fact that they targeted kids is not just something that dr. krugman believed. we showed you that there were four consensus reports from agencies that had reviewed the issue and reached the same conclusion. the federal trade commission in 1967 reported to congress on their targeting kids and how successful it was so that virtually all americans, including teenagers, were subject to their advertising. the 1981 federal trade commission report again confirmed the effect on children of their extensive advertising. the 1994 surgeon general's report reported specifically that their extensive targeting of children and their advertising had, in fact, resulted in children starting to smoke and continuing to smoke. and the 2008 national cancer institute report, exhibit 431, also reached the conclusion that their advertising and targeting of children resulted in getting kids to smoke and in keeping them to smoke. the total weight of the evidence from multiple types of studies conducted by investigators from different disciplines using data from many countries demonstrates a causal relationship between tobacco advertising and promotional and increased tobacco use, particularly in connection with kids. the second area of misconduct that we showed you was how they designed and engineered their cigarettes to be addictive. he showed you a document of what the highly-engineered cigarette was. and dr. burns explained cigarettes are not just tobacco rolled in paper, they are highly-engineered products that include how you develop the paper, where the holes are placed in them, how flammable the paper is, what the filter is, what the tobacco itself is. and what he told you was that they engineer them to make them addictible first by making them inhalable. it is only if you get the smoke down to your lungs deeply is it addictive because then it hits your brain seven seconds later. if you cannot inhale it, then you do not become addicted. the second thing it did to make sure that people were addicted was they manipulated the levels of nicotine to make sure it reached the level necessary for a threshold to create addiction. and dr. burns told you about blending various leaves and stem, using reconstituted tobacco where they added nicotine back into the sheath and blended together to get the minimum level of nicotine necessary for addiction. finally, they added chemicals to make it more addictive. among them was ammonia. among them was acetaldehyde. the purpose of which was to make the product have more of a nicotine kick, and as a result, to make it more addictive. so they targeted children. they engineered their cigarettes to make sure they would become addicted and stay addicted. and then finally, they entered into a conspiracy which they engaged in for close to 50 years to deny that cigarettes were hazardous, to create doubt about whether they were hazardous, and to reassure smokers that they should continue smoking. now, the conspiracy is significant. i'll stop for a moment and explain the significance related to the conspiracy. one of the engle findings was that they entered into this conspiracy. the reason is that a conspiracy means that if reynolds was a member of that conspiracy, they are liable for the conduct of the other members of the conspiracy done in furtherance of the conspiracy. they are liable for what philip morris may have done, what the tobacco institute may have done, what the tirc would have done. so the question of whether or not reynolds brands caused chronic obstructive pulmonary disease is actually irrelevant in the conspiracy count because they are liable under the conspiracy count even if her disease was caused by some brand other than a reynolds brand. that is the significance of the conspiracy count. and the finding was that they engaged in conspiracy. and what is the evidence of that? well, the evidence starts with the development of the scientific evidence that cigarettes are hazardous. he told you about that, that it started in the early 1950s with four epidemiological studies that set out for the first time that cigarettes caused lung cancer and caused an uproar in the tobacco industry about what they should do. that -- those studies were followed by a mouse skin painting study in 1953 that confirmed that cigarette tar could cause cancer and was consistent with these studies. it was in that same time period that reynolds looked into it. and their top scientist, dr. claude teague, wrote a memorandum in which he reviewed the scientific evidence. and what he concluded was that the studies tend to confirm the relationship between heavy and prolonged tobacco smoking and cancer of the lung. it was a secret document. it was not disclosed. and most importantly, they said just the reverse publically from what their internal people were telling them. a few years later, they repeated the work and dr. rodgman also as part of their research department wrote a memo that indicated that cigarette smoke was a major causative factor in the presence of the high increasing incidence of cancer in the lungs in humans. it was secret. they did not disclose it. yet, their public relations people and their executives went out and denied that cigarette smoking was a causative factor. next, there was a visit of foreign cigarette manufacturers to the u.s. manufacturers to see what they thought about whether cigarette smoking caused cancer. and we have the memo of what they thought. they visited all of the tobacco companies and concluded that all of them with one exception, professor at yale, thought that cigarette smoking caused lung cancer, confirming what they thought. and then finally, we showed you a 1962 memo from a dr. rodgman again in which he concluded that the amount of evidence accumulated to cigarette smoke as a health hazard is overwhelming. so we know what the evidence was and what they thought. what did they do? the evidence is with this growing body of evidence that cigarettes caused cancer, the presidents of all the tobacco companies, including the president of r.j. reynolds, president of american tobacco which later became part of r.j. reynolds, the president of brown & williamson which later became apart of r.j. reynolds, they got together at the plaza hotel just before christmas in 1953 and they agreed upon a plan. and it was not to deal with the medical issue, not to deal with the fact that their customers may be dying of cancer from smoking, but how to deal with it as a public relations problem. and they hired the best known public relations company at the time out of new york city, hill & knowlton. and we have the documents to show what they thought at the time because hill & knowlton wrote memos about their meetings with them. and their memos indicate, one, that they believed and understood it caused cancer; and two, that they knew it was addictive, that people could not quit. they knew that, as these documents show, at least by 1953. we know from the claude teague memo that they knew earlier in february of 1953. and what did they do? they agreed upon a campaign in which they would use the vast resources of the tobacco companies to deny that cigarettes were a health hazard. in which they would claim that the scientific evidence was in doubt, that there was a controversy, and in which they would reassure smokers by saying, "we will investigate and determine whether cigarettes are harmful. and if we find that it is harmful, we will take it out. so you might as well continue smoking in the interim because we are going to solve this problem before you have any difficulty." and you saw the evidence of them doing that. it started with what is call the frank statement. the frank statement was the first in the conspiracy campaign. in that, they set out an ad for every newspaper in the country. they reprinted it and sent it around to everybody they could. and in that ad, they claim that there was no proof that cigarettes caused cancer. yet, their own internal documents suggest not only that there was proof but they believed it. and we accept the interest of people's health as a basic responsibility paramount to every other consideration of interest in our business. that is a line they repeated over and over in the ensuing years to reassure people, "we will find out the answer here, do not be worried, just continue smoking." when they knew internally what cigarettes were doing and how harmful they were. and in furtherance of this frank statement, they then issued press releases. they went out and tried to change the stories in magazines and newspapers. they met with television people. they gave interviews. they did whatever they could not just in 1953 and '54 and '55, but in the '60s, the '70s, the '80s, the '90s. they did not admit that cigarettes were harmful until 2000. after the engle trial was the first admission that cigarettes could be harmful. they did not admit that cigarettes were addictive until after the first engle trial in 2000. we have given you some of the examples of this. they used a front organization called tirc to engage in research designed to convince people that the scientific evidence was not sufficient when they knew it was. they created a lobbying organization called the tobacco institute just down the street from the white house that would issue press releases. whenever the surgeon general said anything saying the surgeon general was wrong, sometimes using more blatant language. and we saw some examples of that when dr. burns led you through some of the things that were being said. when the surgeon general's report in 1964 was given and issued that publically said cigarettes caused lung cancer, they sent out their representatives, each of the television news programs to deny that the evidence was sufficient. and claimed, as howard cullman did on the cbs evening news, that they would find anything that is harmful in cigarettes and take it out, and that it was continuing doubt about whether there was any problem. that continued in the years that followed. and we gave you example after example of it. let me show you a couple of examples to sort of remind you of it. first, let us go to the president of r.j. reynolds on nightline. (the following video clip was played as follows:) unidentified speaker: you said smoking does not cause cancer, yes or no? unidentified speaker: it is not known whether cigarettes cause cancer. it has not been causally established. unidentified speaker: cigarette smoking, no causal relationship between cigarette smoking and emphysema? unidentified speaker: despite all of the research to date, there has been no causal link established. unidentified speaker: no causal relationship between cigarette smoking and heart disease? unidentified speaker: no. as a matter of fact, there are studies that while we are accused of being associated with heart disease, there have been studies that are conducted over ten years that would say again that science is still puzzled over these forces. unidentified speaker: does it stain your teeth? unidentified speaker: there are people who say it does. i guess, depending on the human beings' own, let us say, physical makeup, it may well stain your teeth. (the video clip ended.) mr. shields: all right. that is one example. that is from the 1980s. earlier, the tobacco institute sent out the representative howard cullman to make similar statements on face the nation. (the following video clip was played as follows:) unidentified speaker: we are also very concerned about the charges leveled against our product, and we are very anxious to do whatever we can to clear the air in this matter. we happen to be optimistic about the future, and we happen to feel that this is a great industry. and this industry can face the future with confidence because when, as, and if any ingredient in cigarette smoke is identified as being injurious to human health, we are confident that we can eliminate that ingredient. (the video clip ended.) mr. shields: that is the example of all three of the elements; deny that cigarettes are harmful, say that there is some doubt about the evidence, and reassure smokers to keep them smoking by saying if there is anything harmful, we can find it and take it out, so you might as well keep smoking. dr. burns showed you the consumption charts that indicated that the campaign worked. they also denied that cigarettes were addictive. and perhaps the best example we have of that was as late as 1994 when all of the presidents of the companies were asked to come before congress, to raise their right hand, swore to tell the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth, just like a witness here, and each of them, including the president of reynolds, denied that cigarettes were addictive. despite the fact that their own internal documents showed that going back to the '50s they knew and understood that cigarettes were addictive, that people would have an extraordinarily difficult time quiting, and that the way to keep them addicted was to make sure they had the right amount of nicotine. all of this is summed up in a document that indicates what they were selling. we will bring up plaintiff's exhibit 305. this is a document that summarizes what they have been doing over the year. their strategy was to create doubt. another one of their documents indicates that the product that they were selling was doubt, that they could not continue to assert that people had a free choice if cigarettes were addictive, and consequently, they had to deny that cigarettes were addictive. that is what they did for decades. so the question becomes what impact did that have on helen taylor? to understand what impact it had, we have to think about what was being concealed. reynolds would like you to believe that what we are saying is that it was being concealed that cigarettes were harmful and look at all these other things out, newspapers and public service announcements that indicate that cigarettes were harmful. the point of fraudulent concealment, the point of the conspiracy count is not that people did not know that it was being said that cigarettes were harmful, but that the cigarette companies knew it was harmful. they knew it was addictive. they knew that filters did not reduce the risk. they knew that low tar and light cigarettes were no more safe. they knew that there was no scientific controversy. they knew that the compounds in cigarettes that caused disease could not be taken out. yet, they publically said just the reverse and concealed the truth of what they knew. and so the question is: what would have happened had they told the truth? what would have happened had they revealed what they knew and fraudulently concealed? helen taylor told you, "yes, i had heard that cigarettes were harmful. i saw the label that said that they may be. and i thought that meant that they may not be, that there was a controversy." she thought the controversy was between one man called the surgeon general and the tobacco companies. and she told you she believed the tobacco companies because she did not think they would be allowed to sell cigarettes if they were harmful. now, the evidence, the unequivocal evidence is that she relied on their campaign of denial and doubt. she believed their campaign of denial and doubt. she did not think it applied to her. that was not unusual. as dr. krugman showed you, the federal trade commission looked at whether the labels were effective in 1967 and concluded that they have proven ineffective mainly because few people seem to pay any attention to it. they looked at the issue again in 1981 and did a whole series of surveys and polling information to see what people knew and understood and discovered that people had very little understanding of the true risks of cigarette smoking. she had almost no understanding. she did not think it personally applied to her. she thought it was equivocal one man against the industry and that if it really was harmful, the government would not allow it. so she continued to smoke. had the industry been open and honest and revealed what they actually knew and believed, it would not have been possible for the public to then say i believe the industry because the industry would have been telling the truth. it could have made all the difference in the world. what we have now is a culture which is very antismoking, could have been the culture in the 1950s at the time she started if they would have only been truthful about what they knew and believed. that, ladies and gentlemen, is the only evidence on reliance that proves their reliance. the third issue that we are going to deal with is called comparative fault. as i told you, comparative fault is where you compare the fault of one versus the other. and you will have a verdict form that has a question in which you can assign percentages, and the court will instruct you what that applies to. and you then fill that out. as i indicated, we certainly acknowledge that you could find and we acknowledge that helen taylor has some measure of fault for not quitting sooner, but so does reynolds. they say zero responsibility. this case is about whether they have some responsibility. we accept it; they do not. you need to look at their whole course of conduct and compare it to helen taylor's to decide what fault each has. she started smoking as a kid. she quickly became addictive. she smoked more and more. she believed what they said, that it was not harmful. she believed that it did not apply. she believed that there was a continuing controversy. and then when she got disease and could no longer believe that, she tried for almost 18 years to quit smoking doing everything possible. she did exactly what they wanted her to do. that is, they targeted kids; she started smoking as a kid. they designed their cigarettes to be addictive; she became addicted. they entered into a campaign and conspiracy to deny, doubt and reassure, and it worked on her. she believed their denials. she thought there was doubt. she was reassured because they would not be allowed to sell them if it really was harmful. in comparison to her, look at their conduct over the years. it is truly reprehensible. and the result of which is that there have been massive damages and losses. so let me turn to the fourth issue, the damages in the case. there are two types of damages. one called compensatory damages. the second is called punitive damages. we will show you the damages in regard to compensatory. compensatory damages include such things as past medical expenses, future medical expenses, lost wages, loss of earning capacity. the economics. we put all the evidence of her medical bills, they total $468,654. we also put on the evidence of her lost income and loss of earning capacity. you recall mr. spruance testified. mr. spruance gave you a range of the low end of the range and the high end of the range, and you see that in this chart. the low end of the range for past wage loss, future wage loss, future loss of services, medical expenses from hospitalizations is $776,000. the high range is over $2.8 million. you need to decide on the evidence where you think she falls in terms of that, given the testimony about what damages she is suffered. in addition to these economic damages which will be on the verdict form, you will also have a place on the verdict form to award damages for the intangibles, her pain and suffering, her mental anguish, her physical impairment. those are damages under florida law, and the court will instruct you on what damages are allowed under florida law, and the verdict form will have a specific portion of the verdict form in which you can fill out those amounts. now, i suggest that you think about it as follows: her damages include pain and suffering, mental anguish, physical impairment going back at least to 1996 to date. eighteen years. a severe pain and suffering, mental anguish, impairment, hospitalization after hospitalization, er visit after er visit. you call dr. burns describing to you what it was like to have copd with the straws getting smaller and smaller until you just felt like you were suffocating. and you will have a chart that shows what her expected life would otherwise be which is added to those 18 years so that if she lives anywhere as long as her expected life would be, you are going to around and in excess of 30 years of pain and suffering, physical impairment, mental anguish, all of those intangible losses. and you need to determine how much that is worth. you can look at in terms of daily basis. you can look at it in terms of yearly basis. you can look at it in terms of when it is severe and she is in the hospital and she is struggling to breathe, how much that should be worth. you can look at it in terms of all those er visits in which she was struggling to breathe and goes in to seek help because she is panic-stricken. she is trying to breathe and cannot. how much all of that is worth. there is no magic formula. it is up to you as jurors to determine what is a fair and reasonable amount. i suggest to you that a fair and reasonable amount for that portion, the intangible portion, is no less than $5 million. that is in addition to economic losses that are shown, that is in addition to the medical expenses that are shown. all of that should be completed on the verdict form. that is compensatory damages, but there is a second part of damages: punitive damages. the court will instruct you on what punitive damages refers to. punitive damages and the instruction he will give you will deal with the purpose of deterring and punishing misconduct. if ever there was a case that justified punitive damages, it is this case. you have seen the extensive evidence of their misconduct; targeting kids, designing and creating addiction, and conspiring to keep people smoking. with what result? dr. burns told you the result is 440,000 americans will die this year of a smoking-related disease. the result is that since 1964 when the first surgeon general's report came out, 20 million americans have died as a result of smoking cigarettes. 20 million people. that is reprehensible. you are going to have to determine, based on the record you saw, as laid out by dr. burns, as laid out by dr. krugman, as to whether you ought to award punitive damages to punish them for the misconduct and to deter them and others from engaging in such misconduct. we think the evidence is overwhelming and that the final thing you should do on this verdict form is check the mark there is an entitlement to punitive damages and punitive damages ought to be awarded in this case. i'm going to sit down at this point. the defense will have their concluding remarks, but i will be back to speak to you briefly after they have concluded their remarks as well. thank you. rebuttal argument mr. shields: thank you, your honor. i know it is been a long day. you are anxious to get home. i'm anxious to get a little rest. so i'm not going to take a lot more of your time, but i do feel compelled to respond to some of the things that were said. and so let me just make a few major points. first, you are the judges of the evidence. and i've noticed you are avid. and you have been very good about taking detailed notes so that you can refresh your recollection. and you collectively then have to make a decision about what you think the evidence is. the lawyers do not determine what the evidence is. if i tell you what the evidence is and it is contrary to what your notes are, of course you go on your notes and your collective memory. i say this to you because quite candidly, most of what i heard mr. hohnbaum say in closing argument is either, one, not supported by the evidence, contrary to the evidence, or in great part cherrypicking little pieces of the evidence to make it appear different than what the totality of the evidence is. and so i'm going to ask you to look collectively at what you recall the evidence to be, not based on what you tell you, not based on what he says, but you really think the evidence was. so, for example, think about his summary of what dr. burns testified to. it bore no relationship to what dr. burns actually said. he cherrypicked a little point here and cherrypicked a little point there to act like dr. burns did not support in great detail everything in support of this case. second point i want to make. the law in the case comes from judge healey, not from me, not from mr. hohnbaum. you will have written instructions, i must say in candor again, that several of the things he told you in his closing argument about what the law required is not what you will be instructed, and it is not what i believe the court will tell you the law is. for example, he was talking about but/for causation. and he said to you, you have to find that helen taylor was powerless to quit smoking to find causation. you will not find that on in any instruction from the court. you will not find that in the court's instruction about what causation means. what the court, i believe, will instruct you is the concurring cause instruction i showed you during direct; namely, that there can be more than one cause; secondly, that when two causes come together, the question is, is it a substantial contributing factor without which it would not have occurred? and that is precisely what dr. burns told you. mr. hohnbaum can get up here and say nobody said that, but that is what exactly what dr. burns told you. look at your notes. that is the whole point of the analogy of the two trailers. and he can say, well, if she would have quit in 1972 she would not have got copd, but that is not the point. the point is she has copd. what contributed to causing it? and if smoking their brands was a substantial contributing factor and the but for provision is met as well, as dr. burns said, that proves causation. so you need to see what the instructions really say, not what our -- what the lawyers tell you they say or what they mean. third point i would make: why did reynolds need to go to california to get an expert to say she had asthma instead of copd? think about that. he told you that riddled throughout the records was an indication she was diagnosed with asthma. well, if any doctor here had diagnosed her with asthma, why did not they subpoena the doctor to come in and testify to that? if any doctor here truly thought she had asthma, why did not they employ that doctor to come in and testify? well, the answer ladies and gentlemen is, it is simply untrue that the records are riddled with diagnosis of asthma. once again, cherrypicked a point here and a point there and then expands that to say it covers everything. now, i know you are not going -- but do you have any doubt about it, go through the medical records. what you will see is every time she is hospitalized, the discharge summary is: chronic obstructive pulmonary disease exacerbation, not asthma. go through all the times she goes to the emergency room or sees the doctor. almost every one of those, the diagnosis is disease exacerbation. look at the records, just do not take my word for it. and certainly do not take his word that is throughout the records. it is not. look at it and see what the records actually show. now, of course there some times when the term "asthma" appears. and we saw, for example, he mentioned it in his closing argument. on march 3rd, 1999, an intern said -- may be asthma or copd, sounds more like asthma to me. the attending physician, that is the person in charge of training that intern, wrote a couple of pages later that it was disease, not asthma. more importantly, she was then sent as a result of that hospitalization to be evaluated by dr. laos, the head of pulmonology at the university of florida. and he wrote that june 10th letter after doing pulmonary function tests and unequivocally says chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, not asthma. the reality is they have to go out and get the guy they always call from california that paid almost a million dollars to come in and claim it is something other than what all of the local doctors and the local medical records said it was. dr. bagnoli went back through the records and said, yes, i wrote asthma in the history, but i did not have the records. and now, i've gone back through the records and she did not have asthma. ladies and gentlemen, that ought to end the matter. let me also say, as he did, it is not a question of either/or asthma or copd. the issue for you is whether she had copd before november 1996. she also had asthma. if she had asthma some other time, that does not change the fact that if she was diagnosed with copd before november 21, 1996, and she had the symptoms of it, shortness of breath on exertion, hyperinflated lungs, the various things that dr. burns talked about, then she meets the class definition. secondly, he ignored one important fact, pulmonary function tests were done a couple months later. and dr. burns told you that the results of that test, even though done after november, clearly show that she had copd before november -- you do not get that bad between november and march. what was shown in march had to mean that she had copd for sometime prior to november of 1996. and both dr. bagnoli and dr. burns said that. similarly, ask the question: why did they need to get dr. ticknor to testify? you have throughout the records a diagnosis that she had nicotine addiction. not just dr. kennison, but dr. bagnoli, and look at the hospital records, time and time again they use the term "tobacco use disorder," they use the term "tobacco dependence," and dr. burns told you dr. kennison told you, those terms are synonymous with a meaning of tobacco addiction. she was diagnosed over and over again, from '96 forward as being addicted to nicotine. so how do you deal with that? you bring in a doctor from san antonio who is not a specialist, who has no particular training, and who takes an extreme view of what dsm requires. and more importantly than that, who just flatly misrepresents what she told them. we have a transcript. and that is why i put on dr. frazier so she could tell you, here are the things that dr. ticknor told you he testified yesterday about what helen taylor told him, and it is not in the transcript. it is not on the video. she simply did not tell it to him. he said it in order to justify an opinion that is just flat wrong. next let us talk a little bit about brand usage. this whole brand usage issue has been so distorted in terms of what you have been told. first, it is not just winston. the question is whether brands manufactured by reynolds or its predecessor companies for which its responsible american tobacco contributed to causing her copd. so just picking up 1962 winston is not the issue. the very interrogatory read to you indicates she smoked pall mall and lucky strike from 1958 to 1961. those are brands manufactured by the american tobacco company, for which reynolds is responsible because they bought that company. they brought them into it. it is now part of reynolds. so the question is, not just winston and not just 1962 but the entire time period. and you have an interesting possibility here. it is true that there was an answer to an interrogatory that said '72 for winston. but it is also true, as michael testified, that he recalls she smoked winston up through the time she was married to mr. taylor, which would have been 1979. it is also true in her deposition ms. taylor said 1979. so you have two possibilities. you have a time period that runs from 1958 to 1972, and one that runs from 1958 to 1979. if you take this, then the amount of time for reynolds brands is 14 years. whereas if you take this, the amount of time is 21 years. next important point, the relevant time period is 1996 not 2008. because the question is: did those brands contribute to causing her copd in 1996? so if you find as the records show that she had copd in 1996, the time period you are interested in is up to 1996 not 2008. so that if you used the 1996 time period, then if you accepted the '72 time period, the difference would be 14 years for reynolds brands, 23 years for other brands. but if you accepted the '79 period, which is what michael remembers and what ms. taylor also testified in her deposition, it flips, and it is 21 years for the reynolds brands and 16 years for philip morris and marlboro. and helen taylor got on the stand and said she could not be precise. it seemed to her like she smoked them about an equal period of time talking about the time period before 1996 because that is the relevant time period. dr. burns answered the question based both on 1972 and on 1979 and said in his opinion a substantial contributing factor without which it []would not have occurred or the but for causation. there is no testimony to the contrary. dr. schroeder did not address the issue. they have no evidence to contradict what dr. burns said. it is interesting they spent almost no time talking about their own misconduct. we said they targeted kids, they designed their cigarettes to create and sustain addiction. they entered into a conspiracy to convince smokers to continue smoking by denying the hazards of cigarettes saying there was doubt about the science and reassuring people that they would take out whatever was harmful. no interest in going into any that of that, claims it is totally irrelevant. what is the relevance of that? the relevance is comparative fault. you are to compare their fault to what helen taylor admits is her fault in not quitting sooner. it is also relevant to punitive damages. the question of punitive damages is whether their conduct was reprehensible and thus whether you should deter and punish them for their conduct. that is why all of that evidence was put on. and they just ignore it. did they offer any evidence to dispute? mr. hohnbaum: your honor, objection. may we approach? the court: yes, sir. (a sidebar conference was held outside the hearing of the jury.) mr. hohnbaum: i cannot dispute the engle findings. he is spending this whole time blame us for not disputing the engle findings. so him making the point we have not gone in and defended ourselves about those things. we cannot do that. and that is what he is -- i let it go a little smidge. and then it got heavy. he kept drilling on the point. and he knows we cannot dispute the engle findings. and so criticizing us for not disputing the engle findings is completely inappropriate. mr. shields: one, they can dispute punitive damages and the basis for it. two, i filed a motion saying they could and you denied my motion. the court: well, and the other thing is, in your close you started out by jumping up and down about what in lord's name did we spend all this time about engle, engle, engle findings, engle findings -- mr. hohnbaum: because we cannot dispute it. it is already happened. it is already over. it does not decide the issues this case. the court: i know the impression you left with the jury they just wasted your time going through all this engle business, which is not true because there is other reasons for it. and so -- mr. shields: i was going to cite for the record metropolitan gold county v cox says that even in the liability findings had been established, they are still admissible for the purpose of comparative fault. the court: he is just citing the case for his position. mr. hohnbaum: that is not duval county. i can say that. he is not allowed to make the points that he is making about us not disputing the engle findings. and that is where the line is, and he is gone over that line. he walked up to it and he jumped right over it. and so whatever point he is made, i would say it is made. it is time to move on. mr. shields: your honor, i have a right to say they did not dispute all the evidence we put in on punitive damages. and they did not. the court: i agree. it is overruled. (the sidebar conference ended and proceedings took place in open court as follows:) mr. shields: you heard no evidence from them disputing the testimony of dr. burns, the testimony of dr. krugman that they targeted kids, that they designed their cigarettes to make them addictive, that they entered into a conspiracy to keep smokers smoking by creating doubt and denial and reassurance. those are relevant of the punitive damages and the comparative fault. the bottom line in this case is, as mr. hohnbaum continues to say, they claim zero responsibility. worked his way through the verdict form and put zero responsibility for everything. we admit some responsibility. we admit she has some measure of fault. this case is whether they have any responsibility, whether it is an absolutely zero, because that is what they made. and they refuse that -- all these years to concede they have never done anything wrong. mr. hohnbaum: objection, your honor. motion on that one. the court: have a seat. finish up, mr. shields. mr. shields: it comes down to the simple proposition, you are going to have to determine as you work your way through this verdict form, one, was she a member of the engle class? the evidence is unequivocal that she was; two, you are going to have to determine causation. and the evidence is undisputed from dr. burns on that; three, you are going to have to determine comparative fault. i'll submit there is evidence on what they did -- what they did over the years in comparison to her, means that you need to assign substantial fault to them. and finally, you are going to have to determine damages, both compensatory and whether to award punitive damages. the issue at this point is not an amount of punitive damages. the issue at this point is whether there is entitlement to punitive damages for their misconduct. i'm not going to go over the figures again with you, you have heard them. you heard them from mr. spruance. you have seen them from the documents and from the medical records. i trust that you can go through that information and make a decision on those issues. i thank you again for your time, for your attention. we really do appreciate it. we know how difficult it is in a case of this complexity and this length for a jury sit through with the constant problems we are dealing with. so we truly appreciate it. thank you. the court: thank you, mr. shields. all right, ladies and gentlemen, that will do it for today. again, though, we are not yet completely finished so please do not discuss the case among yourselves, do not let anybody discuss the case with you. obviously, do not do any research, do not talk to family members, friends, things of that nature. do not form any fixed opinions just yet. we have one more thing to do, and that is for me to read to you the jury instructions that apply in this case. and then you will be able to go to the jury room to begin your deliberations. and that is when the discussions will begin among yourselves. so again, thank you, as both lawyers have said for your attention not just for today but throughout the last week and a half, two and a half, whatever it is been, long time, and have a safe ride home. see you in the morning. we will start at 9:30. i'll see you all then. thank you again.