closing argument mr. hohnbaum: thank you, your honor. why have we spent so much time in this case essentially trying to reprove the engle findings when the case that you are asked to decide is helen taylor's case? you would not know it by how much time you spent listening to helen taylor. on direct examination, mr. shields asked ms. taylor questions for 45 minutes, 45 minutes. dr. krugman and dr. burns testified, dr. krugman for 245 minutes, dr. burns for 395 minutes, ten hours of testimony from dr. burns and dr. krugman. generic witnesses testifying about generic facts. it is testimony in a box, right. dr. burns $3.5 million, going from one courthouse to another courthouse to another courthouse saying the exact same thing. dr. krugman going from one courthouse to another courthouse to another courthouse saying the exact same thing. dr. krugman, when i asked him about another case, the person from kentucky, "i testified the same as the person started in 1922 and grew up in kentucky." it does not matter to dr. krugman, he comes in and he says the same thing in every single case. the facts that are going to help you decide this case are the facts that relate to helen taylor, not to anybody else. not to any other person but to helen taylor. now, the engle findings that we talked about from the very beginning of this case during voir dire, they do not help you answer the issues that you have to decide in this case. they do not. they do not establish that she is a member of the class, obviously, right. that is the first issue to decide, is she a member of the class. they do not establish whether ms. taylor's copd or pvd was caused by smoking r.j. reynolds cigarettes. they do not establish that ms. taylor was addicted, right. they do not establish that. and they do not establish that any sort of addiction was a legal cause of her copd or pvd. and they do not, of course, establish that anything r.j. reynolds said or did prevented ms. taylor from knowing that smoking was dangerous. you do not even get to consider the engle findings until you determine that ms. taylor is a member of the engle class. the facts that matter in this case are not complicated. they are not difficult. they are simple. all the stuff that you heard from dr. burns and all the stuff that you heard from dr. krugman that do not have anything to do with ms. taylor. what we know is that ms. taylor did not start smoking with r.j. reynolds cigarettes. she started smoking with l&m cigarettes. we know that while ms. taylor smoked r.j. reynolds cigarettes from 1962 to 1972, we are going to have some discussion about that, millions, millions of smokers quit as a result of the public health community's repeated warnings. we know, dr. frazier testified from the stand today that ms. taylor never tried to quit smoking until 1996. and we are going to talk about what that effort looked like. 24 years, 24 years after she stopped smoking r.j. reynolds cigarettes. the ten years that ms. taylor smoked r.j. reynolds cigarettes did not cause her copd or her pvd. and ms. taylor is not a member of the engle class for, among other reasons, she did not have copd before november 21, 1996. the case in some respects is captured right here. what we know from her smoking from 1958 to 1961, she started with l&m. the testimony is she smoked lucky strikes for about six months and then she never purchased pall malls but occasionally she smoked them. then we know from 1962 to 1971, '72, she smoked winston cigarettes. and the rest of the time, decades, decade after decade, she never smoked winston cigarettes. now, let me just address something right at the outset because mr. shields spent some time talking about that the cigarette is highly engineered. what we know is that nicotine occurs naturally in tobacco. what we know is that there is less nicotine in cigarette tobacco than in natural tobacco. this is dr. burns' testimony. it comes out. they reduce the amount of nicotine. and roll-your-own cigarettes are as addictive and dangerous as the cigarettes helen taylor smoked. folks, there is no way to make a safe cigarette. there is no way to do it. and if we go back, of course, keep this in mind because this is a thread throughout the entire case, we did not manufacturer the cigarettes that ms. taylor smoked past 1972. she smoked philip morris cigarettes starting in 1972 for decades up until this year. so, look, what is the first question you are going to have to decide in this case? the first question on the verdict form. i'm going to go through this verdict form with you today. the first question, not surprisingly, is state whether helen taylor is a member of the engle class. all of the verdict form questions that you have to answer in this case relate to helen taylor. it is her case. it is her burden to prove her claims. so we showed this slide to you in opening, and i think mr. shields used it with dr. burns. it is not in dispute that these are the hurdles the plaintiff has to clear to establish that she is a member of the class. the first one: plaintiff must prove she had copd before november 21, 1996. if you do not cross that hurdle, right, if they have not proved that to you, then she is not a member of the class. then you -- plaintiff also has to prove medical causation, that her copd was caused by smoking. they then have to prove that ms. taylor was addicted to nicotine. and if you cross that hurdle, you have an additional hurdle, and that is whether addiction to cigarettes was a legal cause of her copd. so what i want to do is i want to walk through those hurdles and what the evidence is relating to those hurdles. so let us talk about manifestation first. there is no dispute that this is what the plaintiff has to prove: she had copd before november 21, 1996. and there are three facts to keep in mind as you decide the manifestation question: one, ms. taylor has asthma, she has asthma. the symptoms of asthma and copd are the same. and no testing proves ms. taylor had copd in 1996. it is the plaintiff's burden to prove to you that she had copd in 1996. this is it, this is their proof. two pages of her medical records. two, that they are using to establish that they had copd in 1996. there was no testimony from the doctors about these two reports. there is no -- there is nothing else for you to rely on than these two documents. now, look, it said key facts. ms. taylor had asthma. dozens of doctors over time believed ms. taylor had asthma. i set up here, mr. kalil set up here on this elmo and he threw one in front of another about copd, and i threw in one and another about asthma. that does not aid the inquiry. it is not a let us see who can get the biggest stat of asthma versus copd. that is not the exercise here, okay. but what we do know is the one doctor who provided continuous care to ms. taylor, continuous meaning year after year after year starting in 2011, was dr. bagnoli. dr. bagnoli in his medical records repeatedly, repeatedly assessed her and diagnosed her with asthma. and those are four records right there and you will have to look at, he diagnosed her with asthma. three years of office visits. dr. bagnoli did pulmonary function tests. he did the tests. he did three tests. and after looking at those tests, what did he say was her condition? he said she had asthma. he did numerous chest x-rays during that time. what condition -- we are not contesting she had copd, right. the point here is she has asthma, right. dr. bagnoli said so. he said so after three years of office visits. he said so after numerous pulmonary function tests. he said so after numerous chest x-rays. and, of course, he had one ct scan. repeatedly. and i asked, "you would not write down one thing and actually mean something else, would you?" and his answer was, "never. i would never do that." when he wrote down that she had asthma after treating her for many, many years, when he wrote it down, that is what he thought. he would not write down one thing and mean something else. of course he would not. now, you have got to ask yourself when you see a party running from overwhelming weight of the evidence, why? why are they spending so much time trying to prove to you that she never had asthma? folks, everybody from that stand said you can have asthma and you can have copd. you can have both of those conditions at the same time. so why is there a changing story here? and there is a changing story, right. because ms. taylor self-reported throughout her medical history, "i had asthma." i asked her on the stand, "to your knowledge, do you have asthma?" "no, i do not." dr. bagnoli says she is been telling people she has asthma. dr. burns acknowledges that asthma was filled out by ms. taylor, not by her physician. so she says on the stand, "i do not have asthma," she tells doctors throughout her life she has asthma. and here's the problem for them: if she had asthma in 1996, they know that there is nothing in these two records, absolutely nothing that could distinguish between asthma and copd, nothing. the symptoms of asthma and copd are the same. both cause obstruction, both cause coughing, both cause wheezing, both cause shortness of breath. and let us pause on the next one, because mr. shields made a point about mentioning hyperinflation of the lungs because that is a finding on one of these reports, hyperinflation of the lungs. well, folks, every witness from the stand was asked that question, said hyperinflation occurs with both asthma and copd. having hyperinflation does not aid the inquiry because the symptom is the same whether you have copd or whether you have asthma. they are treated with nebulizers and steroids. they can lead to exacerbations. plaintiff simply has not proved that she had copd in 1996. what do we know about these two records? we know there was no pulmonary function test in 1996, right. there was not. there was no ct scan in 1996. there was no chest x-ray that confirmed copd. the chest x-ray -- the chest x-ray only mentioned hyperinflation of the lungs which could be either condition. and there is no reference in here to coughing or sputum production which would be consistent with chronic bronchitis. remember the definition of chronic bronchitis, you have to have coughing or sputum production for three consecutive months over a two-year period of time. is there anything in here about that? absolutely not. what we do see in those records is certain references. in july, right, the reference was rule out copd. now, we can all agree that rule out does not mean that is what she had, right. otherwise, why are you ruling it out? and dr. bagnoli confirmed, you have not confirmed the diagnosis, you are trying to rule it out. it means what it says. in october, what does the record say? it says let us evaluate for emphysema. now, i get that in the diagnosis box it says copd, right. there is no question that is what it says. how could the doctor have made that diagnosis on the limited information that was available to him in 1996 because none of the things that was reported to the doctor and none of the findings that he made differentiate between copd and asthma. and we know that even after 1996 that there was still a question in the doctor's minds about whether or not she had copd. she had pulmonary function tests. there is a record in july 22, '97. the results are still pending. we spent a lot of time on the march 3rd, '99, record. sounds more like asthma but could be both. and then 6-10-99, "we will schedule her for a full set of pulmonary function tests to determine whether or not she has chronic bronchitis or emphysema." copd is chronic bronchitis and/or emphysema. no testing, of course, proves she had copd in 1996. the pulmonary function tests only establish whether or not there is an obstruction, that is what the test does. the test does not show what the cause of the obstruction is. and the first time she had any record that showed emphysema was in 2008 when she had the ct scan. it said minimal -- i cannot even remember what the term was at that point. that is emphysema. 2008, first time it shows up on any record. and those results showed that the emphysema was minimal. now, look, mr. shields spent a fair amount of time putting stock in the fact that there are records that establish -- there are references to records in '97 and later that make reference to no bronchodilator response, right? remember those records that said no bronchodilator response? dr. schroeder when he was on the stand was asked questions by mr. shields, and it is undoubtedly the state of medical knowledge in the gold report that mr. shields put up and said is not this the state of the art? is not this the established view of the medical community? and what does it say? it essentially says response to bronchodilator is not helpful in distinguishing between the two diseases. so while the doctors back then were noting no bronchodilator response because back then the knowledge was that must mean something, it is a way to distinguish between the two. so they noted it back then, but we know now, this establishes now no bronchodilator response is not helpful in determining whether or not somebody has asthma or copd. ms. taylor, the first hurdle that you have is did she prove that she -- her copd manifested itself before january 1 -- november 21, 1996. the answer to that question is no. second, plaintiff must prove smoking was a legal cause of her copd. it is her burden to prove that smoking was the cause of her copd. i'm not going to spend any time on that hurdle. i'm going to go to the next one. plaintiff failed to prove addiction. and we spent a lot of time. in fact, the plaintiff put on three, three separate witnesses to try to prove to you that she was addicted. they put on dr. burns who talked about it. of course, dr. burns talked about a lot of things. he talked about addiction. and then we had -- we had dr. kennison, ph.d., not a medical doctor, dr. kennison. and then today, yet again, we heard from another person to tell you that ms. taylor was addicted. we also heard from dr. ticknor. dr. ticknor testified that ms. taylor's smoking did not cause her clinically significant impairment or distress. and it is clear from the record that it did not cause her clinically significant impairment or distress. she was able to control her smoking. there were times when she would go hours without smoking on the job. there were times where she was smoking four or five cigarettes a day. she could, in fact, control her smoking. and it did not interfere with her work or family obligations. taking a smoke break during the day does not interfere with your work obligations. and there is been no suggestion that it is interfered with her social obligations. we had one argument with the son that we talked about, and that is it. and ms. taylor did smoke to relieve anxiety. that was part of the reason that she did it. dr. ticknor is the only medical doctor who met ms. taylor and treats nicotine addiction every day. think about it. dr. burns testified from the stand, did he ask ms. taylor any questions? did he even talk to ms. taylor? dr. frazier, did she ask ms. taylor any questions? no. what we heard from about somebody who actually seen and discussed with ms. taylor her smoking was dr. kennison, right. and what we know about dr. kennison is she is a specialist because she took a four-day training course. she has seen only ten patients solely for smoking cessation in her practice. ten. she did not review any other medical records or depositions. and this is critical: she knew that ms. taylor had filed a lawsuit against the tobacco companies the entire time she treated her. and she did not diagnose ms. taylor under the dsm v which we spent so much time talking about until after her deposition. what happened in this case is instead of ms. taylor telling you in the 45 minutes of questioning that you got on direct examination whether she was addicted, what we saw was dr. kennison come into this courtroom and put note after note after note after note all done a year or so before this lawsuit came to trial, six years after it had been filed, and testified about what those notes say. that is the evidence from the person who saw her on a day-to-day basis during that time period. the only person that they have that actually spoke to ms. taylor was dr. kennison who only saw her in the last 15 months. ms. taylor was not addicted. if you get over that hurdle, which you should not, you also have to address -- catch up in my notes here. you have to address whether or not the addiction -- because it is not over if she is addicted, that does not end the inquiry. addiction has to be a legal cause of her disease. look, folks, you are going to get the jury instructions, okay. so when mr. shields or i tell you what the law is, this is your check, right. you are going to get them when you go back to the jury room. the judge is going to instruct you on them and you are going to get them. and one phrase that you did not hear from mr. shields in any of his discussion about the jury instructions is the phrase "but for." but for. you are going to see that phrase throughout the jury instructions. but for means it would not have happened but for something. so here plaintiff must prove addiction to cigarettes was a legal cause. but for the addiction, she would not have gotten copd. the issue for you to decide is did she have the choice to continue smoking rather than to quit, did she have that choice or was she powerless due to her addiction? it is one or the other. if she had the choice, then the addiction was not a but for, was not a legal cause of her copd. and if she was powerless due to her addiction, the hurdled is cleared. and this is the instruction and you will get it back there so you do not have to write it down. but it says the magic words "but for." we are going to see that again. now, look, this is also just interesting, and it is a moment to pause as you think about the evidence that you heard in this case and why that evidence does or does not really impact ms. taylor. but according to dr. burns, ms. taylor did not become addicted until 1968. 1968. she was 24 years old in 1968. even under dr. burns' own theory that she was addicted, ms. taylor made a free choice to smoke the first decade she started smoking cigarettes. and her free choice before 1968 did not cause her to smoke for another 46 years. her smoking from 1958 to 1968 was not a but for cause of her copd. let us talk about nicotine addiction. nicotine addiction does not permanently change brain receptors. it does not interfere with the smoker's ability to understand the dangers of smoking. it does not interfere with that. and it does not interfere with the smoker's ability to make an informed choice to quit or continue smoking. nicotine, folks, everybody that is smoked cigarettes has gotten nicotine. it does not prevent smokers from quitting permanently. of course it does not. millions and millions of addicted smokers quit while ms. taylor continued to smoke, and did not even try to quit up until 1996. why is ms. taylor different from the 60 million smokers who quit? ask yourself that question. were her cigarettes more addictive? no, they were not. is her brain affected differently from other smokers who quit? no. was her exposure to advertising different? no. was her exposure to any tobacco company statements different? no. did she smoke more or longer than others who quit? no, of course not. and did ms. taylor somehow -- is she different from her family and friends -- and i went over some of the family and friends that she had over the course of her life who smoked and made the decision to quit. was she any different than those people? the answer is no. ms. taylor chose to continue smoking because she enjoyed it and wanted to continue to smoke until she made a decision in 2014 to stop smoking and made a concerted effort and she quit. there is really no dispute that ms. taylor smoked because she enjoyed it. it calmed her down. she like smoking and socializing. they put up their own pictures showing her having fun with friends smoking. she said she loved her coffee and cigarettes and she said smoking and beer would go together, and she would go to bars and smoke and -- and drink beer. for 38 years she never said she wanted to quit, she never asked anyone to help her quit, she never sought medical assistance to quit. never tried to cut down on her smoking at all. she made a choice not to quit. thirty-eight years on the calendar. and she admits that she bears some measure of fault in not quitting smoking sooner. that, in large measure, answers the question. she is acknowledging that, "i could have quit sooner." she was not powerless to quit. she admits she could have done it. when i asked her that question, though, on the stand, i said, "ma'am, you are accepting responsibility for not quitting sooner; is not that correct?" and her answer was, "i leave that up to my attorneys, but i tried as hard as i could try." some measure of fault in not quitting sooner acknowledges that, in fact, she could have quit sooner. and let us talk a little bit because i know you have heard testimony about quit attempts and quit efforts, and i would ask you here's a woman who worked at brinks for 11 years driving an armored vehicle. she was not driving that vehicle by herself, right. she would go, she would drive and there would be other people in the vehicle, right, that were helping her out, go into the bank, bring the money out, right. so she was working with people at brinks. she had a partner in her private investigation business. who did we hear from? who did we hear from about her efforts to quit smoking? we heard from her, shortly, 45 minutes of testimony, a short period of time her talking about it. we heard from dr. kennison who was just a scribner. she was saying what ms. taylor told her a year before this lawsuit came to trial. and we heard from her son that she tried to quit. where are the objective witnesses? where are the people that she worked with that said, "yeah, i saw her struggle, i saw her work through that, i saw that she wanted to quit, i understood what she was going through." nothing in this case from anybody along those lines. and what we do know is that in 1996 when she goes to the doctor and she is told she has respiratory problems. she says the doctors told her it was copd and it is on records, and it was caused by smoking. what did she do? she says, "i tried to quit." was there any record that establishes that she tried to quit? did she bring in a witness that said she tried to quit? is there any doctors note? is there anything that would establish that that is what she did in 1996? there is nothing. instead, what we know from her own testimony is that she was a private investigator and that was her peak smoking, was 1996 after when she is working on stakeouts and does not have much to do. that is not the sign of somebody who is dedicated and committed to stopping smoking cigarettes. and we know that she repeatedly refused to quit smoking. repeatedly. and i'm not saying that she did not try the nicotine patch and she did not try wellbutrin and she did not try those things. but what we know is when she put forth a consistent effort that is documented in the records, that she quit. you have to ask yourself why did ms. taylor see dr. kennison in 2013? dr. bagnoli referred her. well, dr. bagnoli started seeing her in 2011. dr. bagnoli testified for ms. taylor's attorneys in 2010. when ms. taylor first saw dr. kennison, her lawsuit had been pending for five years. five years. and what you saw was dr. kennison's opinions on what -- it was really no more than just reading what ms. taylor had said. and what ms. taylor had said was said about a year before this lawsuit after the lawsuit had been pending for five years. can anyone really prove to you that ms. taylor could not have quit smoking at any time? she is intelligent. she is hard working. she is capable. think of what she has done in her life, the different things that she has had to accomplish, the different paths that she has taken. she is gone -- she worked at the dog track for a while. then she starts her own private investigation business and then she goes to work for brinks, learns how to use a firearm. she is independent. she is persistent. she tough. she is driven. she is not a victim. the fact of the matter is that ms. taylor quit when she was motivated. she took chantix in 2006. what i did not hear mr. shields say -- and i do not -- he gets the last word, right. so what he could say and might say in the time that he has left is, well, chantix was the deal. chantix, that was the difference, right. that was -- that was how she was able to quit, was chantix. well, she took it in 2006 and continued to smoke. she did take it in 2014, okay, and she took it for months and -- and this is important -- she set a quit date in advance. she threw away her cigarettes. she avoided going to the places that would trigger her smoking. motivation and persistence, not the chantix, are the reasons ms. taylor quit. dr. burns, millions and millions of smokers have quit. every person who took the stand to talk about addiction testified that every single smoker can quit. 30 million smokers have quit between '64 and '79. ninety percent of them do it cold turkey with no assistance. 60 million people have quit smoking. the highest rate of quitting in the united states history was when ms. taylor was smoking r.j. reynolds cigarettes, the highest rate of quitting in u.s. history. plaintiff failed to prove that addiction caused her copd because she could have quit. how do we know it? because she did quit. how do we know it? because they have admitted that she could have quit sooner. we know she could quit. she was not powerless. she made a choice. all right. so here's the verdict form that you are going to get it. and question 1, state whether helen taylor is a member of the engle class. she does not meet any of the hurdles. the answer to that question is no. if you answer that question no, you do not have to go any further on the verdict form. your job is done. and if it were that easy, i would just sit down right now and that is all we would talk about. but i have an obligation to go through the entire verdict form and to address all of the issues that you may be asked to decide when you get back to the jury box -- jury room. just catch up with myself here. michael, can you switch back? thank you. all right. question number 2, state whether cigarettes manufactured by r.j. reynolds tobacco company or its predecessor tobacco companies was a legal cause of helen taylor's copd or pvd. that is the question. all you really need to know is on this slide. she smoked winston cigarettes from 1962 to 1972. mr. hohnbaum: judge, there is a box on mine. i do not want to address jury whether there is a box on theirs, whether they are obstructed in that view -- there it goes. thank you. the court: i did not see a box on mine. mr. hohnbaum: i did not -- after our previous discussion. all right. so look, ms. taylor smoked winston cigarette from 1962 -- your honor, i think with -- i think she is in a little bit of distress, your honor. the court: you need a break? a juror: i'm okay. the court: are you sure? a juror: no. the court: you need to water? we have got tissues. mr. hohnbaum: so ms. taylor smoked winston cigarettes in 1962 to 1972. how do we know that? how do we know? well, dr. krugman said it, said i read her deposition. started smoking around 1962 and she stopped smoking around 1972. he -- he based that on the deposition that he had read that ms. taylor testified that she smoked winston for ten years in the deposition. i asked her questions about the interrogatories. and remember, those are the documents that a party gets where they have questions. and it is long ago that ms. taylor got those. she did not have to do it under pressure. she had plenty of time. she could consult with her lawyer, she could consult with anybody she wanted to about how long she smoked various brands of cigarettes. in 2008 what she wrote down and swore under oath was that i primarily smoked winston cigarettes from 1962 to 1972. and when i asked her that, right, and when you did write it down you swore that that information was accurate, and the dodging and weaving begins. to the best of my knowledge, but my knowledge is forgotten really. she changed her story during trial now that the case is only against r.j. reynolds. so look, what did she go to? mr. shields: objection. may we approach? the court: yes. (a sidebar conference was held outside the hearing of the jury.) mr. shields: counsel, is this one of my two. i thought the discussion we had about mistrial in connection with him raising this with the jury. that would have been sufficient warning being an improper subject to the jury a possibility of another party in closing. apparently not. the court: i thought so too. mr. hohnbaum: i'm permitted to point out that we are the only defendant in the case. so i can certainly say we are the only defendant. where is philip morris? where is liggett? i'm permitted to say that. i thought that is what i did, your honor. i just said we are the only defendant. the court: i do not think that is what you said. mr. shields: now, that we are the only defendant. the court: yeah. now, that the case is only against r.j. reynolds. mr. shields: we would renew our conditional motion for mistrial asking the court to hold it under advisement to see if there is any prejudice at the end of the case. the court: i'll take it under advisement. and let us not go there. (the sidebar conference ended and 212-279-9424 veritext reporting company www.veritext.com 212-490-3430 electronically signed by heidi hunter (201-418-531-0872) 13adc9ba-e982-42ed-921d-38155c50e6c5 proceedings took place in open court as follows:) mr. kalil: is everybody okay over there? i'm blocked. usually i try and watch to see if everyone is all right. mr. hohnbaum: all right. so in 2008 she says '62 to '72. right. then on the stand she says it would be cut exactly in half down the middle. i made sure -- i wanted to make sure what that testimony really was, so i asked her: so you are testifying that you smoked the marlboro cigarettes the same amount of time that you smoked the winston cigarettes? and she said real close, now folks -- my drawing is terrible. the court: mr. hohnbaum, that needs to come down. mr. hohnbaum: okay. sorry. fifty-six years of smoking. where does she go from? ten, ten years essentially, '62 to '72 with a little bit -- i agree there is a little bit before that. it is not clear how much, but there is clearly some before that, but this is -- this is it. what did it go to? half. more than double, almost triple the amount of time that she said she smoked winston cigarettes in 2008 to what her testimony was before you in this case. so why? why the change from 10 years to 28 years? it is because plaintiff has the burden to prove that smoking winston cigarettes caused her copd and pvd. and nobody is going to tell you that the 10 years she smoked winston cigarettes, stopping 40 years ago caused her copd or pvd. here's the legal cause instruction, the legal instruction you will get from the court. there is those magic words again, "but for" that mr. shields did not use in his discussion about the legal standard, but for. and he wants to tell you about this example of the bridge. we heard that in opening and with dr. burns, and we are hearing it again now that if you have two tractor-trailers and one is not sufficient and you need the other, that is legal cause in his mind. but what we have here instead of two trailers, we have a trailer and a motorcycle. and no matter what, the trailer in this case, the smoking of marlboro cigarettes, was sufficient, of course it was, in and of itself to cause her copd and her pvd. it takes 20 to 30 pack-years to develop copd. ms. taylor's winston smoking was not sufficient by itself to cause her copd. and the converse of that is also true, ms. taylor's marlboro smoking was sufficient by itself to cause her copd. that is why the change from 10 to 28. 10 is not enough. otherwise, why not just stick with what you wrote in 2008? it is 1962 to 1972. it is what she said in her deposition, it is what she said in 2008, and it is changed here on the stand. and what we know is that if you do not have copd when you quit smoking, you will not get it in the future. every single expert testified to that. and of course, there is no evidence that ms. taylor had copd when she stopped smoking winston cigarettes in 1972. smoking winston cigarettes was not a but for cause of plaintiff's copd. and this chart that dr. burns used i thought was instructive on this point. so what we know on the left side, that is the fev¹, i know you guys have heard more about pulmonary functions tests than you care to, but you will recall that seventy percent or above is in the normal range. and when she was 28 years old, this is when she stopped smoking winston cigarettes, her lung function was well above normal and essentially consistent with someone who had never smoked. smoking r.j. reynolds cigarettes did not cause her copd and it did not cause her pvd. dr. burns' own testimony. had she quit smoking in 1972 by 2007 her risk of getting pvd, which is when she got the peripheral vascular disease, would be the same as nonsmokers. it did not cause -- it was not the but for cause of her copd, and it was not the but for cause of her pvd. so if you get to this point on the verdict form, and of course we do not think you should, i'm sorry, michael. thank you, michael. question number 2: that cigarettes manufactured by r.j. reynolds were a legal cause of helen taylor's copd no; pvd, no. so what is the next questions on the -- what are the next questions the verdict form you will look at? state whether r.j. reynolds' concealment or omission of a material fact about the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes or both was a legal cause of helen taylor's injuries. and question number 4 is: state whether r.j. reynolds' agreement to conceal or omit a material fact regarding the health effects of cigarette smoking or the addictive nature of smoking cigarettes was a legal cause of helen taylor's injuries. here's a way to look at it. ms. taylor has the burden to prove that the concealment or agreement to conceal -- because now we are in the engle finding territory, right -- was a but for cause of her smoking-related disease. but for the concealment would she have gotten the disease. this is the instruction. you will have it. reliance -- requires reliance on statements to her detriment saying that but for her reliance, the injuries would not have occurred. you cannot rely on something if you have sufficient knowledge about the dangers of smoking and the addicted nature of smoking. and what we know -- and this is the question: did she develop copd or pvd because she relied on a statement by r.j. reynolds about the dangers of smoking? did she rely on it? and what we know from dr. burns himself is that for hundreds of years people have been writing about the dangers of smoking. people have been aware for hundreds of years that it was addictive. school books have taught about the dangers of smoking. the term "coffin nail" dates back to before 1900 actually. we showed you the textbooks, they are in evidence. kids were taught about smoking. we spent time on the reader's digest. article after article after article about the dangers of smoking and addictiveness of smoking. popular press, life magazine. the experiment we heard so much about that was in the news in 1953. the term "coffin nails" comes back in the 1950s. life magazine was one of those magazines that ms. taylor remembers seeing growing up. what do folks in the public health community say about what was known about the dangers of smoking? our position is that we have informed the public through excellent coverage of the press, radio, and tv, the surgeon general of the united states. mr. shields wants to spend a lot of time stacking up the surgeon general's reports. this is what the surgeon general said in 1957. dr. heller, the director of the national cancer institute, newspapers, radio, tv, and other media have done an excellent job covering the problem. this is an exceedingly valuable way of informing the public. we know that in 1964 the biggest public health story of the century was the surgeon general's report that came out in 1964 which concluded that cigarette smoking causally related to lung cancer. we know that in papers that ms. taylor -- in communities where ms. taylor lived that they covered the surgeon general's report, they covered the dangers of cigarette smoking. the florida times union, when she moved to jacksonville -- and this is just a sampling, there is more in evidence if you would like to see them, stacks of newspaper articles covering cigarette smoking. we know that for every pack of cigarettes that ms. taylor smoked from 1966 on, there was a warning on the pack. we showed you during the case the see it now piece in 1955, the surgeon general's report on the cbs news, the discussion about cbs with harry reasoner. we showed you a public service announcement that were typical of that day, warnings were everywhere. dr. daniel horn, 1968: you could stand on a rooftop and shout smoking is dangerous at the top of your lungs and you would not be telling anyone anything they did not already know. 1968. that is the year that dr. burns says ms. taylor became addicted. 1970, the warning changes. every pack of cigarettes contained this warning. we have to go no further than the testimony of dr. burns on this point, no further. mr. shields put up on the screen all his qualifications, all of his qualifications. what did dr. burns say in 1975? not now, not now when he is going from courthouse to courthouse testifying. not now. but back then in 1975 what did he say: more americans know that cigarette smoking is dangerous than know the name of the president of the united states. that is what dr. burns said in 1975. what did he say in 1981? he said 95 percent of people are thoroughly aware of the health dangers of smoking, 95 percent. and then he went and made a distinction between those who are thoroughly aware and those who realized that their own health could be affected. ninety percent of them realized that their own health could be affected. you remember what the questions were of dr. burns, well, there is a context of that. there was a context of that. and i would have expected mr. shields to sort of ask questions about what that context was, and he did not, because those are dr. burns' statements about what he believed -- based on his time in the public health community, what he believed at that time about how widespread the dangers and hazards of smoking were to the american public. and look, the public information campaign worked because what happened? millions of heavily addicted smokers quit. 1950s, 1957. that is the statement we looked at before, 1964 the surgeon general's report, 17.6 million people. of course the warning label goes on, that is the daniel horn quote from 1968, warning label -- new warning label goes on in 1970. and of course in 1972 there is -- every advertising that is out there has to have the warning on it. ms. taylor did not make any smoking decisions based on cigarette advertising. we saw advertisements that were up there for brands of cigarettes she never smoked for time periods well past the time she was smoking r.j. reynolds brands. advertising did not cause her to smoke, to choose a particular brand. advertisements were not the issue. she -- she started smoking. and i think mr. shields mentioned this in his opening. she started smoking with her friend jane when she got her first job. she saw people in the beauty parlor, and she thought they looked glamorous. that is why she started smoking. the first brand she tried was l&m, not made by reynolds. and then she smoked other brands during that period of time. it sounded to me like what she could get her hands on in those first four years, that is what she smoked. and as dr. burns testified, she switched because of taste, not because of advertising. ms. taylor was not asked questions about why she switched brands. she was asked questions about why she started and she testified the beauty salon, seeing the people in the beauty salon. and she switched from winston to marlboro because of taste. why did ms. sadler testify in this case? she did sing the jingle for us. she did sing the jingle for us, and she described the brands her father smoked and she described her own smoking history. in the past 53 years, ms. sadler has spent more time talking to ms. taylor's attorneys than she has to ms. taylor. and did we hear from any other friend or coworker about why she smoked, why she made decisions to do certain things? we did not. what we heard instead was dr. krugman. why was dr. krugman afraid. to talk to ms. taylor? he could have. he is the expert. he wrote a textbook. he teaches. do you think that dr. krugman could have gotten to the bottom of the issue of whether advertisements matter to her? did she continue to smoke? did she believe something was untrue? did it prevent her from understanding the risks? he could have put together a nice package of questions and sat down with ms. taylor and asked ms. taylor those questions and gotten the answer. he did not do that. and you have to ask yourself why he did not do it? instead, he goes from courthouse to courthouse saying the exact same thing. ms. taylor's claims that somehow -- and they are thin anyway. her the testimony on this is paper thin that she had any reliance on anything the tobacco company said, right? you got dr. burns testifying it, never talked to ms. taylor; you have got dr. krugman testifying it, never talked to ms. taylor. what we know is that in 2008 -- this is what we read this morning -- six years before trial, ms. taylor testified or admitted under oath that is when she signed the interrogatory responses, that she routinely read the florida times union newspaper for at least the past 30 years. and then what happens? dr. burns gets up on the stand. dr. krugman gets up on the stand. and then what happens? knowing what it would look like if she was routinely reading the newspaper and keeping up with events. after seeing all of that information, what did she testify? once you moved and got married, would you have occasionally read the newspaper? occasionally read the newspaper. i doubt it. your testimony is: you did not subscribe to the florida times union in the 1970s? i remember subscribing to it because either somebody was stealing it or it was wet, rained on. when the surgeon general's report came out in 1964, do you recall it being in the newspaper? no, i would not have read it. and you saw various newspapers that were put up during the course of this trial, do you recall seeing any of those stories in the newspaper? no, not at all. i routinely read the florida times union in 2008. i would not have read that, from the stand. what do we know about what ms. taylor told her son? do you remember your mom telling you when you were growing up to not to smoke? yes, sir. did she tell you do not ever pick them up because they are hard to quit? yes, sir. did she tell you that pretty much your whole life? yes, sir. ask ms. taylor: is that what you were telling your son when he was growing up? the fact is that what she told her son was not to smoke and that it can be addictive, and she told him not to smoke because she knew it was harmful. she did not want her son to pick up smoking. and then she acknowledged -- we got a little sliver there, right. and so you told your son should quit smoking prior to 1996? at that point she was saying it was like common knowledge it had come into being, that is the way she described it. the fact of the matter is ms. taylor testified she did not hear all the things you saw put up on the screen, facts, facts, the frank statement, tobacco institute. all of those statements that you see there, why? she did not read them. she never saw them. did she rely on those statements? of course she did not rely on those statements. she never saw them. and, once again, you have to ask yourself: why did dr. krugman not ask her questions about this as well? the campaign of doubt, the campaign of denial. people were misled. people did not understand. they were confused. well, the only person that matters in this case about that is ms. taylor. she is the other person that matters. so why did not dr. krugman ask her: did you disbelieve the warnings? were you confused? do you not think he could have put forth a series of questions that would have put this issue to rest? he did not do that. ms. taylor was not waiting on additional information from r.j. reynolds to quit smoking. the material information is -- this is in the instructions -- that is of such importance that a reasonable person would have considered it significant in his or her decision making process. ms. taylor knew cigarettes were harmful. she knew they could cause disease. and knowing that information for 38 years, she never even tried to quit smoking. remember, ms. taylor has the burden of proof in this case on every single one of these issues. and what does ms. taylor say? she says she doubts she would have quit smoking based on additional information from r.j. reynolds. doubts. that is not more likely than not. that is doubt. just like dr. bagnoli, doubt means exactly what it says from her own statement on the witness stand. ms. taylor did not develop copd or pvd because she relied on a statement by r.j. reynolds about the dangers of smoking. she knew the dangers of smoking. the fact that she did not know that reynolds knew does not change the fact that she knew that it was harmful and she could have made a decision to quit when she knew that and she did not. she did not rely on it. for 38 years she knew, for 38 years and she did not try to quit. she knew it was harmful and -- and she did not try to quit. michael, can you help me out again? thank you michael. so question 3: state whether r.j. reynolds' concealment or omission of material fact about the health effects or addictive nature of smoking or both was a legal cause of ms. taylor's injuries? the answer to that is no. and state whether r.j. reynolds' agreement to conceal or omit a material fact regarding the health effects of cigarette smoking or the addictive nature of smoking cigarettes was a legal cause of helen taylor's injuries. the answer to that is no. facts, facts as it relates to ms. taylor. all right, so what is next? question 5, so this is the comparative fault point. again, we do not believe you should get to this point. but it is my obligation to go through the whole verdict form. state the percentage of fault, if any, that was a legal cause of helen taylor's injuries that you charge to r.j. reynolds and that you charge to helen taylor. now, this is an important point. the assignment of fault relates only to actions that were a legal cause of ms. taylor's copd or pvd. you have to find -- there are facts here -- there are lots of documents that you have seen, there are lots of testimony that you have seen, right. but unless it is a legal cause of her copd or pvd, you cannot consider it for purposes of fault. the action of reynolds has to be the cause. and we cannot -- reynolds cannot be assigned fault for actions that were not the legal cause. so documents you see up there from 1974 or 1990 about youth marketing, she was an adult at that point in time. you cannot assign fault based on things that have nothing to do with ms. taylor and were not the legal cause of her copd or pvd. look, four addiction experts. only ms. taylor could make the choice to quit. only ms. taylor. dr. burns, before 1968: free and encumbered decision to smoke before 1968. says she became addicted again at this time period between the end of her first marriage and dating her second husband. that is the 1968 time period, give or take. and when ms. taylor started dating her second husband, she been smoking winstons for six years. okay. what do we know about 1968 when dr. burns said she became addicted? well, by that point in time the surgeon general had already issued his landmark report in 1964 that got as we talked about enormous coverage. the cigarette warnings were already on the pack for one or two years by that point in time, right, 1966. she started telling her son not to smoke. do not smoke. and millions of other smokers were quitting. she made the choice to smoke winston cigarettes. one way to look at it is just comparing, what is the conduct of the two? if you look at ms. taylor she made a free choice to smoke winston cigarettes. she told her son to smoke her entire life [sic], his entire life and her entire life when he was growing up, but did not try to quit before 1996. she did not quit after she saw the 1966 warning. she made no effort to quit in 1970 when the new warning went on the cigarette pack. she made no effort to quit when she was smoking winston cigarettes at all. by 1985 she had stopped -- remember the testimony, i just stopped reading -- i was so used to them i stopped reading. she stopped reading the pack warnings. before 1996, undisputed. she made no attempt to quit. before 1996 she did not even reduce the amount of cigarettes that she was smoking with the knowledge that she had that it can be harmful. she did not even reduce the amount that she smoked. when doctors told her she had a respiratory condition caused by smoking, what did she do? that was her peak amount of smoking her entire life. and the amount of time -- the peak amount of time that she was smoking -- this after 1996. and of course since 1972 she was smoking marlboro cigarettes made by philip morris, not r.j. reynolds. ms. taylor refused to quit a number of times. you have the records. you will have them back in the jury room if you want. she refused to quit time and time again. she sought professional help, when? about a year before the trial. and she is testified herself she knew she would not quit until she got strong. she would not quit until she wanted to do it for herself. and every quit attempt that you have heard about was made while smoking somebody else's cigarettes, not r.j. reynolds' cigarettes. and we know that ms. taylor can quit smoking. and we know by her admission that she could quit smoking sooner, and we know that of course because, in fact, she quit smoking in 2014. and when she quit, she had not smoked an r.j. reynolds' cigarette -- when she quit she had not smoked r.j. reynolds' cigarettes in 42 years. her choices are the only legal cause of her copd and pvd. i had to do it myself. i had to get strong, i knew i had to get serious. when ms. taylor got serious -- i know there is testimony that she had to the nicotine patch and she had these other things. do you have any doubt in your mind that when this lady put her mind to it, when she finally put her mind to it, she did it, and they have acknowledged that she could have done it sooner? of course she could. she had 42 years of choices after she stopped smoking winston cigarettes. during the time, she was smoking, majority of the time she was smoking winston cigarettes, according to their own experts, she was not addicted. nothing we could have done before 1972 would have prevented ms. taylor's copd or pvd. only ms. taylor had the ability to prevent her copd and pvd. and she is one hundred percent responsible for the choices that she is made. nothing reynolds did -- because it is about reynolds at this point, nothing that reynolds did between 1962 and 1972 caused her copd or pvd. and just so it is clear, if you answer questions 3 and 4 yes, this comparative fault concept does not come into the case. you would be finding, if you answer those questions yes, that reynolds is one hundred percent responsible for her copd, even though she did not smoke reynolds cigarettes for 42 years. we are one hundred percent responsible for her starting to smoke, even though she smoked l&m cigarettes first made by liggett. you would be finding that we are one hundred percent responsible for her decision to smoke philip morris cigarettes, marlboros for the last 42 years, that we are one hundred percent responsible for her never trying to quit smoking when she smoked winston cigarettes, and we are one hundred percent responsible, even though dr. burns testified that ms. taylor was not addicted for the majority of the time she smoked winston cigarettes. the comparative fault calculation that you are doing does not apply if you answer yes to questions 3 and 4. so on this question if you get in your deliberations, state the percentage of fault, if any, that was the legal cause of helen taylor's injuries that you charge to -- i'm sorry, you are ahead of me, thank you. you are get -- thank you -- r.j. reynolds tobacco company, 0 percent, one hundred percent. so let us talk if you get to this point -- let me catch up in my outline here. next, damages. you will be instructed any damages must be fair and just in light of the evidence. let us talk a little bit about some of the issues relating to the damages claim. first of all, the $5 million thrown out to you for pain and suffering. $5 million, what is that connected to? what -- what basis did the $5 million have? no basis. it is just a number, $5 million, that is the pain and suffering. but let us take a look at what happened from 1996 when they claim she had copd until the present. okay. so we know that when she was driving the brinks truck -- she fully employed from '96 to 2001 working full-time. no impairment to her function. she did have exacerbations that we attribute to asthma, but she was working during those time periods. then she goes and gets a job at brinks. she is got to get a commercial driver's license. what is required in that? you cannot have a respiratory dysfunction likely to interfere with your job. i asked her: you knew you could not have a respiratory condition that would affect your driving? she said, right. i was considered safe to drive. they are asking for damages going back to 1996, and then into 2000, 2004. what did she say about her job at brinks? do you have to lift and carry things? yes, sometimes i would load 200 boxes. she did that the entire time she had a job at brinks. and that ended driving the truck in 2011. so her copd and pvd did not prevent her from doing what anybody would describe as physically strenuous work. and what did she say to dr. kennison in 2013? in 2013, she is telling dr. kennison contrary to what she said on the stand that i'm working one day a week, just saturdays, is that she is working overtime three, 12-hour days. this is in 2013. she lost no income because of the injuries she claims here. she was fully employed throughout this entire time period. and we have set forth from private investigation internship. she got a master investigator's license, started the cleverly named art of facts detective agency. she went on stakeouts. she was going on stakeouts as much as a year ago. they want you in part of their calculation of damages to consider future medical expenses. now, ms. taylor has not been hospitalized in just about two years. and dr. bagnoli himself said it would be a guess to try to determine how often she would be hospitalized in the future. you cannot base your decision on guesses, on speculation. and that is exactly what you would be doing finding that somehow she was going to be hospitalized a certain number of times in the future. and of course part of the calculus here is -- again, it is their burden. ms. taylor has asthma. right now she has emphysema, minimal emphysema according to the ct scan in 2008. and it is their burden to establish what of her damages are a result of copd versus asthma. and the fact of the matter is they cannot. in fact, they asked dr. schroeder, can you say which one is what? which hospitalization? what problem is associated with the asthma versus the copd? and the issue is, you cannot distinguish which one is causing the problems. and it is their burden to prove to you their damages. and they have not proven that. so there are a number of categories of damages on the form that they break out. and you will have to go through each one if you get to this point on the verdict form. you will have to look at that, evaluate the evidence. you will have access to whatever documents that are in evidence that will help assist you in that regard. and i'll just go to question 11: what are the total damages that helen taylor has proved in this case? and the answer to that is zero. thank you, michael. let us talk about the next issue, if could you get to this point on the verdict form. punitive damages can only be awarded for the concealment that caused ms. taylor's copd or pvd. so when you heard evidence about what was concealed or what was not known, you have to tie that to ms. taylor in determining whether or not punitive damages are awarded. and you may not punish r.j. reynolds for any harm suffered by anyone other than ms. taylor. and let me make this point clear, that punitive damages are in addition to damages that fully compensate. if you get to this point, you will have already determined that ms. taylor has been fully compensated for her injuries. this would be in addition to that. and the punitive damages can only be awarded to her. it is about the money going to ms. taylor. the instruction is important here. it is clear and convincing evidence, which is different than the burden of proof on any other issue that you have in the case. clear and convincing evidence is evidence that is precise, explicit, lacking in confusion and of such weight it produces a firm belief or a conviction about the matter in issue. and i want to focus on the phrase "lacking in confusion" because if you get back into the jury room and you are deliberating over this point, if there is any hesitation about this, then it is not lacking in confusion. the engle findings do not establish that ms. taylor is entitled to punitive damages. that is what we talked about at the beginning. it does not establish certain things in this case, and it does not establish that she is entitled to punitive damages. dr. burns testified in response to mr. keehfus' question about number of things reynolds has done to develop a safer cigarette. reynolds has tried to reduce harmful ingredients in cigarette smoke, dr. burns acknowledged that. dr. burns acknowledged that reynolds was on the cutting edge of developing a body of tobacco chemistry science. dr. burns acknowledges that reynolds scientists and their publications have been cited in many of the surgeon general's reports. and we know that cigarettes that burn tobacco, it cannot be made safe. the council for tobacco research has awarded more than $300 million in grants to fund independent scientific research projects. thousands published scientific articles and medical reports, more than 600 articles funded by tobacco research are cited in the surgeon general's report. the ctr funded scientists of great integrity, from dr. burn's mouth. and ctr funded research at virtually every major university in the country. before publication of the 1964 surgeon general's report, tirc and ctr funded published research concluding that smoking is addictive before the publication of the 1964 surgeon general's report. and it funded a collection of more than 6,000 articles, 6,000 articles that was cited as a basic source reference for the 1964 surgeon general's report. reynolds should not be punished in this case. michael, please. thank you. under the circumstances of this case, state whether by clear and convincing evidence punitive damages are warranted against r.j. reynolds. the answer to that question is no. now, this is my last opportunity to talk to you unless you answer that question yes. in which case we will come back for another phase of this -- of this trial. and mr. shields, as is his right, can split up his closing, and he can talk first and he can talk last. and obviously i do not get a chance to respond, and so i'm confident he will bring up things for that reason. so that i do not get a chance to respond. now i would ask you to continue as you have done throughout this case to listen carefully to -- what the evidence has been and decide the case not on what mr. shields says the evidence is or what he says the instruction is, or what i say the evidence is or what the instruction is, but on your view of the evidence that you have heard in this case. and at the end of the day what matters in your determination of the issues in this case are the simple facts that i raised with you in the opening, these are the facts that matter in making your determination. michael, can you switch that on. thank you. so liggett made -- liggett made l&m cigarettes that ms. taylor smoked during the first four years of her smoking history. liggett is not here. philip morris made the marlboro cigarettes ms. taylor smoked for the past 42 years and is not here. what we know is that helen taylor smoked winston cigarettes from 1962 to 1972. and we know all of these facts. and those facts lead to the conclusion that ms. taylor has not proved her claims and is not entitled to any damages in this case. thank you very much for your patience and your service.