closing argument by mr. mitnik mr. mitnik: good afternoon. i would like to start the way i started it seems like a long time ago, and that is, to thank y'all on behalf of everyone in the court. this has been a long trial. it is been a lot of evidence. everyone's been here on time. everybody's taken notes. everybody's paid attention. everybody's given both sides a fair shake and nobody can ask more than that from people that y'all have given. your time is valuable, everyone knows it and appreciates it, but this is an important matter. this is a case that not only involves something as significant as it can be, to start with, and that is, someone losing a beloved spouse. and that value of that loss to her that is forever, that is a somber important moment right there. but this case does not stop there in its significance, because it also is a case that involves a company and their behavior that has gone on for over 50 years, all the way through today and up when you leave here. and it is an opportunity for all of us to make a difference, because this case also involves, if we prove the things we need to, and i'm going to go through them with you, it involves punitive damages which are to punish, which are to send a message not just to r.j. reynolds but to others who listen and hear an opportunity to say, enough is enough. that there has to be some lines that corporations do not cross; that there is a line of betrayal of public trust that ought not be crossed. and an opportunity as a jury, six people in gainesville, florida to stand up and be counted and say, i'm going to do in this case what needs to be done to send a message to make a difference. mr. johnson: your honor, may we approach? (a sidebar conference was held outside the hearing of the jury as follows:) mr. johnson: i am absolutely reluctant to interrupt anybody's closing. but send them a message is just clear mistrial. mr. mitnik: the instruction, judge, says that it goes to others, too, the jury instructions. mr. johnson: send them a message is pure mistrial. it has to stop. and i move, hereby move for a mistrial. mr. mitnik: the jury instruction -- most cases you absolutely can. this is a punitive damage case in which the jury instructions tell them that it is not just for them but for others in the community._ the court: all right. well, the motion for mistrial is denied. do you want any sort of special instruction, curative or otherwise? mr. johnson: yes, your honor. i would like you to instruct the jury that it is improper to argue that it is -- that the purpose of this trial is to send a message. mr. mitnik: i do not agree with that. the court: i'm going to suggest that you might want to argue that -- your statements regarding punitives is to establish more damages. mr. mitnik: yes, and i told them i'm going to talk -- i told them these are things i have to pass through but i'll be glad to say it right now. the court: then stay away from this argument about sending a message. mr. johnson: just be clear, my position is it is too late; you have done it. the court: okay. (the sidebar conference was concluded, and the following proceedings were held in open court in the presence of the jury:) mr. mitnik: may i proceed? the court: let me just ask? approach for a second. (a sidebar conference was held outside the hearing of the jury as follows:) the court: so that you want me to give some instruction, i know you disagree with, but do you want me today something about that by way of a curative instruction? mr. johnson: yes, your honor, i do. the court: i need to be accurate on what i say and i do not want to do something to further potentially compound this. mr. johnson: i'd like to instruct -the court: i would like to agree -mr. johnson: i would like you to instruct the jury that it is not their function to send a message. the court: here's what i'm proposing that the jury will get specific instructions on the circumstances under which punitive damages may be applied, specific instructions to both those. mr. johnson: okay, without waving my position. the court: yes. (the sidebar conference was concluded, and the following proceedings were held in open court in the presence of the jury:) the court: ladies and gentlemen, the court will give you specific instructions. you will have copies of those instructions regarding punitive damages and you are to follow those instructions. go ahead, mr. mitnik. mr. mitnik: yes, sir. and i will talk to you specifically about those instructions shortly. rather than pull them out right now, we will get to those. this is a matter that we prove first certain things, such that ms. townsend through her husband were members of the engle class which we have to prove. we have the burden and the burden is by the greater weight of the evidence, not black and white certainty that we talked about in jury selection, but it is more persuasive, more convincing, more likely right than wrong. we have to prove two things to be part of the engle class. it is in one question but it is, was -- was frank townsend addicted to cigarettes or nicotine in cigarettes, and was it a -- that is important, i emphasize the word a for a reason -a legal cause, a legal cause. that is what is part of the class. then there are other items that we will go through that we have the burden of proving also to reach the question of punitive damages. but we intend to prove them. now, let me talk to you -- i want to address a couple other things, and that is, another way that we started this conversation of this important matter back whatever day it was, was saying from the very onset, before you ever came here, on behalf of frank townsend, mrs. townsend is taking responsibility for -- he certainly shares some responsibility here. he certainly shares some responsibility here and she has insisted on it from the beginning. r.j. reynolds is taken none from the beginning to the end. that is why we need you. and you are going to get a jury instruction that says, ms. townsend has admitted that frank townsend's acts and omissions relating to the duration and frequency of his efforts to quit smoking were a partial cause of his death. omissions. i'm going to say it again; relating to the duration and frequency of his efforts to quit smoking were a partial cause of his death in combination with the acts and omissions of r.j. reynolds tobacco company. r.j. reynolds company denies that its acts or omissions contributed to causing frank townsend's death. they just flat deny it. and on behalf of mr. townsend, she flat acknowledges it, based on this evidence and everything you have heard. our message, we did nothing. furthermore, you are going to have an instruction that follows right after that, that the court has ruled as a matter of law that ms. townsend bears no-fault in frank townsend's death. they have presented evidence during this case on something called an affirmative defense in which they have sought to blame ms. townsend, to blame ms. townsend for buying their product, to blame her for buying their product arguably because it is so dangerous she should have known not to buy it, all the while taking absolutely no responsibility themselves. next question that the defense asks in their opening statement, i want to address it up front before we get into this. they asked the question -- these were not their exact words -- but the gist of it was, what is this conspiracy and fraud. they said kind of, well, if we did it, we might have done some bad things, maybe some, we probably did, but what is any of that got to do with frank townsend. well, let me answer that one right up front. and it -- the answer came clearly from an odd place, but it claimed loud and clear. the answer was, it has everything to do with frank townsend. and where did that information come from? from their historian, dr. sharp, the gentleman who went through all of the stuff from back in the 1900s and 1800s and made it sound like everybody knew these things were addictive and everybody knew way back when, school kids, and everybody knew that they were killing people, all the while the same people that hired him, paid his bills, were taking the position -- taking the position -this is not so clear, kind of both sides, noting the same mixed messages in this courtroom that has been going on for over 50 years. but he said, dr. sharp said, in a kind of good for the goose, good for the gander, talking about how things become part of the public conscious or public awareness was his phrase, public awareness. certain things that have some mass presentation to the public sink down to a core root level to where -- you recall, this was me talking with him, this was one of the times he was not pulling teeth, he just was saying, yeah, agree with it. let me explain, which was certain things the information comes out at a level to where it becomes part of your core knowledge and unless you live in a cave, you would not -- there is no way you would not hear it. and that you do not need, he said, you do not need to be able to say, nor would you even expect to be able to say, well, i saw that newspaper article, that tv show, that magazine article, that whatever, and identify it. that is not the way things work when they are in this realm of public awareness like nikki or mcdonald's, like a brand of bottle water, evian. you say -- too bad i do not see an evian, but i got him. he explained in detail to you how that phenomena works and then brought it full circle and acknowledged that is the same with cigarette information that came out. and remember, you seen the numbers. $6,000,000 spent. this was one of the documents that you saw, and i'm not going to put a ton of documents up. everybody's seen those. i'm going to put some up but not a ton. this was one of the documents that we showed when dr. bernstein was here. this was from his american society of addiction medicine. you recall this is the one that says, nicotine is the psychoactive drug in tobacco. regular use of tobacco products lead to addiction in a high proportion of users. nicotine dependence is the most common form of chemical dependence in the united states. nicotine dependence most often begins as a pediatric disease. in 1994 four million young people age 12 to 17 years were current users of the cigarettes. 3,000 young people become regular users each day, one/third of whom will eventually die from a cigarette caused disease. and then here comes the part. the nicotine addiction epidemic is fueled in part by the low price of tobacco products, they are ready availability to the underage, despite laws to the contrary, and the -- here it is -- the enormous marketing campaigns for these products, campaigns that are often very seductive and attractive to the young. in 1993 the cigarette industry spent $6.3 billion or 25 cents per pack on the market. in one year $6 billion. now, there was an effort to kind of downplay information being put out by the cigarette industry but you heard other numbers. this was just one source. you heard multiple sources as to the huge sums of money they used to saturate with not just their glamorous marketing that indicated it was safe when it was not, misleading the public. the cool and refreshing and the ice water running and looked like the most wonderful thing to put in your mouth you can imagine. and it was misleading and it was fraudulent because these people knew, they knew its dangers. their internal documents showed over and over how they knew it and how they it was addictive while they said it is not. and they were marketing it to children. they were marketing it to anyone that would look at it. they also went on a massive campaign to create a controversy, a massive campaign where the heads on a christmas eve met in new york city of these huge giant corporations that said we are going to get together and we compete like this, we are going to get together and we are going on christmas eve because this is a big problem. and they conspired and they cooked up the scheme to tell the public, and you are going to see in these documents. i ask that when you go through these documents that you look and see, one in particular that will be back there, and it is just too much in it to go through it all here in a closing argument, but i would like for you to keep an eye out for it. it was that hill & knowlton document, the one that talked about someone saying words to the affect that, you know, thank goodness we have a product they cannot quit. and that document is of significance because in it there is a whole lot more than just what is shown to you. in it, it shows how they went through different scenarios how to deal with the problem. there is a number one, there is a number two, there is a number three, there is a number four, there is number five, i think there is a number six. and through it they are talking about things like, we got to get them american people to believe and think this is no more dangerous than driving a car. you could die driving a car. it is exhibit 396, 396. no more dangerous than driving a car or all these other activities. we got to get them to think that way. we got to get them to think, you know what, until the information is clarified, i might as well -- and they say these words or words to this effect -- get them to think i might as well go on and enjoy and eat and drinking and living my life to the fullest and enjoy my cigarettes unless there is some really clear answers. they talk about how we as the industry have to establish credibility so people will listen when we say. and how do we do that? we cannot use the old method of just denial. we got to come up with a way that we -- we are going to say, we are going to hire scientists to get to the bottom of this. but wait until we get the answers and go on a 20-year life. read the document. it is shocking. and it was just a piece of paper we pulled out, but then you see they carried it out. and then you hear from dr. sharp, and you know the numbers that they spent, document after document, how much time. they are on murrow show. they are on tv, talk shows. they have sent squads out called the truth squad. the guy talking about applesauce and the guy talking about, oh, people do not mind if the babies come out little. woman like little babies. and there is no answers to this stuff and if we ever find it, we will probably take it out. we got all these scientists working on it and we are going to send the, quote, frank statement out to every newspaper and any city of any size. and it worked. remember the documents we showed you. we showed you documents from the federal government, federal trade commission. we showed you documents from the surgeon general. documents that said after the surgeon general warning -- i'm sorry, the surgeon general report came out, they had the biggest sales they have had ever. they are documents in there again, and they are in evidence. they are documents in there that talk about how -- what is the psychological crush document? i'll get to it. i'll give you a number. it is on a slide where i summarized, where they talk about how we -- the worst of the public health scare came back in '53 with the rat painting and all that stirred up. and we survived it. and when the surgeon general came out, boy, it did not have nearly the impact we thought and, therefore, they conclude in writing in their secret behind these documents, they conclude, so we do not think anymore of these health scares that are going to be coming really are going to have much of an impact. they have got the situation under control. they threw millions and millions of dollars at this problem, but the problem with the problem was, the problem was people were dying from their addictive product. they make a product that if used as designed and intended, ingested into the body, kills 440,000 people a year. not abusing or misusing. and they went on this 50-year cover up. and dr. sharp says, yes, the tobacco industry's information is the kind that frank townsend would have known along with everybody else would have heard to the -- remember, i asked him, to the point it would sink into the core base knowledge. you cannot say what he would do with it, but it would sink to the core base knowledge. and they say, what is any of this got to do with frank townsend when their own witness says, in summary of his words, logical conclusion, is everything. actions speak louder than words. what someone does live at the time oftentimes is more persuasive than what someone may say years later in court. now, frank townsend is not here to say, yeah, i saw this ad and i saw that tv show, it is not a fair argument. he is not here. he is deceased. and people do not typically walk around saying i saw this ad in this, i saw this show, so i'm going to this. but we know from dr. sharp -- remember, our burden is not to show absolutely. our burden is to show what is more persuasive, what makes more sense, what is more likely using common sense. and, remember, there is another piece to this. and it is a real significant piece to the question of what is this got to do with frank townsend. it is not just dr. sharp saying everything. remember the filters. remember the filters. now, let us look at the testimony of dr. sharp. bear with us, through the lens of filtration with the documents that talk about the illusion of filtration. and you saw the documents about the ftc report that said the filtration worked in such a way that it was embedded -- again, sounds very similar to what dr. sharp says -- embedded in the public conscious. and they thought they were safe. and it says it was deceptive. it was misleading because they are not safer. they are not. but it was a motivation deprivation device designed by them for that purpose to say people have heard, people have heard this information, of course, the information is out there. it is not that you know they are going to cause cancer but have you heard on the street? that is -- at the end of the day, all he could say is they heard. but on one side is the force at which you hear. on the other side is this giant force that the group of coconspirators of these cigarette companies came together and locked arms -- and by the way, locked arms is in the hill & knowlton document, not my words, they are own -- locked arms. they brought a powerful force against it to create controversy, confusion, psychological crutch. but they brought more to the table. they brought a filter. looks like it would filter stuff out. looks safe. what is a filter do other than purify? they market it as this healthy wonderful option. so somebody who is in the addictive process, who it does not take much to somebody in the addictive process to say, i do not need to quit now, i do not need to try to stop, i do not even need to try. they are telling me all these things. this all has not been decided, and just take your time and we will get answers, we will take the bad stuff out. that was the message. but you know, tell you what, be on the safe side, i'm going to switch to this filter. do not like it as much like my other product, but i'll switch like -- this is a lousy analogy, because coke and product that kills that many people that is addictive are like night and day, but it is like switching from coke to diet coke and then finding out later it had absolutely the same calories and having coke say, well, why did not you just quit. and he did not just switch with no evidence. you heard that he said he heard it was better for him. now, where did that message come from if we are using more likely than not? more persuasive? did he just make it up? or did it have to do with the billions of dollars being spent marketing and sending that message that the federal -- united states federal trade commission said people are switching over in huge numbers. they believe these things are safer. and they are not. it is deceptive. and it is deeply embedded in the conscious of the people. let us go back to dr. sharp. that is the way it works. here is the proof in the pudding it is working, and here's the direct proof to frank townsend that he believed they were better for him and switched. what is this -- all this shenanigans got to do with frank townsend? everything. and the filters prove it. he switched to the filters. could it be a mere coincidence? could it just right at the point in time they were heavily marketing bringing these things in, saying switch over rather than quit, which was the unrelying message, could he just at that time decided i'm going to change over? remember, there were not many, but there were filters before then. they came in mass. their product, the kool that he switched to. could he have switched unrelated to the message they were saying switch? here we go, just a second, do not need to worry, you do not need to quit now. if we find anything, it is okay, but switch and you are okay. this one's safe. what is more likely if we are using the scales of balance and proof? is it more likely that that was simply coincidence or is it more likely that all of those people at the federal trade commission were talking about were falling under that trap? when we looked at dr. sharp's testimony and we then look at the actual direct proof to change, you heard it was better for you. that is what it is like for frank townsend. now, let us talk about for a minute, and before i leave, there is one other subject i want to cover. i do not want to hit them again, but i want to mention one other thing. the putting in the brown stuff, remember the paper they were going to add something so it would look like it was turning even browner so it looked more effective in this quote, illusion of filtration? remember the document that talks about the illusion of filtration is as important or more important than any actual filtration? the brown stuff. and they made issue to say, well, that was never -- that was crazy dr. teague and that was never actually done. remember what the evidence actually came out. no, no one can prove they actually did it, but there was a reason you heard it. you heard it from dr. cummings that up until 1986, 1986 they did not give any of that information out. no way to know whether they put it in or not. and that information had not been given up on these other documents. it is still back there. their trade secret. and even when it finally came out, it only went to three or four, five people in government. so the lack of being able to prove it, you would not be able to prove it because the proof is unattainable. so we are left with they were planning it, what happened. but the fact they were planning it is telling even of itself. the court: you are 30 minutes, mr. mitnik. mr. mitnik: thank you, judge. i want to run through a couple of these slides if i may and then i want to talk to you about the jury instructions. let me start with -- would you give me that first slide. in the punitive damage phase of this case that i'm going to go through the law what takes us here, this is really significant. and it is significant to frank townsend individually because he started as a 13 or 14 year old boy in naches, mississippi. and remember they played the clip from leave it to beaver of the beaver. i ask that it is so hard in this case sitting here today in 2010 to remember what it was like back there unless a conscious effort is made and the leave it to beaver kind of resets the clock. that was at a time when we did not have ipods. we did not cds. we did not have cassettes. we did not have 8 tracks. we had turn tables with 45s and 78s and 33s. nobody had cell phones. they kept change in their pocket for the phone booth. even as late as the late '70s, i remember taking a computer class. i'm not a computer guy, but a programming one class and i realized that is not for me, but they had in the computer lab you had these little printout cards with holes and they went in a machine and they went (onomatopoeia). that is how the computers work. that was in '79. go back to the late '40s where doctors are smoking in their offices. 85 percent of the men in american were smoking, plain smoking. i'm not going to pull the pictures back up. and we are talking about the mind of a young adolescent, a teen. and it is interesting, the clip they showed of beaver. he says, well, why would you do that? now, it is interesting that little age, may have been a few years, i'm not sure, he may have been a little younger than 13, but in that age group, the tv show was showing other kids were trying it. when you see their youth marketing information how they were going after 12 to 18 year olds because once they got to 25 they did not get them, you understand why way back then the show was not even covering the subject of why kids that young were experimenting with cigarettes. they were. but his response was telling, because in his response he said the logic of a young kid. well, i thought because it was bad, it was good. and they glamorized it and go after that mindset. and i ask you to use that image to remind you of the different time and place and the different mindset of someone that age. and they are called replacement smokers for a reason, because so many people are dying off from the lethal effects of the product that they are marketing it itself that is addictive that they got to replace them. and that is the fishing hole today. not just back with frank. today. camel pink's. camel crush. by the way, r.j. reynolds produced camel crush where they have these band parties for the young. joe camel is recognizable to little young kids, like six year olds or something, in a poll by the journal of american medical associates and american medical association, the doctors groups journal was as recognizable as mickey mouse's face. and attorney generals were in an uproar and they flashed and stopped. this is not ancient history. can i see the next slide? and remember the document that said -- before i go to that -- there is another document that says that this has been our strategy for youth marketing. they got smart later and the document talks about youth marketing, young adult youth marketing, but if you flip to the appendix, it showed who they really meant. it was 12 to 18 year olds. and the other documents flat show that is who they were talking about. it said that is been their strategy for 50 years, so it did cover frank townsend. what is this case got to do with frank townsend? the strategy was with ads and going after the kids to prevent health -- no proven health risk, smooth, satisfying, cool, sophisticated, athletes and stars. they make it as hard as possible to stop. denying any proof of addiction. all the way in 1994 stood in front of congress and all the heads raised their hands and swore to tell the truth that it was not addictive, and you saw all the documents. it was -- they absolutely were celebrating its addictiveness. look for greater addictive effects. enhance the deep inhalability. control nicotine levels. they controlled the nicotine levels but remember, they brought them down but they never bring them below the addictive level. and when frank townsend and that whole generation were coming up, back in the beaver days, they were getting the worst of the worse. that generation got the worst of the worst. they had the highest dosage of nicotine, meaning the least amount of information when they started and got addicted. and they lived day by day through this 50-year conspiracy. today the conspiracy is not going to work like it would in the '40s and '50s and '60s. remember, until late after frank townsend died these experts who know as much about the cigarette industry and the addictive nature of nicotine as anybody in the world, dr. cummings and dr. henningfield, they did not know most of this stuff. it was all locked in secret files and then it got out. and remember, dr. cummings said i could bring you loads of this stuff. it was not like we just selected a few bad documents. we could turn this trial into a year long trial. they went through all of that and frank townsend was an r.j. reynolds success story. get them young, manipulate them through product manipulations as well as psychological crutches as best they could, knowing better than anybody in the world how denial, relapse, and the cycle of addiction worked to their advantage. nicotine was their secret ingredient. it was the greatest sales tool they could find, because they want to sell lots of it for a long time. here's the problem with that. that is what causes lung cancer. not dabbling with them. lots of it for a long time is what causes the lung cancer. that is why on the question on the verdict form, was it a legal, a legal cause of the death or the disease. of course. there is no dispute. it is absolutely undisputable that he died from lung cancer from smoking their cigarettes. the only question is was he addicted. of course he was. i'm going to talk about that in a minute. of course he was. and was the addiction a cause of him continuing to smoke or was it a mere coincidence. indeed not. you are going to hear an instruction being the sole cause. can there be some of his own motivation? there is. he is taking responsibility for his role in it. but they want to pretend that the addiction to nicotine had no role. it just coincidence. what is addiction got to do with it? that is their defense. what is addiction got to do with someone using an addictive product. well, what is addiction? what is addiction but for it contributes to the use of the product? that is why it was one of the most significant things that happened in this trial, was this. when dr. bernstein was on the stand and he said, well, addiction, when we are talking about all those people who failed, ninety percent of all of the armament he had went back to he really treated people for nicotine addiction, all of it failed, ninety percent failed in relapse, he started to downplay the role of addiction. he said, well -i said, are you saying it was insignificant? well, i would say -- and then he finally said, well, it sounds like something i should have said. okay, i agree, it is a significant factor. on the causation question, that ended that part of this trial. that ended their dispute. he was trying to diminish addiction. and remember, the engle findings say, and it is stipulated in this case period, that nicotine is addictive. dr. bernstein is a guy that back before the engle decision, back when they would say, the old hard line that it is not addictive, even though all their documents showed that it was, he was the guy that came and said it is not addictive. well, he is still on message. now he says, okay, i have to admit, i cannot take that position. i will not tell you when i changed, but i cannot say that anymore, but i'll just say you were not addicted, frank townsend. but then he wanted to go the next step. and remember, he did not even go through the criteria. they did not go through the checklist of the criteria. dr. henningfield went through the dsm-iv, heaviness of smoking, fagerstrom, absolutely no question. one of the most knowledgeable guys in the world on this stuff was the lead researcher in the 1988 surgeon general report that was dealt with nicotine addiction. he spent his life on it. no question. dr. cummings, who spent his life on this stuff, one of the most qualified people in the world, no question, heavily addictive. dr. feingold, a pulmonologist doctor who treats people all the time that had this kind of a problem, lung problem from smoking, no question. and dr. henningfield went through all the of this. dr. bernstein just came and said, not addictive. popped up a few little lead in things out of the dsm-iv, went through the criteria; not addictive. put them on the scale. what weighs more. dr. feingold, dr. cummings, dr. henningfield, addictive or dr. bernstein who not that long ago claims they were not addictive, at the time everybody said they were addictive; the surgeon general. it ain't common sense. 45 years smoking, 30 of them a day, getting up in the middle of the night and smoking rather than, oh, i got to get up, i'm not sleeping good, i'm going rush out of here and go to the bathroom, get myself back to sleep before i have to wake up to have a cigarette. not addictive. just cannot get enough of that huffing and puffing. it is so much fun. he never could quite get over the novelty of it when he was 13. going to work and hiding in the bathroom repeatedly. he gets a break. he smokes on his way in. he sets up and then has another cigarette. he is got a break he can have a cigarette. he is going to have lunch, he is going to have a cigarette. he has breaks and has a cigarette, but he still sneaking off into the bathroom to have another cigarette until one time he is in there asleep and he gets a three-day suspension and gets sent home. just what is addiction got to do with it? it is just so much fun. that is what dr. bernstein would have you believe. the guy that tried to stop, tried to stop. middle of the night his wife finds him drinking coffee. another time tries to stop. tells his wife to get rid of them, do not buy me anymore. and he is sweet, nice, gentle, easy going, loving guy, and she says he was, my words, mean, and saying things mean. remember she said that i did not think it was appropriate. totally out of character. no addiction. first thing he wakes up in the morning, he is got an ashtray waiting in there when he is brushing his teeth to smoke a cigarette because the depletion of the nicotine while he is asleep. and he says, this ain't working in the middle of the night; goes out and gets another pack of cigarettes or carton. then the third time he is actually diagnosed with lung cancer. he goes up to loyola. he is in the hospital there and he tries quitting. he tries to stop. we do not know for sure how successful. from his son it sounds like he was pretty successful up there, but then by the time he gets back down here we know from the lady who was taking care of him while ms. townsend had to work, which incidentally i'm going to talk about that in a moment, but he was still sneaking cigarettes after he had been diagnosed. and dr. bernstein did not even know it, did not even bother to get the facts straight. he did not know. did he think he just quit? he thinks this thing at work was just a one-time incident. did not know he was sneaking off in the bathroom smoking all the time. the court: 45 minutes. mr. mitnik: okay. and ms. townsend who goes loyola and makes a promise, she is going to stay by her husband's side. the guy had no health insurance and she had to come back. she is the only one working and providing the health insurance, and for goodness sake, he cannot do without health insurance. and a broken heart of having to come home under the circumstances, and they tried to imply she left as if that relationship somehow was not of great value or diminished in quality. let me talk to you a little bit about this law and i'll talk about the damages. and i want to talk about the jury instruction. you may make deductions and reach conclusions which reason and common sense leads you to draw from the facts shown by the evidence in this case. use your common sense. when you say, is it more likely that this stuff was so massive, so designed had some impact, that it was a cause, a cause, that it contributed substantially, not that it was the only cause to the continued smoking, that is the question, to the continued smoking. when you hear what dr. sharp says and look at all the other things we talked about, the answer is, yeah, that is more likely, that is more likely. and then when you add the filters, it more likely gets even more likely to switch to the filters, which is the reliance upon that information that got -- and you can use your common sense to draw interferences. you can use also something that is called circumstantial evidence. circumstantial evidence. and i'll give you a very brief analogy what circumstantial evidence is. you have direct evidence in the switch. but circumstantial evidence, such as the timing change in the filters, the timing of the information, the fact his actions speaking louder than words, switching over to filters and those type of things is called circumstantial evidence on that part. the testimony of -- that he told his wife, it was better for him i believe you heard, that is direct. the circumstantial evidence is -- once i had -- my daughter when she was younger, i'd work out in the living room and she was not supposed to drink coke after hours because it would keep her up at night. i heard her in the kitchen rattling around in the refrigerator and i thought she might be getting a coke. i said, jessica, you are not getting in the coke, are you? no, dad. within seconds i hear a big boom and i got in and a big liter thing of coke spewing everywhere. she is got a glass there with it pouring out the side on her nighty. well, the nighty and the stuff on the ground and the liter, that is the circumstantial evidence. and i asked a dumb question. i said, you did not get into that coke, did you? she said, no. i'm standing there looking at her. that is circumstantial evidence. and they got coca-cola all over. other instructions quickly. there are findings in here that the judge will go through with you. i'm not going to go over all of these right now but these are actually stipulations, and it is critical to look at this because smoking -and these are just established facts -- smoking cigarettes causes squamous cell carcinoma. nicotine is -- in cigarettes is addictive. i guess he is just one out of 90 or 95 percent of long-term smokers. he just happens to be, with all that surrounding evidence, just happens to be one of the outliers. is that likely? of course he is addicted. then we get into -- let me put this down first -- i'm not going to go through this but it is important that these other companies like brown and williamson and american tobacco company, you are going to see an instruction, they are responsible. they took them over and they are legally responsible for that. so when you see they were selling the product, they are responsible for the kools, the salems and the pall malls. the engle instructions, if we prove the two things, addicted and the addiction was a cause of the death or the disease, meaning did it contribute to the ongoing smoking because you do not get lung cancer from smoking a few, it is the long, smoking, smoking, smoking that causes the disease, therefore the question is, did the addiction contribute or was it a cause of ongoing smoking leading to the disease. they say, no, it had nothing to do with it for the reasons i've told you. of course it was a contributing cause. of course it did and we activated in it when dr. bernstein admitted it. then these engle findings then -- once we have proven that we are then in the class entitled to these findings from your fellow jurors who, that is then passed on to you, and accepted as fact. we sat through a year long trial in this case, went to the florida supreme court and it is coming here with these as absolute findings once we proven the class membership. that r.j. reynolds placed cigarettes on the market that were defective and unreasonably dangerous. that r.j. reynolds tobacco company concealed or omitted material information not otherwise known or available, knowing the material was false or misleading, failing to disclose material facts concerning the health effects or the addictive nature of smoking. and then this next one has to do with the conspiracy. they agreed with other companies to conceal. they sold a defective product and that they were negligent. those are absolute findings once those first two obvious questions are answered. then -- and here is that first question just to show you: the plaintiff must prove by the greater weight of the evidence that frank townsend was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine manufactured by r.j. reynolds company and that his addiction was a, a legal cause of his lung cancer and death. in order to be a legal cause of the death addiction need not be the only cause. addiction may be a legal cause of death even though it operates in combination with the acts of another or some other cause, if such other cause occurs at the time of the addiction and the addiction contributes substantially to producing such death. that is the language that i've been talking to you about since way back during the jury selection. this is -- i'll give you one example. i'm not going to go through each of these on the legal cause but on the fraudulent concealment and conspiracy where i started out talking about what is this got to do with frank townsend and i presented to you that proof that certainly by the greater weight of the evidence it proves that it contributed, that it was -- contributed substantially to his ongoing smoking. when you see the injury, you would not get injured without the ongoing smoking. that is what that means. and go through these various engle findings, that information is there for you to glean. same -- contributes substantially language to it. so i'm going to skip those for the sake of time and not go through each and every one of them. conspiracy is an agreement between two or more parties to do an unlawful act. remember, they have already been found that these group of cigarette companies did indeed conspire. once we have proven we are a class member, that conspiracy is a done issue. that is why we show you documents from others -- from other companies because it was in furtherance of the conspiracy, which then leads up to i want to talk to you about lyantie townsend's loss of frank townsend's companionship and protection and her mental pain and suffering as a result of frank townsend's death, and any future loss you can look at the mortality tables. and let us talk about that companionship and protection. one of the things you will be asked to do is to put a value on her pain and suffering, her loss of companionship. and it is important to keep in mind in a courtroom like this in america, we talk about equal justice and we talk about -if you have ever seen lady justice, i'm sure you have, it always has a blindfold on. it is the justice as a blindfold on. it makes no distinction because wealth or class. and the reason i say that is there is no validity to any -- when you are valuing the loss of a loved one, you value the character and quality of that marriage and that love and the companionship and the value of that. the quality of a marital relationship has nothing to do with wealth. i know people that have grown-up with school teacher parents who did not have a lot of money but had a wonderful, loving, adoring relationship that did not fight, and woke up every day and spent every moment that they could when they were not working together and reached retirement and old age and the happiest bliss. and i've known people with great wealth that have had lousy marriages. so we do not say when we are valuing the quality of that loss of ms. townsend, well, let us look at her condition of finance. we look at -- let us look at condition of the quality of her relationship. and it was a great relationship. we heard from ms. townsend's friends and it was touching, they did not gilly lilly go all off. it was pretty to the point and direct but it spoke volumes. when you hear from her longtime friend who came in here, the lady that was an adjuster with allstate or state farm, for somebody, she testified she never heard them fight. that they did everything together. if she was in the lawn he was in the lawn. and i do not remember her exact words but she said something to the effect of with a couple like that, their minds become one and they think as one, two think as one. now, that is a wonderful statement on the quality of a relationship. we have heard from ms. townsend and she did not need to say in any words again how much she loved her husband, and what a nice gentleman, kind man he was, and how deeply going into retirement alone this has been of the loss, and how she talked to her mother and her mother said you get one good husband. she was one of the fortunate ones that got one good husband a long time ago. the boy that used to charge her to take her places in his car. she was asked something to the effect of he was man's man. she said, no, he was my husband. now, how do you value that? because ultimately that is going to become your job. no one else. but we certainly can try to assist you in suggesting, and one of the ways that we value things such as a relationship and the time one spends with a husband or a loved one or a wife, one of the ways to value that, once you have heard the evidence and know the character and the depth and the love involved, is to look at what other things people would spend money on to have time with someone. and we do have some evidence in this courtroom that is a different situation, but it may be instructive or helpful in trying to find reasonable gauges or measuring sticks. and one of them is the toxicologist, dr. thomas. and if you recall, he said he had made $4.6 million in eleven years for -- from working for r.j. reynolds or people on their behalf. if you take that over, and it was asked live here, what is that work out to? about $400,000 a year, just to spend occasional time assisting litigation. that is a measure over a year of occasional time. on the other end of the spectrum, we have dr. gentry, the vice president, who came and testified. and in one year he was compensated to the tune of a total compensation package of $2.6 million. now, i would suggest that certainly his value in valuing time going to work and then he goes home to his family, that his value of going to work is another measure. in 15 years ms. townsend -- and remember, ms. townsend is not a spring chicken now. but when this -- she is got a lot of life left. you_ heard her life expectancy is 15 years, but remember, this was 15 years ago. she was -- her husband was 59. she was like 56. that is young. that is a lot of life. some of us in the courtroom are 52. that is a lot of life to lose a husband when you have worked your way up and did all that they did and the hard hours and the work raising children and to come home, the dream, get out of the cold, coming down to the warm weather, live down on the end of a dirt road in the country and have chickens and eleven cows and two dogs and work it together and get up and get out and have your schedule now, every day is marked out. one day we go fishing. another day we feed the horse. another day is our visiting day. another day we go to the seafood restaurant; each day. and those days no longer have her husband and you live it one day at a time for 15 years. and i would suggest to you when you look at the quality of that relationship that at the low end of that range, that $400,000 a year, over 15 years, each year is a starting point. and we have other values such as dr. gentry from which to put your collective wisdom and mind together and make a rationale, reasonable, fair decision based on the evidence and the law. now, i want to talk to you about, for a moment, the punitive damages before i sit down. one of the questions that you have to answer before you ever get to the punitive damages, this is important, on the verdict form -juror: we really cannot see that because there is that white thing there mr. mitnik: i'm sorry, that is easy to fix. juror: thank you. mr. mitnik: first question: was frank townsend addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine manufactured by r.j. reynolds tobacco company and if so, was such addiction a legal cause of his lung cancer and death? the answer to that question is overwhelming yes. the answer to that question being no, it is the end of the case, period. the answer to that question is clearly yes. and when you apply the standard of greater weight of the evidence there cannot be much question. was r.j. reynolds tobacco company -- i'm sorry, and there is another question, i skipped the second part -- was frank townsend addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine manufactured by r.j. reynolds tobacco company and if so, was such addiction a legal cause of his lung cancer and death? did it contribute as opposed to was it insignificant, his addiction. that was answered by dr. bernstein. the answer to that question is clearly yes. was tobacco company's negligence a legal cause? of course it was, for the same reasons. was the defective and unreasonably dangerous cigarette placed on the market by r.j. reynolds a legal cause? the answer is yes. we know it was defective. that is part of the engle findings. we know what they did to manipulate that product. we know that long list, i think 35 pages and 350 something ingredients and they are putting them in there and saying this product has nothing to do with taking tobacco from the field and rolling it. it is a highly manufactured, precisely designed and it is designed for a purpose. the reason for all the additives and all of the fooling around with it is so you can suck it in as deep as possible into your lung rather than rejecting it if it is harsh and you cannot get it down. why? if you smoke a cigar or a pipe you do not have to do that. just you do not even take it. why? because the nicotine, the deeper and quicker it gets into the lung, the faster it gets to the brain and you get the, quote -- you saw it in their documents -- the nicotine kick. it is playing on the addiction. and it does two things. it gives the kick to the customer and it gives the cash to r.j. reynolds because that means you are going to get somebody to smoke for a long time. there is a problem with that, because when you suck it deep down into your lungs, because it is been made nice and soft so you can get up in there and not so harsh and you can get it there quick and it tastes pretty good and not go (onomatopoeia), what else is coming with the smoke? the carcinogens. all of those -- 60 of them being identified, and they bury down deep in the lungs, bathe the lungs in carcinogens. thank goodness it does not come from a few. it lakes a long time and a lot of them, but you keep bathing deep in with a product that is been manufactured intentionally to get it deep, that is what comes with it. that is what comes with it. and they cannot get the -- they cannot get the cancer causing stuff out and they will not get the nicotine out. it is the -- nicotine is the best marketing tool. so here it is, suck it in, over time, causing lung cancer. so, yes, when you see the question, a legal cause, yes it does. did frank townsend rely -- reasonably rely to his detriment, and it goes through, now we are into this is the coverup stuff, the concealment, the omission. this is that part of the case. and you will see these two questions to get to punitive damages must be answered yes. the court: mr. mitnik it is not quite showing on the top. mr. mitnik: thank you, judge. to deal with the issue of punishment, you must -- these -- one of these questions must be answered yes. you are going to get an instruction on that. and it says, this is the concealment and was it -- there it is again -- a legal cause. and this is the conspiracy. this is the agreement, is the conspiracy, and, again, a legal cause. for the reasons i talked about already the answer is yes. then you come to the question what percentage of fault, if any, was a legal cause of frank townsend's death that you charge to both. and there is one thing before we do that i want you to see. in determining the amount of damages, do not make any reduction because of the fault of frank townsend. the court in entering judgment will make an appropriate reduction in the damages award. in other words, it would be double reduction if you said he had some fault so i'm going to reduce the amount of damages, because the court takes whatever damages it reduces by the percentage of fault that was attributed to him. so when you are talking damages, please realize and i'll remind you here, you can pass through this issue of percentage that deals with that already. and i would suggest to you -- again, these are your decisions, but i feel an obligation to try and make suggestions that i think would be helpful and give some rationale for it. and i would suggest that a fair split of that would be r.j. reynolds 75 percent and frank townsend 25 percent. now why do i say that? why am i not just saying 50/50? here's why. because if we fairly look at this and kind of even handed, put aside emotions and just say, let us look at this fairly based on the evidence we have heard in this courtroom, frank townsend's not doing more to stop. now, remember he is got a filter that says i do not need to quit, you do not need to quit now, you switched. if you switched, why do you need to quit. and he is got all of their other whispers, do not worry, it is way off, it is watered down, it is wishy washy, its not a clear presentation. we will get to the bottom of it. someone will take it out. all of that going on, but still frank townsend has said from day one, i bear some responsibility. he says that through his wife. why do i say less than 50/50? because his part of this is inescapably and admitted by dr. bernstein being driven in significant part by the addiction. that is their product that they celebrate the addictive nature of. they celebrate it in their internal secret documents. so if part of this is being driven by the addictiveness that they are profiting from -- and let us look at theirs by contrast. their fault in this was not driven by any human flaw. it was not driven by addiction. it was driven by greed, unbridled greed. so, yeah, i would suggest in fairness based on the evidence that it ought not be 50/50. what are the -- and then you put in here, what is the amount of damages sustained by lyantie townsend caused by the death of her husband, frank townsend. and that will be the amount that you determine in valuing her relationship with her husband. not how much she is going to get but how much did she loss (sic) and what is the fair value of the loss of that relationship and that pain and suffering that goes with a companionship. and then you have to ask, under the circumstances of this case whether it appears damages were warranted. and you will get an instruction as to what warrants punitive damages. and the things that you determine in looking at that include, if you find lyantie townsend -- if you find for lyantie townsend against r.j. reynolds tobacco company you should consider whether, in addition to compensatory damages, punitive damages are warranted in the circumstance of this case as punishment and to deter others; and to deter others. that is what i talked to you about the importance of this job, what i mean. is that it is to punish and to deter others. not just r.j. reynolds but deter others. punitive damages may be awarded against r.j. reynolds based only on your findings of, that there is this fraudulent concealment or -- that is what i was telling you about, the question to the fraud question and the concealment ones are the gate through which you must pass to deal with the punishment and the deterrent to others. punitive damages are warranted if you find by clear and convincing evidence, and that is a little bit higher standard. the judge is going to give you an instruction, but it is clear and convincing is more than just the tilting of more likely than not. it is more precise than that. it is not beyond a reasonable doubt, but it is a step-up requirement. but let us look if there could have been any more clear and convincing evidence of these things. the conduct causing the loss was gross -- so gross and flagrant as to show reckless disregard to human life and the safety of other persons; that there was a conscious indifference to the consequences. and by the way, each of these are "or's". it does not have to be all of them. any one of them proves it. there was a reckless disregard for the safety and welfare of the public. now, can there be any question that there was precise, clear, and convincing evidence that they were -- had a reckless disregard for the safety of the public and showed a conscious indifference to others in a reckless disregard for human life and safety based on this evidence? that one's crystal clear, by any standard. so let me talk to you about the punitive damages. you also may consider harm suffered by others. the court: you need to pull it down. mr. mitnik: sorry. when considering whether to award punitive damages you may only consider harm of r.j. reynolds conduct caused by frank townsend, you also may consider harms suffered by other persons not parties to this lawsuit in assessing the reprehensibility or wrongness of r.j. reynolds tobacco company's acts. so that is why when we talk about the 440,000 people a year that are dying, knowing that they are marketing to children and those replacement smokers that are dying were ones 13, 14, 15, 16 year old replacement smokers targeted by r.j. reynolds and others in the conspiracy. that is reprehensible. that is why we have a case about punitive damages. we look at the nature and extent of the degree of misconduct and related circumstances and r.j. reynolds company's net worth and we have put into evidence r.j. reynolds's net worth, and it varies over a few years leading up. we had several years. but it works out, if you were averaging it, to about $8 billion of a net worth and you can look at the net worth in making a determination. and i would like to talk to you about, again, a rational way to suggest to you to measure when we are talking about punitive damages and that situation. and it is not punishment to deter. and when we are punishing and deterring, an analogy would be a speeding ticket. now, a speeding ticket, let us say, $200 to somebody who is a movie star and loaded may not mean much. to a single mother or somebody working on a tight income, it could really have an impact and make you think i'm going to slow down next time. so let us use that under the analogy, but you have got to convert it to the 8 million. and if we took some american, and i'll call it a lucky american, that had an $80,000 net worth or fortunate enough to have an $80,000 net worth and you apply that same standard and you put 80,000 here and the 8 million here, and try to convert that to show what the same impact of a $200 speeding fine would be -- could you give me that -- you know which one i want? r.j. reynolds 8 million and using the example net worth of someone with $80,000, ten percent of the net income would be $8,000 to the person with a net worth of 80. it would be 800 million to r.j. reynolds. percent would be a $800 fine; would be 80 million. a half of a percent to the person would be a $400 fine; would be 40 million to r.j. reynolds to have the same type impact. and if you took one quarter of one percent of the person who had a $80,000 net worth, that would get you down to the $200 speeding ticket. and to do the equivalent fine to r.j. reynolds, it would take $20 million. so in this realm we are not talking about compensating. we are talking about punishing in a way that has an impact that is noticeable and deterrent effect. and to this day, those people are dying. to this day you have seen evidence that it is not ancient history the marketing for the kids. the manipulations of the product so you get it as deep as possible are going on. the things that happen in looking back are time as opposed to deterrent and pure punishment. 50 years, and all those people, that whole generation and frank townsend. this is a significant task. it is an important task. thank you. rebuttal argument by mr. mitnik mr. mitnik: thank you. second guessing mr. townsend. how many people walked into this courtroom and got an education in 2010 about the things they have been doing? how many people walked into this courtroom and got an education about the things they have been doing for 50 years? and mr. townsend's supposed to know it? what if mr. townsend heard what we heard in the courtroom? what if mr. townsend could rise up from the grave and come in here? what would he take that stand and say? i was a 13 year old boy. i smoked and you people were out telling me it is okay. i heard warnings. i heard people talk. i'm not deaf. but you kept telling me while i was -- i do not even know what addiction is. i did not go to school for addiction. i just know i got a craving for this stuff. i know when i tried to quit my feeling -- that i tell my wife when i'm about to die, it is the hardest thing i ever did in my life. and. then we know, in fact, he did not even tell his wife. i did not know what the word addiction meant. if i heard all this, let me tell you what, i was addicted. i was going to the bathroom at work and hiding in the bathroom and smoke. i was getting up in the middle of the night every time i had to go to the bathroom and got to light up. i did not crawl out of bed first thing in the mourning and have a danish and something nice; i'd a cigarette. that is how i spent my life. 30 cigarettes a day for 45 years. man, i would have made some different choices if they made different choices and been honest and straight with me. if they had not told me and led me to believe that those filters were safe, they looked safe, they indicated they were safe. i'm going to show you some ads that indicated, you will see just how honest they are being with you. what would mr. townsend say if he could talk? to keep them in the dark and then have the gall to come in here after -- you are going to hear in a moment the judge read what they did and what they founded have done, once we pass through those first two steps. i wander how mr. townsend would feel if he was here and he heard that. the whole argument. you know when we talk about punishing, the first thing -- if you are dealing with a child, the first step in learning a lesson is to make the child say, i did it, i'm done making excuses, i'm done lying about it, i did it, and i've learned my lesson; i will not do it no more. did that closing argument sound like they learned anything? they are still on the same message they were before engle. we did not do anything wrong. let us talk out of both sides of our mouth. we are going to bring you dr. sharp to tell you that school kids all knew how dangerous, they caused cancer, they knew that back -- way back. look at the polls. but now let us move over here. wait a minute, we were telling the truth in the frank statement when we said, no, we did not know, it was true. we did not know. woops, frank townsend knew; the school kids knew. frank townsend knew; the school kids knew. that helps them in the case. and you notice they never put them side by side. they talk about something else so you do not catch it. then they go over here and say, we, the people that produce it in our labs and you have got the documents that were coming up and hiding it. scamming and planning. we did not know. you cannot have it both ways. not when you got people handpicked to see through that here. the best evidence you will ever see that they have not learned their lesson is the way they defended this case in what you just heard. and you are going to hear instructions of the findings and ask yourself, did it sound remotely close to that. and ask how familiar this sounds. the court: let me just ask you, mr. mitnik, that in the past, as you remember, sometimes you get going without having it fully on there. just for the benefit of the jury make sure you have that on there. mr. mitnik: and for the benefit of the jury this is exhibit 330. and this is the document that says, we cannot -- and by the way, this is from 1980 -- talking about the law firm reminds us, we cannot defend continued smoking as free choice, if the person was addicted. we just cannot do it. we cannot look the jury in the eye and defend a lawsuit if this word gets out of addiction, because the addiction is the weapon that the lawyers bringing in the case have. in a lung cancer case we cannot defend it anymore we are told by our lawyers. we can no longer stand up with this old broken story of it is all just free choice if the person was addicted. why? why? well, dr. bernstein told you why. because they want to tell you it is all choice or it is addiction. and let us look at the rationale of that. their lawyers are telling you you cannot do that because it does not pass the smell test. the suggestion is if you have some choice -- remember this was dr. bernstein what he tried to do before he came in with that answer was to suggest, well, unless you got some mental problem like alzheimer's to where you really cannot make a decision, then you are capable of making a choice. and if you are capable of making a choice, then addiction is irrelevant to using the drug. it is meaningless. it just evaporates, like pulling the plug on the question of why did you keep using the addictive drug for years and years and years. their suggestion is if you have an ability to make a choice, you are not in a coma or have some kind of mental disorder where you just really cannot think, any thinking person, addiction has zero, nothing, it does not contribute, it is an either/or choice, it is all just choice and addiction is meaningless. well, way back in '80 it was recognized by the lawyer -- law firm defending it, you just cannot do that. what did we just hear? he is got a choice, choice, choice, choice, choice; all his choice, choice, choice. hearing of potential dangers does not pull the power plug of addiction. you heard that from dr. bernstein. hearing of dangers does not mean addiction goes away. in fact, he said when you are fighting with addiction, just knowledge of a risk does not mean much. that is the guy they brought in. he is the same one -- if he says something helps us, you can take that to the bank because he is the guy that gets up from the back and get away and say it is not addictive. but you know what? you might as well heard the same thing from their side, as if he had not admitted, yes, they are competing forces. on one hand is the choice or motivation; on the other hand is the addiction. and the addiction is a significant factor. and they coexist. they just looked at you as if you did not hear it. they said it is either/or. they do not co-exist. their own expert told you. did they think you did not hear it with your note pads? they do not -- if it is just choice, and addiction, what is addiction got to do with it? you pull the power plug on it if you are not mentally disabled. then how come, according to their own expert and everybody, there is this 90 to 95 percent relapse rate of people walking around wanting to quit. what was the number? 85 percent want to quit. 85 percent want to quit. 95 percent are relapsing. but if you are not -- got alzheimer's, you can just decide, wake up one day and quit. addiction's got nothing to do with it. that is what this means. but no one's learned any lessons. even if -even if you were addicted, it is all just free choice. motivation is a good thing. motivation is when this addiction that is -- it does overwhelm. never -- i want to set something straight and i feel i almost do not need to, but i cannot help it because i got personal ties. as if i stood up here and told everybody this is the word, what is a drug that is addictive other than causing compulsion, meaning a drive, a drive. the suggestion was that i started out this case by telling you if you are addicted, it is impossible to quit. and then i somehow shifted. yet i'm not going to take the time, but you remember up on the screen, everybody remembers the wheel and it said diminishing control -diminishing control. and i went into great length to say to everybody first, i'm sure you all remember, of course, it is possible to quit. nobody says you are a robot. remember i said nobody says you are a robot but you had two competing forces. i cannot just keep telling you things as if you were not paying attention. i never made that suggestion. from the beginning i told you exactly what we have proven in this case, and ultimately dr. bernstein proved it for us, which is you have on one hand, you have two competing powerful forces, a very powerful drug that is possible -that is possible to shake free of but it is statistically rare because it is, as surgeon general koop said, you saw him on the mic, you seen the document, it is like heroin and cocaine. it is not impossible to stop. that is a trick question, could you stop. of course you can. that is like suggesting if somebody's been on the street shooting up with heroin, they say, well, could you stop? yes. that is just a trick question. of course, it is possible you could. the question is not for you on the -- hey, you have now seen the instructions, you are about to hear them, look for something that says choice; did you have a choice. the question is was he addicted and was it a cause; did it contribute. and their expert, dr. bernstein said, yes. and what is the last thing that should be done with someone who -- the motivation is if you are going to be one of the rare ones, and some people, for whatever reason, you can just put a cigarette down and walk away without any big problem, but they are the lucky, rare ones. most it is impossible to take off. it is not impossible. but what is the -- if you are going to try to break free, if you are in the cycle of addiction and it does have its hook in you, what is the best hope? motivation. what motivates? clear and present danger. what is the worst thing that could ever be done to someone who is trying to get off the hook? to fool with that motivation and deprive that motivation or undermine that motivation. and what is the precise way that the documents prove they went after was to say i'm going to take clear and present and i'm going to water it down, i'm going to make it wishy-washy and make it sound way off. if we ever find it, we will be the first to tell you we will take it out, we will quit selling it, or whatever we have to do, but in the meantime -- and what is that to the ear of someone in an addictive cycle, to say what a lousy feeling and it feels like it is never going to end and it is seconds away? it is okay. now give that person a filter. it is safe. why quit? just change. and they did it on purpose. why? to keep them smoking as long as they could. if you look at those documents -look at the documents. remember dr. cummings? they make it sound like they just tore dr. cummings up on cross and he confessed, there was no conspiracy, no cover up, you got me, i made it all up. they were in a different courtroom than i was. document after document what they did. the worst thing they could do and they did it on purpose, they did it for one single-minded purpose. money. and they did not do it alone. they joined together in conspiracy and planned and plotted to do it and they did it and the documents show they bragged about it. they bragged about the brilliant, brilliant strategy that they carried out, and planned. now what are we going to be doing next to keep people smoking, to keep those addicted smokers there? what are we going to do to replace them? go get some more kids. if you have heard them, they are in this courtroom unjustifiably. it is a tragedy they are having to defend themselves. give me -- would you play that ad real quick for me. (video played.) mr. mitnik: now, we do not have any evidence of any suggestion that filters were healthy and safe and refreshing, and the most -- the world's most tested filter. would you pull up the filter one, please? i'm not going to go back through every document. you have seen them. i'm trusting and relying on the fact that people remember them. but i pulled out some stuff on this. health ads on filter cigarettes include kools. the cigarette industry has done a grave disservice to the smoking public, publicizing the filter tip smoke as a healthy protection. they actually, in there, talk about how they deceived the public. the connection between filter tip cigarettes and protection has become deeply embedded in the public mind. this is the united states of america congressional hearings. 1958. but they would have you believe there was no problem with these filters. they really worked. they did not work, is the problem. remember the evidence of how they were putting them on the machine that said low tar, low nicotine and how dr. henningfield showed you and put it on here, how they got the little holes in them, and it dilutes it because the air comes in, and then people put their lips on them and smoke them and it covers the hole up so you get the full dose, or how people compensate for it because they are in the addictive cycle so they smoke deeper and harder to get the same effects. which meant what? they sold more. it was a scam. present technology does not permit selective filtration of particulate smoke. that is philip morris in '61 who was part of the conspiracy. these people knew it was not working. in 1966, exhibit 385, the illusion of filtration. that is a critical document. it is too long for me to pull it out and go through. it is smacked full of stuff, that if you read that and a logical conclusion from reading, i cannot believe they stood up there and talked to me like that with this evidence in this record. i ask you, 385, just read the illusion of filtration document and look at the stuff. it is outrageous stuff in there. how contrary it is to the story you are hearing in this courtroom. the illusion of filtration is as important as the fact of filtration. when charcoal was added to cigarette filters, it proved to be an effective_ advertising gimmick, and we have no evidence. and when you read through there you will see how they talked about how they were switching people over and how what an effective, wonderful way it was driving up their sales in dealing with this health risk and how people were taking to it, and how they boomed with sales with it. and when you look at the timing, frank townsend switched to those filters right when all this was going on and said he heard they were better for him. look at that kool commercial and heard it is better for you. and remember dr. sharp, and look at the trends and say, that when i look at that circumstantial evidence i do not think more likely than not that that had something to do with it as opposed to it was just a shear coincidence he switched to a normal brand at that time. give me the next the slide on addiction. it is unfortunate. it is a habit. they cannot break out of it. hill & knowlton. read the rest of hill & knowlton. they act as if we pulled one quote out to somebody. that is just -- read and see what they say. this is an executive within their companies that are meeting. that is their state of mind. they are celebrating. then we look at the brown and williamson, which they are responsible for brown and williamson. more nicotine -- moreover nicotine is addictive. we are then in the business of selling nicotine. brown and williamson, 1963. exhibit 177. but we just heard, well, and what is addiction? it is just a word. i mean, you know, people are dependent now. we are not even using addiction now. we are just using dependence. really? really? as if you did not hear dr. bernstein say just the opposite, the person they are paying 30 something thousand dollars. he took this stand and said, well, i know that not long ago i was testifying under oath these things are not addictive at all for the same group. but let me explain to you why now i say it is. and i showed him the engle statement and -- or you have actually studied and now you cannot say it and i cannot tell you when i changed my mind. but nonetheless, what was he changing his mind to? he now accepted that -- this was his explanation for his change in position -- was the scientist changed where everyone now agrees that the word addiction is the proper word where before i thought that if you were dependent, that meant something different. but now everyone agrees it should be the same thing as addiction. they just told you, now we all just use dependent. addiction is just a word. why? why such an argument? you are going to get the engle finding and it is stipulated this even without proving anything comes with it. they are addicted, period. why would you hear an argument that it is just a word and we are moving away from that word? i wonder why. i wonder why. we cannot defend continued smoking is free choice if the person is addicted. so let us just downgrade it to just a word. no one has ever become a smoker by smoking cigarettes without nicotine. 1972. we have deliberately played down the role of nicotine. surprise, surprise. nicotine is the sine qua non of the smoke, meaning without which nothing. few customers are aware of the effects of nicotine, i.e., its addictive nature. 1978. i thought i heard from the person they paid, dr. sharp, and from their lawyers that, whoa, everybody knew, everybody knew. really? that is what the internal secret documents; what they wrote at home in private like a diary versus what they say in public. night and day. i want to put up scholastic -- i want to put up studies --let me finish this before i take this out. we cannot ever be comfortable selling a product which most of our customers would stop using if they could, if they could, r.j. reynolds, 1982. that is r.j. reynolds. and i'm hearing how mr. mitnik is indicating that because somebody back in the hill & knowlton document talked about how if you quit, you could, and that is -- how fair is that? that is just ridiculous. well, this is their own internal document. they think i was not going to pull it up? or you would forget? remember they put up the gallup poll. well, they left -- and remember the gallup poll wrote and said, quit doing what you are doing in courtrooms with our stuff. quit it. well, no lessons have been learned, and they leave out gallup polls that say -- and i'm not going to zoom this in, we went through this -- but 62 percent of smokers did not think cigarette smoking was one of the causes of lung cancer in 1957. their polls are all over the place. you saw this poll. 62 percent of smokers agreed that the connection between smoking and disease is not yet proven because it is only based on statistics. and i know it is wiggling around. it is all -54 percent of high school students believe that you could only get lung cancer through heavy smoking or did not think there was a link that had been established. did people hear by -- was the word on the street where you could hear it, was it possible? absolutely the word was on the street. no question. it is not whether you hear, like these polls talk about. it is do you know. and why? ask this of yourself when you are back there. why have we got polls with fifty percent of the people saying they have heard or 90 -- heard it could be, heard it could be. you have seen the internal documents. they knew it was. what if -- i ask this question -- what if they had, rather than cover up, had owned up, or how about just hushed up and let what was coming out of the public health be able to take root naturally. what would the polls have said? it would have said as if we polled people, is the earth flat. why is it heard, could be, statistics? there was only one force standing against it, and it was these tobacco -- these cigarette companies. give me please the public deception. there is only one -- these are the secrets behind the scenes. there is only one problem. confidence and how to establish it. public assurance and how to create it. that is the '53 plaza hotel meeting when they sent hill & knowlton, pr firm, to go out and speak to the head of tobacco and their scientists, and they wrote this paper. and i would suggest you read it. it is shocking. 1964, exhibit 195. give smokers a psychological crutch and self-rationalization to continue smoking. would not guess that from the closing you just heard. they were just innocent as a lamb. the objective is to influence public opinion, reestablish the cigarette controversy. that is the tierod from the other pr firm they got involved in '67. that is 235. read that one and see about that one and how they list all the fronts, the political and public opinion fronts that they have done so well in its time to ratchet it back up. we are interested in evidence which we believe denied the allegation that cigarette smoking caused disease. 1970. yeah, they were being straight with frank townsend and the american people. for nearly -- and remember there was the other one that talked about all of the evidence -- this is an internal secret document. i do not have it on here, but you will remember, and it is in the record that talked about the overwhelming evidence that was indicting the dangers of the cigarettes and the scant amount of evidence to the contrary. that is not what they were telling with the frank statement. we are going to get to the bottom of it. we are going to get these scientists. we have tirc. we have the tobacco institute. we have ctr. all of them were pr arms admittedly, just not to the public. now admittedly were just public relation arms that were made to look like they were doing a bunch of scientific good work when the truth was, it was all part of the propaganda to keep addicted smokers smoking as long as possible. and the longer you smoke, the closer you are getting to lung cancer. that is one of the real tragedies of this case. when we heard at the tail end of this case, from the tail end of this case, dr. thomas came in here and you also heard from dr. feingold that time does matter. time matters. it does not go down to zero like they tried to -- told you in opening statement they were going to prove. but it does diminish. time matters. and all the while you will see their documents that say this was a, quote, holding strategy, a holding strategy. well, while they are holding, people are crossing that line of lung cancer and death. they are holding for what reason? need i say? greed. money. it was a betrayal. greed and money. they are holding on as long as they can through this deception and manipulation of a product and of the mind. holding on in time really mattered. i asked you when you think about those time frames think about what if they had just owned up rather than cover up, or just hushed up and let nature take its course. the opportunities that were lost for people to have a clear and present danger because intentional by design strategies. when the rat painting came out in '53, when the surgeon general in '64, when they went off the air out in '71. when the warnings went on. all the way up to '94 when they took the microphones in all sports and not addicted. if you had just cut it out, how many people, including frank townsend, would have had a clear-cut message, if you had just said the truth, these filters do not work, they are a gimmick. they may reduce tar a little bit, but they are not safe. they are causing lung cancer. they are just as addictive. that is the truth. do not rely on this stuff that is better for me. i want you to know loud and clear this is a clear and present danger. every time you suck on it you are a step closer to potentially getting lung cancer and dying and we know it, and by the way, they are addictive, go get help. what if they would have done that? all those opportunities lost, risk reduction. for one reason, they knew it, they knew it. that is what makes it so offensive. for profits. the objective is to influence public opinion, reestablish the cigarette controversy. for nearly 20 years this industry has employed a single strategy. 20 years they are bragging about it. a single strategy defend itself on three major products: litigation, politics, and public opinion. and you heard when dr. gentry was here about their lobbyist. brilliantly conceived. holding strategy, there it is. creating doubt about the health charge without actually denying it. that is the tobacco institute. they all took a share of the market and threw billions of dollars at it for them to go to work for the conspiracy and do these things and they are crowing about it. ctr, tirc, was set up as an industry shield in 1954. that is a ctr document in '78. an industry shield, but they just stood before you and said, well the frank statement, look, we really were doing good things. show me the concealing and omitting document. i've talked about this ad nauseum. i'm not going to talk anymore about the huge admission from dr. sharp. public awareness and the impact that it sets in and you do not need someone to say i saw an ad to know they certainly saw the ad. they would had to live in a hole that that applied to what was going on with the cigarette companies. dr. gentry, the customer has a right to rely on the statements of the company. and mr. hyman who was the president of ats for which they were responsible wanted the public to rely on the ads. it was reasonable for members of the public to rely on those ads. dr. cummings talked basically the same exact thing. dr. sharp was just using a different term, wallpaper information. and lyantie townsend, frank switched to filters because he heard they were better for him. by the way, here's another tragedy in what they did, and further proof, circumstantial proof, using common sense that this filtered gimmick, trick, sham was working specifically on frank townsend. frank townsend switched to -- he switched around the late '50s, early '60s, right when they were pushing all this, when their statistics show it is when he switched to filters. the first time that there was a quit attempt that we know of, he may have tried some that his wife did not know about, but the first one we know about was in 1978 to '86, in that period. sometime '82, '83, '79, and he switched over to the filters in '60. that is 20 years, because he was smoking something that he thinks is safe. and why does not he know that it is not helping? it will kill you just like the other stuff? why? because they did not want him to hear it. the court: mr. mitnik, three minutes you will have been talking for two hours. mr. mitnik: okay. i know y'all are tired. it is so hard to quit. i've got stacks here of stuff that i want to tell you about and there comes a point i got to pass the baton. just like that jury from engle passing the baton here, i got to sit down. on behalf of ms. townsend and her husband, on behalf of the important issues that are before you, i got to pass the baton. i will tell you this, this is a significant sacrifice but it is for a very, very, very important cause. and it is a rare opportunity. and i will tell you that if you look at the verdict form, i'm not going to pull it because of the minutes to go, that under the law and the evidence, which we have proven, the gateway to punishment and an opportunity to make a difference by second to -- telling them, telling them enough's enough. and to make a difference is under the evidence, yes, he was addicted, of course it was a -- a -- one of the causes. it was not irrelevant that he was addicted to ongoing smoking that led to disease. he asked the question. and when you get into the questions about the concealment and the agreement to conceal, you will see in there, yes to those are necessary element to the punitive damage phase of this case and finding easily the reprehensible type conduct. and i ask you, they have celebrated for too long. let us not let this be another opportunity for celebration. let us let this be an opportunity to make a difference and to do justice and to stand firm and to say, those old tricks are not working at all, please. this really matters. thank you.