22 ms. gallagher: thank you, your honor. good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen. this case is about mr. tullo. this case is about what he knew about cigarettes, how he knew that, 5057 and why he made the decisions he did. and the short answers to those questions that i'll spend the next hour or so talking to you about are that mr. tullo knew that smoking was dangerous and addictive. he got that information from the public health authorities and his own family. mr. tullo made the decision when he would quit, and nothing the tobacco companies said or did impacted any of those decisions he made. you have been presented with kind of two different worlds in this courtroom. one i would 12 call the litigation world that has been created by the plaintiff attorneys and their experts. and then you have the real world in which mr. tullo lived. and in the litigation world you have had the plaintiffs bring you experts to come in and talk about documents, talk about statements, talk about ads that are decades and decades old. some of them older than some of you. what they have not done is tell you that mr. tullo, the person that this case is about, saw any of those ads, heard any of those statements. as mr. fasi told you in opening statement, there is a missing link. and the plaintiffs have not brought that 5058 to you. they have not shown that mr. tullo heard or saw any of that, much less that that had any impact on him. now, we brought you some historical evidence also. and you might be asking yourself, why did they do that? because we cannot tell you that the reader's digest we put up, the information we put up, we cannot tell you that mr. tullo saw that any more than they can tell you that mr. tullo saw that information or heard that information. but we brought you that information because if you listened only to the plaintiff's experts and to the plaintiff's attorneys and, in fact, if you listen to 15 mr. hammer today in his closing you would think the tobacco companies were the only voice out there talking about cigarettes. and you know that is just not true. the medical press was talking about cigarettes and the dangers of cigarettes. the lay press was talking about it. the surgeon general was talking about it. the public health community was talking about it. and, in fact, you know from the testimony in the case the tullos themselves were talking about it. this was not something that only the 5059 tobacco companies were involved in. so let us go back and look at what some of those other voices were, some of the other information that was out there. now, you know that for a long time people have known that smoking was not good for you and that smoking was addictive. you have heard evidence in this courtroom that during the 1940s and particularly in the 1950s some epidemiological studies started coming out having a scientific link between cigarette smoking and disease and specifically lung cancer. but this was not something new. people had known for a long time that smoking was dangerous. and you have seen some of these before. this is reader's digest. you have heard a lot 18 more about reader's digest in this case than you probably ever wanted to hear, one of the most popular magazines of its time back then. this is back in 1935, and reader's digest is talking about on giving up smoking. and what do they say about tobacco? that it is a drug, this is 1935, and that it gives you cancer. this is 1935 telling the american public, cigarette 5060 smoking gives you cancer. the same is true with addiction. as far back as christopher columbus, you heard, in the late 1400s people recognized that tobacco was hard to quit. and, ladies and gentlemen, i say tobacco because it was not cigarettes. the modern cigarette was hundreds and hundreds of years from being developed. people knew back 500, 600 years ago that smoking was difficult to quit. this is john quincy adams in 1845. "in my early youth i was addicted to the use of tobacco in two of its mysteries, smoking and chewing." 1845 he is talking about tobacco being addictive. "cigarette and the boys." the florida health notes, you remember this from the early 1900s. this one is 1906, and florida health notes, which was published here, says, "to-day the cigarette is looked upon by all smokers as 21 the very worst form of tobacco addiction." this is not something new. "life without nicotine." as i told you, people for hundreds of years have recognized that nicotine in cigarettes is difficult to give 5061 up. and here we are with newsweek back in 1951 telling people how to quit smoking, giving them some of the same things we will see a little bit later in smart move that was published in the late 19 -- by the american cancer society. people recognized that smoking was difficult to give up. now, it was no secret in the 1930s, '40s, '50s, '60s that smoking was dangerous and nicotine was hard to give up, that it was an addiction. and let me talk a little bit about the word "addiction." because you have heard that it was not until 1988 that the surgeon general of the united states labeled nicotine addictive. and it is because in 1988 the surgeon general changed the definition of addictive. if you go back to 1964 when the surgeon general was talking about tobacco and the dangers of smoking, the surgeon general said, nicotine is not addictive. we are not going to call cigarettes addictive. and it is because of the definition that they were using at the time that required intoxication. 24 when we fast forward to 1988, the surgeon general says, yes, we are going to use a 5062 different definition of addiction and therefore nicotine is addictive. but does it really matter what label you use? it does not matter whether you call it addictive. it does not matter whether you call it dependence-producing or a really bad habit. it all means the same thing. now, the tobacco companies hung on to the old definition of the word addiction, and did they hold onto that old definition of addiction too long? yes. did the tobacco companies make some statements that today we look at and say, those are totally unreasonable? yes. did the tobacco companies write things down that when we are looking at them today we say, that is just not reasonable? yes. but the question for you in this case is, did that impact anything mr. tullo did or did not do? that is the question you have to answer in this lawsuit. now, let us talk a little about the statements that the tobacco companies were making when they said cigarette smoking is not addictive, when they said that cigarette smoking does not cause disease and they said we need more tullo v r j reynolds - vol 34 - 04-12-2011 trial transcript 5063 research on this, we need to do more research. what did dr. riddel tell you about that yesterday? she told you that what the tobacco companies were saying was not effective. and remember she talked about awareness and she talked about people can hear things and be aware of things. and then that has to transfer into do people believe things. and she showed you a slide yesterday. jen, would you pull that please. from 1954 up until 1990 when the tobacco companies were making all these statements, what happened to the belief in the american public about whether cigarette smoking was a cause of lung cancer? if you start back here in 1954 with the blue graph and just follow it up to 1990, you can see that no matter what the tobacco companies were saying out there it just did not work, because the american public believed and believed through the years that cigarette smoking was a cause of lung cancer. the plaintiff's attorneys want you to believe that mr. tullo heard nothing except what the tobacco companies were saying. and that is not true. let us get out of the litigation world 5064 1 and go back to mr. tullo's world. because in the real world we know that mr. tullo knew smoking was dangerous. we know that because ms. tullo talked to her husband about the surgeon general's report. she talked to him about the dangers that were in the surgeon general's report, and, in fact, mr. tullo said he had read about it, he had heard about it independent of what ms. tullo told him. ms. tullo pointed out the warnings on the packs of cigarettes. and i'll show you those later. you have seen those. the warnings that said, cigarettes may be hazardous to your health. the warnings that said cigarette smoking can give you lung cancer. ms. tullo pointed out warnings on those packages to her husband. and every time he reached into that pocket to pull out a cigarette, he saw those warnings. the surgeon general told mr. tullo in 1964 that smoking causes lung cancer. you know that he is read about it. we have put up a lot of things up here on the boards that you all have seen, and one thing we do know that mr. tullo saw were the newspapers. he read the new york 5065 daily news and he was an avid newspaper reader. we brought you articles from the new york papers. so there is at least a better chance 4 that he actually saw those rather than all these other things that plaintiff's attorneys have brought to you that have absolutely no connection to mr. tullo. what did mr. tullo do when mrs. tullo would point out the dangers of smoking? he would ignore her. he would get angry. he would give her the silent treatment. he would get annoyed. and sometimes he would blow smoke in her face. why? because he already knew what she was telling him and he did not want her annoying him any more with this information he already had. and on some occasions mr. tullo would say, do not worry, i'm smoking a filtered cigarette. well, he was either telling ms. tullo that to get her to quit nagging him, as she said in her plain brooklyn language that she would nag him about the risks of smoking, so he was either doing that to make her stop or he had heard what the public health community was saying. and it was the public health community that was saying, quit smoking, and if you do not quit, smoke a low 5066 tar cigarette or a filtered cigarette. now, ask yourself, if mr. tullo did not know that smoking was dangerous, then why did he switch to a filtered cigarette? if he thought that this was a less dangerous cigarette, then he had to know that the cigarettes he was 7 smoking were dangerous. and no one ever told mr. tullo that filtered cigarettes were safe or safer. everything you have heard is that filtered cigarettes were less dangerous. when mr. tullo caught his daughter smoking, mrs. casino, what did he tell her? if i catch you doing that again, you are going to be in trouble. she was 16, 17 years old stealing his cigarettes, his filtered marlboro cigarettes. he did not tell her, oh, you are okay because you are smoking a filtered cigarette, what he told her was, do not do it again. this was in the mid '60s. and even dr. cummings told you that he thought mr. tullo was probably aware of the health risks of smoking. after we brought all those things up, all the reader's digest, all the magazine articles that is when dr. cummings 5067 finally said, yeah, mr. tullo probably saw this and he was probably aware of it. in the lawsuit world dr. cummings and dr. burns would have you believe that mr. tullo was probably aware of the health risks of smoking, but that for some reason he could not quit. for some reason he could not process the information that millions of other people processed. 10 you know, one of the things mr. hammer was saying was, you know, in 1954, in 1964, if the cigarette companies would have just said, we agree with the surgeon general or had put out the frank statement and said, you know, we think cigarettes cause lung cancer, what did he tell you? if they had done that back in 1954 americans would have quit smoking. people are still smoking today. they have not shown you that anything the tobacco companies said or did not say had any impact on mr. tullo. and everything that mr. hammer is telling you in his closing argument is just pure speculation. he wants you to make the jump that if the tobacco companies had done this then all of america would have done something different. 5068 and we know that that has just not happened. let me keep on filtered cigarettes for a while. dr. cummings and burns want you to believe that mr. tullo started smoking filtered cigarettes, and particularly parliament cigarettes, because of ads. and mr. hammer actually got up and told you in his closing argument that those ads said that these cigarettes were safe or safer, filtered cigarettes were safe or safer. you have got a bunch of ads that you can look at when you get into your deliberations, and you are not going 13 to find that word on any of those ads. that is not what those ads were saying. and the problem is, even if those ads said that, the plaintiff's attorneys and their experts cannot link any ad to mr. tullo. no one can tell you that mr. tullo based his decision on what brand of cigarettes he smoked and whether he smoked filtered cigarettes or unfiltered cigarettes on any ad that is out there. it is mr. fasi's missing link again. there is just no connection. let us look at the real world again. the plaintiff's experts would have you believe that 5069 it was the tobacco companies only that were talking about filters and filtered cigarettes. and, again, you know that is not true. the tobacco companies were not the only voice talking about filtered cigarettes. in fact, who were the people who were talking about low tar and filtered cigarettes? the scientists, the surgeon general, the national cancer institute, the american cancer society. these were the people who were telling smokers, quit smoking, but if you do not quit, go to a cigarette that is low tar, and one of the ways you can get low tar is to smoke a filtered cigarette. there were other voices out there. as far back as 1957 dr. wynder, dr. wynder 16 back here in 1957 questioned making cigarettes safe. and this is dr. wynder that you have heard so much about with the mouse painting, and he is on the -- in the medical press, he is in the lay press. you have heard a lot about dr. wynder. and what dr. wynder is saying here is if you remove the tar from cigarettes or you reduce the tar in cigarettes that what he has found is you reduce the risk. in other words, he is saying here, a forty percent filter would bring most men's 5070 tar intake down to the equivalent of well under a pack a day. if you are smoking a whole bunch more and you reduce the tar, then you reduce the total exposure. nowhere here does dr. wynder say, and you are smoking a safe cigarette. what he is saying is you reduce the tar. here's dr. wynder again, two years later, april of 1959, "smoking and cancer," this is five years before the surgeon general's report comes out, and here we have time magazine talking about smoking and cancer. and dr. wynder despairs of persuading 55 million americans to quit the habit. "but how am i going to get 55 million people to quit the habit? but to make it safer, he urges manufacturers to use low tar tobaccos and the most potent filters they can find." this is what dr. wynder is saying in 1959. 19 everyone agreed, including every single surgeon general, that if tar could be reduced, cigarettes would be less dangerous, not safe, no one has ever said that smoking a low tar filtered cigarette is safe. what the public health community said was that it was less dangerous. but they told you and we will look at 5071 these, it could still cause lung cancer and death. as i told you, one way to reduce the tar is filters, to smoke a filtered cigarette. and here we go. most scientists -- and this is to smoke or not to smoke from acs is the american cancer society and you have all of these back in the jury room with you when you deliberate and you can look at the entire document. but this is the american cancer society saying to smoke or not to smoke. and they say: "most scientists believe that a decrease in the intake of tar, either by filtration or a reduction in smoking reduces the risk of lung cancer." either by filtration put a filter on the cigarette to reduce the tar or a reduction in smoking, smoke less cigarettes. reduces the risk of lung cancer, but nowhere here does it say it takes away the risk of lung cancer. here's the new york times. this is january 22 15th, 1964, terry, you remember terry was the surgeon general in 1964. qualifies filter tip reply, "to the extent that a filter removes tar and nicotine and gaseous elements of cigarette 5072 smoke, it is not reasonable to assume that the affects of the filter will be similar to the effects reported by the committee on smoking fewer cigarettes." so they are saying here, although it will reduce it, it is not the same as not smoking. there is a difference. it is a reduction in the harm. it is not making it safe. here we have 1967 news release by a senator. this is after the surgeon general's report and he says, "hopefully, the wide dissemination of this information and the growing awareness of its significance among the smoking public will channel competition in the cigarette industry toward the marketing of cigarettes of progressively low tar and nicotine content. for the best of our knowledge, such a change would produce progressively less hazardous cigarettes for the american public." here is a senator calling on the tobacco companies to make filtered cigarettes because we think it will make it less hazardous. here we have the department of health, education and welfare from 1968. you heard some 25 of this from dr. riddel yesterday. and here we 5073 are talking about the effects of filter cigarettes on the risk of lung cancer. "this leads to the estimate that the person who switches to a filter cigarette has about 60 percent of the risk of a person in the same exposure category who continues to smoke regular cigarettes." that would be nonfiltered cigarettes. here we are talking about a reduction in risk again. 1979 surgeon general's report. we have jumped a decade. the surgeon general is still saying filter cigarettes, "use of filter cigarettes and smoking of cigarettes with lower amounts of tar and nicotine decrease lung cancer mortality rates among smokers." and, again, the surgeon general is saying decrease. it does not eliminate it. what is out in the public health, what the public health is putting out is reduce your tar, one of the ways you can reduce your tar is through using a filter, but it is only going to reduce your risk, it does not take it away. and then one more from the 1981 surgeon general's report. and, again, they are saying 5074 1 the same thing. you have higher lung cancer incidents in people who smoke the higher tar than you do who smoke lower tar. and once again they are not saying lung cancer goes away. what they are saying is you reduce the amount. the message is clear over the decades that it is not going to be a safe cigarette, but that a filtered cigarette reduces the harm. so what did the tobacco companies do? they did what the public health community was advocating. they studied filters, they sold filtered cigarettes. before wynder and the others in the public health community told people to smoke filtered cigarettes back in 1953 the filter market was 3 percent of all of cigarettes sold. by 1968 that number -- 1967, that number was up to 68 percent. people had heard the public health community message, reduce your tar, do it by smoking a filtered cigarette, and americans were doing that, mr. tullo was one of them. now, how do we know that mr. tullo was smoking filtered cigarettes because of the public health community? we know that because he told us so. and he told us so through 5075 mrs. tullo. remember when the surgeon general's report 3 came out mrs. tullo said she talked to her husband about it. and he said, yes, i've read about it, that is why i'm smoking a filtered cigarette. he never said, you know, i saw this ad for filtered cigarettes and that is why i'm smoking it. he specifically told his wife, i saw the surgeon general's report, i've heard the message, and i am smoking a filtered cigarette. now, let us take a step back here. with all the talk about parliaments you might think that those were the only filtered cigarettes that mr. tullo smoked, and we know that is not right. he also smoked kent filtered cigarettes and he smoked marlboro filtered cigarettes. now, admittedly, when mr. tullo started smoking any brand of cigarettes is unclear at best. but we do know when he was smoking a specific filtered cigarette and that is marlboro and it is from somewhere in the mid '60s to about 1970. and how do we know that? well, we know that from ms. casino, the tullo's daughter. remember, she was born in 5076 1951 and she told you about the time that she was 16 she started snitching cigarettes from her dad. and she remembers that the cigarettes she stole from her dad were marlboros. and she remembers that because that is the brand she 6 stuck with her entire life until she quit smoking the very first time she tried. she has personal experience that makes her able to give us a better time frame of when mr. tullo was smoking a specific cigarette. and what does ms. casino also tell us? that he was still smoking marlboro cigarettes until she left the house when she was 19 years old. this was 1970. and so we know it is some time after 1970 that mr. tullo switched to parliament cigarettes. and i want to read an instruction the judge gave you. and that is the instruction the judge gave you on warning labels. and what judge sasser read to you was, "i instruct you that the warning labels placed on cigarette packs and advertisements by defendants complied with federal law and defendants had no obligation to place any additional warnings on their cigarette packages and advertisements." 5077 and then doctor -- judge sasser also instructed you, "i also instruct you that as long as the cigarette packs bear the federally mandated warnings," you have seen those, "cigarette advertising from july 1, 1969 forward cannot be the subject of any claim that the advertising undermined or neutralized the warnings or made them less effective." 9 so what does that tell you? all those ads that dr. cummings showed you after '69, you cannot take those ads under this instruction -- mr. hammer: judge, can we approach? (a bench conference occurred as follows:) mr. hammer: that is not what the instruction reads. what it means is we cannot -- as far as the ads themselves, as far as whether or not they may influence the jury, certainly that can come into play. the court: the argument -- the objection is overruled. (the bench conference ended.) ms. gallagher: so what does this instruction tell you? this instruction tells you, from judge sasser, that you are not allowed to say when an ad has a warning that the ad 5078 itself somehow cancelled out the warnings or made it less effective. that is not allowed under this instruction. so let us get back to some time before 1970 when mr. tullo was smoking marlboros. after some time in 1970 we know he started smoking parliaments. and we know that before mr. tullo smoked parliaments, he smoked marlboros and before that, he smoked kents. and we know from mrs. tullo that mr. tullo switched to filtered cigarettes some time after 12 the surgeon general's report. now, ask yourself, if he was smoking parliament cigarettes because of the recessed filter, why did he wait until 1970? dr. cummings came in and showed you ads of the recessed filter as far back as 1958. if mr. tullo was affected or impacted in any way by those ads, why did he wait 12 plus years to start smoking parliament cigarettes? ask yourself, if mr. tullo was so influenced by these ads, like dr. cummings said, why did not he start smoking filtered cigarettes back in the 1950s? he started smoking them after the surgeon general's report. and it is funny, 5079 because although dr. cummings brought you all these ads and talked about the wallpaper of ads out there, when we asked him, okay, you cannot tell us why mr. tullo switched from one filtered brand to another, his answer was, no, i cannot tell you that. they cannot make the link between the documents and the ads they brought you and mr. tullo. there is also another disconnect on the testimony of recessed filters. mrs. tullo told you that mr. tullo said he was smoking parliament because of the recessed filter, but that was only after mr. hammer had put those 15 words in her mouth. he said, did mr. tullo tell you he was smoking parliament because of the recessed filter? and she said, oh, yeah, the recessed filter. when i asked her questions, she admitted that she heard the word "recessed" in this courtroom, in the litigation world. that is where the term "recessed" came up. mr. tullo never said a word about recessed filters. he never said a word about ads. what mr. tullo talked about was i heard the public 5080 health community and that is why i started smoking filtered cigarettes. mr. tullo was not listening to the ads or reading the ads or basing his decisions on something that was in an advertisement. he was smoking different filtered cigarettes until he found the one he liked and that is the one he stuck with. now, you kind of had to listen carefully to dr. cummings and dr. burns to really understand what their criticism of filters is. because they would agree that if you reduce tar, that is a good thing; and if you reduce tar by using a filtered cigarette, that is a good thing. what their real criticism of filters is is that they do not work for all smokers. and that is because some smokers compensate. 18 and by compensating that means they are trying to get more nicotine and so they smoke differently than they did before. and so the filters are not getting rid of the extra tar. and there were two major ways you heard about compensation, one is you go from a full-flavored cigarette to a low-tar cigarette and you increase the amount you are smoking. well, if 5081 you increase the amount you are smoking, you are going to get more tar. the second way that they told you about was to inhale more deeply. if people took a full-flavored cigarette and smoked it one way, but then took a low-tar cigarette and smoked it much more deeply, inhaled more deeply, then they are going to get more tar. that is their real criticism of filters. now, if you listen to them, dr. cummings and dr. burns, what they are trying to convince you is that the tobacco companies were the only ones out there who understood this concept of compensation and that the tobacco companies understood compensation and hid it. they hid it from the public health community, did not tell anybody about it. well, we know that is just not true. in fact, we know the opposite is true. the public health community understood the concept of 21 compensation. can i have the next slide, please? a study of tobacco carcinogenesis. this is from cancer from 1957. and in 1957 they are talking about some numbers here about reduction 5082 of tar and it says, "a reduction to such level, as both animal experiments and human statistical studies show, will be followed by a significant reduction in cancer risk provided the number of cigarettes smoked is kept constant." what is that? compensation. 1957 they are recognizing that if you lower the tar, it is only going to reduce the risk if you do not compensate. 1981, surgeon general's report -- i skipped some decades for you all here, but they are back there. 1981, surgeon general's report. again, surgeon general says, "smokers who are unwilling or as yet unable to quit are well advised to switch to cigarettes yielding less tar and nicotine, provided they do not increase their smoking or change their smoking in other ways." what is that? compensation. do not smoke more cigarettes, do not inhale more deeply or you are not getting the less-dangerous cigarette. the lay press even reported on it. can i have the next one, please. 24 terry qualifies filter tip reply. you have seen this one already today. this is 1964. "a 5083 part of the problem here" -- this is the surgeon general talking. "a part of the problem here is whether the filter, in addition to removing tar and nicotine or other elements of cigarette smoke, might also lead to different levels of cigarette consumption and different amounts of inhalation." what is the surgeon general talking about here? compensation. here we have consumer reports, not known for its medical literature, but here's even consumer reports reporting on this. "less tar, less nicotine: is that good?" "some smokers also increase the size of each puff, thus increasing the nicotine per puff." this is 1976. "there are also other ways to compensate" -- they actually use the word -- "for a drop in nicotine yield by drawing the smoke deeper into the lungs, for example, or by holding it there longer before exhaling." there was no hiding by the tobacco companies of this compensation. and, in fact, the tobacco companies actually specifically told the government about compensation. and you saw this from the 1967, when ftc was thinking about tullo v r j reynolds - vol 34 - 04-12-2011 trial transcript 5084 developing or instituting the ogg method. and this was so that there would be a uniform way to measure the tar and nicotine in cigarettes and put it on the packs. so you saw these on the elmo. this is the federal trade commission submission, remember, i flipped to the back and it was all the different tobacco companies. and they submitted this to the ftc when the ftc was thinking about adopting this. and the tobacco companies are telling the ftc, "the ogg method, in fact, does not and cannot measure either all of the particulate matter or the total nicotine from any cigarette. it measures only the particulate matter and nicotine in the volume of smoke puffed through a machine on the standardized method. it does not measure the pm or nicotine in all of the smoke that any cigarette might produce when totally smoked under any and all conditions." in other words, it is going to tell you what the machine gets, it is not going to tell you what each individual smoker gets. well, did the ftc understand this? can i have the next one, please, jenn. let us look at the federal trade commission 5085 1 news release. it starts with, "the cambridge filter method does not and cannot measure these many variations in human smoking habits." does not that kind of sound like what tobacco companies submitted to them. "thus" -- and here's what they tell you the purpose of putting these numbers on is -- "the purpose of testing is not to determine the amount of tar and nicotine inhaled by any human smoker, but rather to determine the amount of tar and nicotine generated when a cigarette is smoked by machine in accordance with the prescribed method." they recognize exactly what the tobacco companies told them. let us look at the next one, please, jenn. here we have the federal trade commission submission. again, this is from the tobacco companies to the trade commission. and they are going through here and they say, "no two human smokers smoke in the same way. no individual smoker always smokes in the same fashion. the speed at which one smokes varies both among smokers and usually also varies with the same individual under different circumstances even 5086 within the same day. some take long puffs or draws. some take short puffs. the variation affects the pm quantity in the smoke generated." 4 what does the ftc press release say? can i have the next one. it is kind of hard to tell the difference. it is almost word for word is what the ftc says in its press release. this was not the tobacco companies hiding the fact of compensation from the government. here is the most direct evidence of them actually telling the federal trade commission. the federal trade commission acknowledging it and putting it out in its press release. and this was not something new, this goes back to the '50s. compensation was understood. now, let us get away from the litigation world and go back to the real world where mr. tullo was living. because compensation was not part of mr. tullo's world. first of all, we know over the years that mr. tullo smoked parliaments, the nicotine and tar levels went down. and i showed you -- i had to write this down, i can never remember the name of this document -- the directory of 5087 cigarette brands from 1864 to 1997. and that was the piece of paper that listed the various cigarettes and it would have the year and it would have the tar and nicotine levels on it. and then i showed you this graph. and this is a summary of what is in that document. and in 1970 7 parliaments had 18.9, almost 19 milligrams of tar. by 1995 it was 11, a little more than half. the nicotine had fallen from 1.25 to .09 [sic]. so what does that tell us? it tells us mr. tullo was getting less tar and nicotine, in fact, he was getting percentage-wise less tar in 1995 and more nicotine if you look at the numbers. now, the plaintiffs want you to believe that mr. tullo must have compensated. but what do they do when they do that? they ignore what people have said about mr. tullo's smoking. because those people who knew mr. tullo said he always smoked the same. it did not matter if he was smoking filtered cigarettes or unfiltered cigarettes, he smoked the same amount. when he switched from unfiltered to filtered, he did not start smoking more. 5088 everybody says he smoked the same amount. and what do we know about the way mr. tullo smoked? again, you ask the people who knew him. because they all said, did not matter what cigarette he was smoking, did not matter if it was a filtered cigarette, an unfiltered cigarette, cigarette he was smoking in the '50s or the '80s, he inhaled them so deeply his cheeks sank in. that is inhaling pretty hard, 10 ladies and gentlemen, and that is something that the people who knew him saw. in the real world mr. tullo was not compensating. mr. tullo smoked the same number of cigarettes and he smoked them in the same way. so dr. burns and dr. cummings' criticism that filters are no good is based on compensation. and compensation is not part of mr. tullo's world. it is in the litigation world of dr. cummings. one other thing on this government issue. if the government really thought that they were being duped by this filter issue, then why did not they issue two sets of warnings? if the government really thought that -- mr. hammer: judge, can we approach? 5089 the court: certainly. (a bench conference occurred as follows:) mr. hammer: judge, that is totally inappropriate. we cannot challenge the warnings. the warnings were not effective or were not sufficient. the defense cannot get up here and say the government should have given two sets of warnings. it is their motion. it is their motion and they are violating the court's ruling. ms. gallagher: i do not understand that objection. mr. gdanski: cannot use the warnings as both 13 a sword and a shield. it is used as a shield against us and as a sword to say the government should have given different warnings. we cannot question the warnings. there should not be a suggestion of alternative warnings. if the court is going to permit alternative warnings -- ms. gallagher: that is not what i was suggesting, your honor. if they just listen, they would see -- the court: that is not what she said. mr. gdanski: can we get a preview -- the court: you are not saying there should have been a different warning. 5090 ms. gallagher: not at all. mr. gdanski: her last words were -- the court: if she does, then come up, but that is not what she said. objection overruled. (the bench conference ended.) ms. gallagher: as i was saying, ladies and gentlemen, if the government thought they were duped, if there was some idea that this whole compensation thing was hidden, that there was a difference, the government understood that there were dangerous cigarettes, whether they were filtered or unfiltered, because nobody ever said that filtered cigarettes were safe. let us look at the warning. 16 1966 to 1969, "caution: cigarette smoking may be hazardous to your health." this warning went on every package of cigarettes whether they were filtered or unfiltered. from 1970 to 1984, "the surgeon general has determined that cigarette smoking is dangerous to your health." they did not just go on unfiltered cigarettes, it went on every cigarette package 5091 in the united states. the same with the next set of warnings where it says, "quitting smoking now greatly reduces serious risks to your health." " surgeon general's warning: smoking causes lung cancer." this went on every pack of cigarettes in the united states. the warnings were not just for unfiltered cigarettes. the warnings were telling the american public, it does not matter what kind of cigarettes you smoke, they are dangerous. this case is not about whether mr. tullo knew cigarettes were dangerous and addictive; he did. this case is not about whether mr. tullo smoked filtered cigarettes because of ads, because we know he did not. and it is surely not about whether low-tar 19 cigarettes are safe, because we know they are not. he was never smoking a safe cigarette. so now that i've spent all this time telling you what this case is not about, what is this case really about? and this case is about whether mr. tullo was addicted and whether his addiction was the legal cause of his lung cancer 5092 and death. that is the question you have to answer. that is the very first question on the verdict form. now, you will notice in the instructions that judge sasser gave you that there is no legal definition of addiction. there are lots of definitions in there for other things, but there is no definition of addiction. and you have heard various tests and criteria used by different people in this courtroom to tell you what their definition of addiction is, but you know they are not always correct, because the definition that dr. cummings likes to use, he told you under that definition mrs. tullo is addicted. and she told you that is just not right. she is never been addicted to smoking. well, one of the things that dr. burns and cummings say that you look at to determine if someone is addicted is how much they smoke, how many cigarettes do they smoke. now, dr. burns told you it was between one 22 and two packs per day. and dr. cummings told you that it was over two packs per day. now, why does dr. cummings pick the highest number, two packs per day plus is what he said, 5093 which is not even ms. tullo's testimony that it was two packs a day, because dr. cummings, the tobacco advocate -- anti-tobacco advocate, the general in the war on tobacco, cherry picks the evidence that supports his opinions in the litigation world and ignores the rest. well, what did dr. cummings ignore? for one, we have the medical records. all of the medical records we have we have shown you that talk about how much mr. tullo smoked. and it is all a pack a day or less. here is, in 1995, you cannot see it, but you will have the record back there, may of 1995 when mr. tullo first goes to see dr. levine and he tells her he smokes one pack of cigarettes every two days. and now dr. cummings says, well, i do not believe that, because smokers lie to their doctors about how much they smoke. well, let us look at his other records. here it is, and this is after he has been diagnosed, he tells his doctors he used to smoke one pack per day. and the next one, please, jenn. another record, smoking history of one pack 25 per day. this is right after he quit, stopped 5094 two days ago. and the next one. he quit smoking about a month ago. that was from july of '96, this is august of '96. he quit smoking about a month ago after smoking a pack a day. i think we have one more. and here -- sorry. never mind. thought we had one more. now, dr. cummings says that smokers lie to their doctors about how much they smoke. why would mr. tullo lie to his doctors after he is been diagnosed and after he quit? that just does not make sense. dr. burns at least acknowledged that the medical records were in there when he said one pack a day to two packs a day. but dr. burns, who has made over a million and a half dollars testifying in the litigation world, also ignores evidence that does not fit with his position. so let us start with who says it was two packs a day? the only person who has told you that is mrs. tullo. all of the other family members say, we do not remember, we remember it was a lot, but we have no idea how much it was per day. and mrs. tullo is not really sure 5095 1 either, just that it was a lot. and it is understandable that she cannot recall exactly, because it is been a long time. mrs. tullo cannot even recall how much she smoked. you heard in her deposition testimony that we read that she said she smoked two cigarettes her whole life. then when she was on the stand she said she smoked a cigarette every day for some period of time. and yet her family remembers -- her family members remember her smoking three cigarettes a day, smoking socially. it is been a long time. the one thing that does not make sense is why dr. cummings and burns would ignore the philip morris surveys when trying to decide how much mr. tullo actually smoked, because that is mr. tullo himself. if i can get conner's assistance for this. you have seen this form. and mrs. tullo has told you that although her name is down there, mary tullo, that this was actually filled out by her husband, mr. tullo. and in that form it asks, "what are you smoking?" and it says, "parliament." i know this is difficult for you all to 5096 read, but you will have it back there. one of the questions is, "how many packs of 3 cigarettes have you smoked in the last two weeks?" and what does mr. tullo write down? "10." that is a little less than a pack a day. which is consistent with what he was telling his doctors. dr. cummings completely ignores that. and dr. burns does not use it either, because he says it is at least a pack a day. this is mr. tullo telling philip morris how much he smoked in the last two weeks. why would he lie to philip morris about how much he is smoking? this is to get free cigarettes. and then we have the second survey. it is a little unclear who completed this survey. mrs. tullo has said this is her signature, that she signed this. she has said it is not her signature, that she did not sign this. and she has also said, well, maybe a little bit of this is mine, but she does not know which little bit. well, conner, would you put up the... this is the handwritten list, you saw this 5097 earlier. this is the handwritten list that mrs. tullo wrote when she was writing down to help her memory the cigarettes that mr. tullo smoked that she could recall. and i want you, when you get back there, look at the two 6 marlboros and then look at the two parliaments and see if you do not think that mrs. tullo is actually the one who filled out this form. mr. hammer: judge, can we approach? the court: sure. (a bench conference occurred as follows:) mr. hammer: judge, defense made a big issue and took up a lot of time during this trial about a handwriting expert. they had one. we deposed him. that expert who looked at these documents -- they have to make a good faith argument -- that expert who looked at these documents could not even tell with any kind of certainty whose writing this was. and now they are making an argument that is totally disingenuous to this jury and asking them to do something that their own expert could not do. ms. gallagher: your honor, i do not understand what the objection is and she did testify at one point that she filled this out. 5098 the court: she testified during the deposition and the jury heard the testimony. mr. hammer: judge, ms. tullo explained her answer, but more importantly, now they are asking this jury to compare handwriting when they know their own expert, who was supposedly an expert in the field, could not even make an identification. it is inappropriate. 9 ms. gallagher: he could make the identification, it is just when i saw this i realized we did not need a handwriting expert. the court: objection is overruled. (the bench conference ended.) ms. gallagher: all right. so let us look at this document. and the reason i bring this to your attention is because it says "parliament" and it says "1 pack per day." if mrs. tullo filled this out, then at the time she wrote this she said her husband smoked 1 pack per day. in the litigation world here she is telling you two packs per day in this lawsuit, a lawsuit that has been brought years and years and years after these forms were filled out. a lawsuit that is been brought years and years and years after those medical records 5099 were filled out. and a lawsuit brought against the same company from which she got free cigarettes for her husband. thank you for your technical assistance. now, another thing that dr. cummings tells you to look at to see whether someone is addicted is whether someone is in control of their smoking. and there is not really a whole lot of evidence on this point. you heard from louis tullo, mr. tullo's son, that he could go to movies, he would go out to eat, that he would 12 go to weddings and he would not smoke. mr. tullo also told you that when he was at his son's house -- or when his dad was at his house he would ask him not to smoke around the children, not to smoke in the house and mr. tullo would comply. now, these are examples of mr. tullo being in control of his smoking. for example, what did he do when he was at the un working? we have no idea. there is no evidence on that. and ladies and gentlemen, remember, it is the plaintiff's burden of proof here. if you have a question that cannot be answered such as 5100 was mr. tullo in control of his smoking, you cannot fill in what you think the evidence might be. the plaintiff's attorneys have the burden of proof in this case and it is to prove their entire case to you, not just part of it, but the entire case. so let me get back to addiction. because, you know, whatever definition of addiction you use, it really does not matter, because whether you believe that mr. tullo was addicted, the question you have to answer was: was that addiction the legal cause of his lung cancer? and the answer to that is no, because everything i'm about to say applies whether mr. tullo was 15 addicted to cigarettes or was not addicted to cigarettes. in the litigation world, dr. burns and dr. cummings say, without having met mr. tullo, we can tell you that he could not quit because he was suffering from cognitive dissonance, that he used a psychological crutch that kept him from being able to quit. and that -- this is again the missing link thing, because the cognitive dissonance, the psychological crutch that was all created by the ads or statements that they 5101 cannot say mr. tullo ever saw or heard. plaintiffs have the burden of proof in this case and they have put on no evidence that mr. tullo saw or heard a single thing their experts spent four days on the stand telling you about. and there is probably one part of dr. cummings' and burns' testimony that left you maybe a little perplexed. and that is both of them said by 1998, 45 million smokers had quit permanently. they also both told you any smoker can quit, addicted or not, any smoker can quit. what dr. cummings and burns cannot explain is how those 45 million people, who were presumably exposed to all of the same things that mr. tullo was exposed to, quit permanently. forty-five million smokers, the great 18 majority of them addicted, many of them heavily addicted, all quit by 1998. they gave you no reason, no explanation for why mr. tullo could not have been one of those 45 million people before 1996. let us go back to the real world. you heard that ms. tullo said she thinks mr. tullo tried to quit smoking a few times in new york. she 5102 also says that she thinks mr. tullo might have fibbed to her, that she could still smell cigarettes on him and she told you that she did not think that mr. tullo gave smoking [sic] a very good try. and we have gone through this. somebody has to want to quit in order to stop smoking. that is common sense. well, what do we know about mr. tullo and his attempts to quit smoking. what he reported to dr. levine was that he had considered quitting, but he was too anxious. and by the way, he never told dr. levine, do not worry, i'm smoking a filtered cigarette. all he said was that he had considered quitting. considered is thought about. remember with dr. cummings, you can consider something, you decide something and then you act on it. you do not go on a diet, you do not start an exercise program, you do not eat healthier by thinking 21 about it; you have to decide you are going to do it and you have to take action. what we know from dr. cummings, he told you the best evidence of motivation, if somebody is going to quit smoking, is the number of quit 5103 attempts made. in other words, dr. cummings says the best thing to see if somebody is actually motivated is how many times they actually try to quit smoking. and what do we know about mr. tullo? that in 60 years he tried three times. now, ask yourself this, if you were unemployed for 60 years and you tried to find a job three times, do you think you would be trying very hard? now, we had the smart move. would you just put that up real quick. think about when mr. tullo was in new york. do you want to stop smoking? there is no indication that he actually did. "are you willing to make some changes in your daily routine?" remember, this was all about triggers, that if you smoke, there are certain things and certain people, certain situations that are going to make you think of a cigarette, like if you have always smoked when you have coffee in the morning, you are going to have to do something 24 with the coffee because it is going to give you the trigger to want to smoke again. there is no 5104 evidence in this record whatsoever that mr. tullo did anything to get rid of the triggers for smoking. "are you willing to put up with some uneasy moments after stopping?" well, we really do not know because we are not for sure that he went for a whole day without smoking when he was in new york. we do know that when he quit smoking in florida after his diagnosis there is no report in the medical records of any withdrawal symptoms. and ms. tullo certainly did not testify to you about any withdrawal symptoms he had after he quit permanently. and there is another reason, there is another reason that dr. burns' and dr. cummings' opinions that mr. tullo was unable to quit makes no sense. and it is a big reason. and that is that he actually quit. when mr. tullo was motivated to quit after he got his diagnosis, he quit. he put the cigarettes down. now, the plaintiff's attorneys have tried to tell you, well, he did not really quit, that he just cut back after his diagnosis. well, let us get out of the litigation world and look at the tullo v r j reynolds - vol 34 - 04-12-2011 trial transcript 5105 facts. because the facts are that mrs. tullo saw him smoke one cigarette. amy miller saw him smoke one cigarette. mrs. tullo found a pack of cigarettes in the car. in a period of a year and a half mr. tullo smoked two or three cigarettes. that is the evidence in this case. and you know he was not smoking regularly and we know that from mrs. tullo. remember how mrs. tullo told you she hated the smell of cigarettes, his breath smelled like cigarettes, his clothes smelled like cigarettes, he smelled like cigarettes. remember what she told you when she saw him smoking outside of the publix, when she saw him smoking a cigarette after his diagnosis? she was angry and she was surprised. if he had been smoking regularly, she would not have been surprised. she would have smelled it on him. remember, she hated that smell. she was surprised when she found the pack of cigarettes in the car. and she was surprised because she knew he had quit. mr. tullo quit smoking cigarettes. he smoked a couple in the year-and-a-half after his diagnosis, but he had quit. this is not a situation where he had cut down and was still 5106 1 smoking regularly. he had quit. so let us go back to that first question you have to answer: was mr. tullo's addiction to nicotine the legal cause of his death? now, legal cause, you have heard the definition of, that it requires a substantial and direct impact. i was going to put it on the elmo, but -- oh. jenn has more faith in my capabilities. okay. is the legal cause of death, if it directly and in natural and continuous sequence produces or contributes substantially to producing such death so that but for the addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine, the death would not have occurred. you have to have a direct and substantial impact. and the answer to that question is no. because you heard dr. cummings and dr. burns both talk about declining risk. do you remember declining risk? this is with dr. burns. and what he was explaining was that there is excess risk of smoking for getting various diseases including lung cancer, but if you quit, your excess risk goes way down so that by the time you get 20 to 30 years out, your 5107 risk, excess risk is almost that of a never-smoker. well, think about if mr. tullo had quit 4 smoking in 1964 when the surgeon general told him to, when his wife told him to, that was 32 years before he was diagnosed. mr. tullo's addiction, if you believe he was addicted, was not the substantial and direct cause of his lung cancer; his failure to quit was. he was not so addicted that he could not quit, because we know he did quit. if he had been motivated to quit back in the '60s, there is nothing to suggest that he would not have been successful, like he was later on when he did quit. he had the ability to quit and he demonstrated that ability. now, mr. hammer put up all those other questions for you, and in the interest of time, i'm not going to go through them all again. i just want to point out one major thing that he left out. he talked to you about the findings and he said you have the findings and you should say yes, they were negligent; yes, there is a defect in the product. he forgot one very 5108 important thing, because the findings are not enough for you to say yes to those questions. mr. hammer: objection. can we approach, please? the court: sure. (a bench conference occurred as follows:) 7 mr. gdanski: judge, what counsel just did is question the findings. mr. hammer did not say that they should say that they were negligent or they were defective because there is a finding of negligence, a finding of defect. so what counsel just did was inherently question this court's ruling that the findings are binding that they were, in fact, negligent and they are in fact. ms. gallagher: i said that is not sufficient. mr. gdanski: what she just said to the jury -- and i can check the transcript. ms. gallagher: i do not understand the objection. mr. gdanski: the objection is that counsel has violated the court's ruling on questioning the findings. and the transcript, i believe, will substantiate that, but it has nothing to do 5109 with legal cause. i know that is where she is going, but the predicate should be: we were negligent, but you need to decide if that negligence was a legal cause. what was just asked to the jury was: you need to decide if we were negligent, and that is improper. ms. gallagher: your honor, if he would let me get to my next statement, it would be that it requires legal cause, it is not enough, which is 10 what your instructions tell them to answer those questions yes. mr. gdanski: that does not matter because the first statement is improper. i can check the transcript right now. it is improper. the findings have just been challenged and, you know, do not really know how to respond to that. the court: that is not how i heard it. she was going towards legal cause. mr. gdanski: that is fine, i'll take a minute and look at the transcript right now. i'll reserve on all my motions that i'd like to make relative to that. (the bench conference ended.) ms. gallagher: like i was saying, ladies and gentlemen, the findings that judge sasser 5110 read to you and the findings that mr. hammer told you are not sufficient for you to answer those questions yet, because they require something else. and what they require is something that mr. hammer did not talk to you about and that is legal cause. every single one of those questions requires legal cause. and you were probably wondering why every time you got a new instruction or a new definition, a new question, you got a separate instruction and definition on legal cause, because it is required in all of those questions. 13 and because all of those questions require legal cause, the answer to all of those questions is no, just like the answer to the first question is no. because nothing that the tobacco companies said or did or did not say or did not do was a legal cause of mr. tullo's death. the fact that tobacco companies sold cigarettes is not enough to answer any of those questions yes. and as i said, the existence of the findings are not enough to answer those questions yes, you have to find that there was a legal cause of mr. tullo's death, a direct and substantial impact. 5111 and it is just not there. now, i want to talk to you a minute about the concealment question. and rather than put it on the elmo, there are two concealment questions. and they say, "please state for each defendant" -- and one is a little bit different -- "whether dominick tullo reasonably relied to his detriment on an act done in furtherance of the defendants' agreement to conceal or omit material information concerning the health effects and/or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes and, if so, whether such reliance was a legal cause of his death." and what i want to talk to you about here is something that plaintiff's experts told you and 16 the plaintiff's attorneys agree with. and that is that this supposed agreement to conceal started in 1954. no one has told you that the tobacco companies concealed anything before 1954. and why is that important? because both dr. burns and dr. cummings told you that by 1954 mr. tullo had started smoking cigarettes, mr. tullo had become a regular smoker and mr. tullo was addicted to cigarettes. 5112 the plaintiff's experts and attorneys are not saying that anything the tobacco companies said, did or supposedly concealed caused mr. tullo to start smoking or to become an addicted smoker. let me say that again. nothing that the tobacco companies did caused mr. tullo to start smoking or to become an addicted smoker. so we are back to the very same question. and that is, did anything the tobacco companies said or do, not say or not do have a direct and substantial impact on mr. tullo and his decisions about quitting? and i've talked at length about that and the answer is still no. now, there is another part of those questions and that is: did mr. tullo rely on anything the tobacco companies said? 19 now, we get back to the plaintiff's attorneys have not proved to you that mr. tullo heard anything the tobacco companies said, much less that he relied on anything the tobacco companies said. and that is their burden of proof for you. they have to prove that to you and they have failed to. 5113 what do we know about mr. tullo? we know he was his own man. he was a smart man, a man who made his own decisions and a man who kept up with current events, a man who would not be told what to do. he did not listen to his wife, to his family, to the surgeon general or the public health community when they told him to quit smoking. mrs. tullo told you that mr. tullo did not listen to anyone, not that he did not listen to anyone except the tobacco companies. he made his own decisions. people have the right to make the decision as to whether to smoke or not to smoke, but mr. tullo made the decision to continue to smoke. and he is the one who is responsible for that decision. now, mr. hammer talked to you about the percentage question and i want to address that pretty quickly for you. and i would submit that you put, if you get there, and i do not think you get there, because i think you answer the first 22 question no and you are done. but as i told you in voir dire, i've got to talk about all the issues here, so i've got to talk about these questions. 5114 on the percentage question you put 100 percent, if you get there, next to mr. tullo's name. and the reason is that the plaintiff's attorneys have admitted, and i'll read this to you, this was an instruction from the judge, "i instruct you that the plaintiff has admitted that dominick tullo shares some measure of responsibility in combination with the acts and omissions of the defendants. specifically, plaintiff has admitted that mr. tullo's acts or omissions" -- mr. hammer: judge, sorry, can we approach minute. (a bench conference occurred as follows:) mr. hammer: judge, this was the exact conversation we had about the use of this instruction and that how the defendants were going to try to use it, which is why we made that argument. and i have to object to preserve the record. and, again, renewing our request for that additional instruction, especially in light of this argument now. ms. gallagher: i do not know what he is talking about. we have got the instructions. i'm 25 reading them to the jury. 5115 the court: she is reading the instructions. objection is overruled. (the bench conference ended.) ms. gallagher: "specifically, plaintiff has admitted that mr. tullo's acts or omissions relating to the frequency and duration of his efforts to quit smoking were a partial legal cause of his death." so what are the plaintiffs saying here? what has -- what is this admission? well, one, they are saying mr. tullo is partially responsible because he did not try enough times to quit and he did not last long enough when he tried. the legal cause part of that, because it says the partial legal cause, is that those actions were a legal cause of his death. and, in other words, what they are telling you is that mr. tullo could have quit and if he had quit earlier, he would not have gotten lung cancer and death. that is what it means when they say it is a partial legal cause. he could have quit smoking in time to avoid getting lung cancer and die. mr. tullo could have quit smoking earlier and that is his responsibility. he could have 5116 1 quit smoking in time to avoid his lung cancer and death, that is legal cause. it boils down to one simple thing, the plaintiff's attorneys are admitting that mr. tullo should and could have quit smoking decades ago when everyone told him to and that is his responsibility. now, the plaintiff's lawyers want you to put some of the responsibility on the tobacco companies, but, again, they are not saying that the tobacco companies are responsible for mr. tullo starting to smoke or mr. tullo becoming addicted. what they are saying is tobacco companies are responsible for mr. tullo's failure to quit. and the evidence in this case is mr. tullo could quit, he did quit and he decided when to quit. the tobacco companies had nothing to do with that. and that is why you put one hundred percent next to his name. now, mr. hammer talked to you some about the damages question. all i want to say on that is mrs. tullo has been blessed with a strong support group of family and friends. and she has been able to return to the activities she 5117 enjoyed, doing her friends' hair, going to the pool. she has returned to activities she liked 3 and she has had strong support from her family since mr. tullo passed. but one thing i want to point out here is that you cannot let sympathy play any part in your deliberations. that is not something that you can use when you are deciding questions in this case. i think everybody would agree that mrs. tullo is a nice lady and we all like her, but you cannot decide the case on that. that is what makes sitting in your chairs hard. because you have to put that aside and decide this case on the evidence. the last question talks about entitlement to punitive damages. i want to talk a little bit about the findings again, because the findings are there, but they do not mean that the answer to that question is yes, because it requires more. there is a different burden of proof. it has to be clear and convincing evidence, which is precise, exact, of such weight to produce a firm belief or conviction. and they have to show you -- mr. gdanski: we need to approach. 5118 (a bench conference occurred as follows:) ms. gallagher: i'm reading from the instructions again. what did i do wrong this time? mr. hammer: he is looking at the 6 instructions. ms. gallagher: it is in there. mr. hammer: all right. i just want to make sure. (the bench conference ended.) ms. gallagher: that is the different burden of proof for this question. and it is not enough that we have an individual against corporations here, because judge sasser has instructed you that you have to treat all the parties the same. and it is not enough that you say, i do not like some conduct of the tobacco companies in the past, you have to find conduct within the instructions that judge sasser gave you. and, again, you have to find that it was a legal cause of mr. tullo's lung cancer and death and that is just not here, ladies and gentlemen. the plaintiffs have not proved that to you. i want to ask you to put aside the litigation world that was created in this 5119 courtroom and look at the real world of mr. tullo. ignore the world that has no connection to mr. tullo, no link to mr. tullo. in the end when you look at the evidence, it is clear that mr. tullo knew smoking was dangerous, he knew it was addictive. he could quit and he did quit. mr. tullo made the decision when to stop smoking. nothing the tobacco companies 9 said or did not say had anything to do with the decisions mr. tullo made. he made his own decisions and he is the one who is responsible for them. ladies and gentlemen, thank you very much for your attention. thank you for participating in the jury trial process. on behalf of mr. fasi, on philip morris and myself, thank you very much. mr. bideau: counsel, mrs. tullo. good morning, ladies and gentlemen. (jury collectively: good morning.) mr. bideau: it is nice to finally get to talk to you right off; where i look down as you walk in the hallway or get on the elevator downstairs. you have not seen much of me, i have not been up 16 here very much to talk. and i'm not going to be very long. ms. gallagher gave a very compelling and a very comprehensive closing argument in this case and discussed really a lot of the issues -- mr. hammer: judge, can we approach? the court: yes. (sidebar held as follows:) mr. hammer: it is inappropriate for a codefendant to comment on one of their 5163 codefendants. mr. bideau: i was trying to explain why i'm not going to talk to them as long on every subject. mr. hammer: a compelling argument, that is inappropriate. she covered all the points i was going to cover; but to make a comment on quality and on what you thought -- the court: let us move on. mr. bideau: yeah, i will. (sidebar concluded and the following was held in open court:) mr. bideau: let me join mr. hammer and ms. gallagher in thanking you for your time, for your service and for your patience. i will try to 15 move this case along. i know it is not fun sitting back in the jury room or sitting out in the hallway, but we have tried to move the case along, and we appreciate your time and your patience. yesterday ms. gallagher discussed with you mr. tullo's smoking history, discussed his decision-making, she discussed what was in the public arena concerning the dangers of smoking, going back really to christopher columbus. she also discussed the issues relating to the plaintiffs claim about filter fraud and why there is 5164 just no basis for that claim, and so i'm not going to talk about those subjects in any great detail. i'm going to do what i did in my opening, which is really focus on my client, lorillard. because you have not heard much about us in this case. you have not seen many documents related to lorillard and, frankly, you have not heard many witnesses talk about lorillard. give me the first slide. yesterday mr. hammer acknowledged that mr. tullo smoked lorillard product for what he called a little, a short period of time. well, the 13 facts in this case are that the only brand of cigarettes that lorillard manufactured that are the issue in this case are kent. and the facts are also that mr. tullo smoked kent for, at most, a three-year period in the mid '60s. that was 30 years after he began smoking and he was in his 40s at the time. and as i explain to you in a few minutes, kent could not have caused his injury or his addiction in this case. yesterday mr. hammer said to you that mr. tullo smoked kent in 1958. folks, there is no evidence whatsoever with respect to mr. tullo 5165 smoking kent in 1958. two witnesses have come before you to talk about when mr. tullo smoked kent. stephanie casino, his daughter, and mary tullo. and what stephanie casino told us was she said that she recalled her father smoke kent when she was adolescent, 11, 12, 13, that time period which would have put us in the '63, '64 time period. mrs. tullo testified she did not really remember when he started smoking kent or how many kents he smoked, but she did testify very clearly 12 that he did not smoke a filtered cigarette until after the surgeon general's report in 1964. kent is and always has been a filtered cigarette. those are the only two witnesses you ever heard from with respect to when mr. tullo started smoking kent. there is no evidence that he smoked kent before the 1963, '64 time period. and with respect to when he stopped smoking kent, you heard from louis tullo -- you remember him, we read some of his deposition transcript -- louis tullo is mr. tullo's oldest son. and what he said was he remembered his father switching to marlboro when he was 17 or 18. well, he was born in 1949, and so he was 17 or 18, in 1966 or 1967. 5166 stephanie casino testified that she started smoking marlboro in -- when she was 15 or 16, same years, 1966, '67, she is two years younger. there is no evidence that mr. tullo smoked kent after that 1966, '67 time period. so what we have is a period of about 1964 to '67, that is it. that is the entire smoking history in this case with respect to kent. so the one thing i do agree with mr. hammer 10 about is mr. tullo only smoked kent for a really short period of time. now, why is this important? well, it is important for a number of reasons. one of those reasons is plaintiffs expert, dr. cummings -- you remember dr. cummings, he came down here, he had the big slide show, the big presentation. well, one of the things dr. cummings said -- could you put up the slide, dr. cummings slide, number four. one of the things dr. cummings said, okay, is that while every cigarette counts, the risk of cigarette smoking is related to the dose. do you remember he talked about what he called the dose response, that is the higher the dose, the more risk that is involved. and what he said is that if you are under 5167 ten-pack years your risk over your lifetime is about equivalent to a person who is never smoked. well, clearly, three years of smoking is under ten-pack years. let me explain, by the way, what a pack-year is, since i think dr. cummings talked about it, but a pack-year is simply the number of packs per day times the number of years. so if you smoked one 9 pack per day for three years, it is three-pack years. so what dr. cummings said is that while every cigarette counts, if you are under ten-pack years, your risk over your lifetime is equivalent to somebody who never smoked. so that raises the question, did the three years of kent smoking, was that the legal cause of mr. tullo's lung cancer? did it produce or contribute substantially? do you remember ms. gallagher went through legal cause yesterday? the definition of which is did it produce or contribute substantially to producing his lung cancer so it can reasonably be said that but for those three years of smoking mr. tullo would not have suffered his lung cancer? well, dr. cummings, plaintiffs expert, has explained that issue to you flat out. the risk 5168 does not increase until you get to ten-pack years. so the answer to that question is obviously no. and that is probably why you have not heard a whole lot about us in this case. another thing you had not heard about is why did mr. tullo actually smoke kent? not a single 7 witness has told you why he smoked kent. in fact, every witness who is testified has said they did not know, never told him, they did not know, they did not see anything. there were no documents that referenced why he smoked kent. you saw a lot of cigarette documents in this case. dr. cummings, dr. burns had big powerpoints, lots of cigarette documents. and you are going to get to see a lot of them when you go back to the jury room. what you are going to see is there is not a single lorillard document in that pile of documents. dr. cummings never mentioned a single lorillard document. dr. burns never mentioned a single lorillard document. now, there are three ads from lorillard that you are going to see for kent smoking. one from 1954, which is a decade or so before mr. tullo ever smoked kent, and the other two are from the late 1950s. 5169 and i think there was one television clip with the dick vandyke show, about ten seconds, where it says "sponsored by kent." that is it. that is the entire paper record in this case with respect to my client lorillard and kent cigarettes. there is 6 nothing else. you will see a couple of documents i put into evidence with dr. cummings and dr. burns, and those were submissions by lorillard to the surgeon general providing information to the surgeon general, submissions by lorillard to the federal trade commission providing information to the federal trade commission with respect to smoking and health. but you are not going to see a single document put in by any of the plaintiffs experts with respect to lorillard. you saw a lot of other documents in that case. and, by the way, as ms. gallagher told you, none of those documents you saw had anything to do with mr. tullo. that was when ms. gallagher was talking about, i thought it was really good, when she said we have a litigation world and we have the mr. tullo world over here. and all of those other documents from the 5170 plaintiffs experts, from dr. cummings, are over here in in litigation world, they had nothing to do with mr. tullo. 4 with respect to my client, you do not even have to look at that because there is no documents any place with respect to my client. and again, that may be why we received such scant attention in this case. i do want to talk to you a little bit about filters. could you put up slide two for me? you know, mr. hammer talked a lot about what we called filter fraud and something about 50 years ago the cigarette companies were defrauding the public with respect to filters. and ms. gallagher did a great job yesterday of showing you literally seven, eight, nine, ten publications that took place back then about filters, about what the public health authorities were suggesting about filters. she showed you articles from the mainstream press, reader's digest, time magazine, she showed you articles from the scientific press, she showed you articles -- she showed you portions of surgeon general reports, all of whom were saying to smokers, hey, quit; if 5171 you do not quit, cut back; and if you do not cut back, at least smoke a filtered cigarette. all 3 related to the same concept dr. cummings was talking about, dose response, lower the dose of tar. so i'm not going to go back through all of those documents that ms. gallagher went through with you because i want to talk about my company -- our company's filter, the kent filter. this is an article written by dr. wynder. you remember dr. wynder, he is the guy that dr. burns and dr. cummings called like a giant in the industry. he was one of the leaders in this industry with respect to smoking and health. and he was recommending filters all the way back now in the '50s. this is an article that he wrote recommending filters. and what he said was, you know, put a filter on a regular-sized cigarette, and if you reduce the tar down to 18 milligrams, a reduction at that level has shown in both animal experiment and human studies -- human statistical studies would be followed by a significant risk reduction in the cancer risk, providing that the number of cigarette smoke just kept constant. 5172 1 that is what dr. wynder in the public health authority recommended, get that tar down to at least 18 milligrams. well -- can you put up the next slide. do you remember ms. gallagher talked to you about the federal trade commission setting up a testing procedure, an agreed-upon testing procedure, by the government, as to how they are going to test tar and nicotine. and she went through a number of documents with you about that. well, this is the very first report that came out in 1967, right around the time that mr. tullo was moving from kent to marlboro. and notice what the tar number is for kent, the very cigarette that mr. tullo had been smoking; 17.4 milligrams, below what did wynder was recommending for a significant reduction in the risk of cancer. now, ms. gallagher showed you yesterday what the numbers were for parliament, which also meet and exceeded the levels suggested by the public health authorities during the period that mr. tullo was smoking parliament. mr. hammer put on absolutely no evidence that there was anything wrong with the kent filter, zero, none. 5173 1 he wants to stand up here and talk about, quote, filter fraud, but with respect to the filters on these very cigarettes that are at issue here, the parliament filter that ms. gallagher talked to you about yesterday, and the kent filter that i'm talking about today, all of the evidence is that those filters actually met the requirements and the suggestions of the public health authority, every one of them. and mr. hammer has given you nothing -- mr. hammer: judge, can we approach a minute? the court: sure. (sidebar held as follows:) mr. hammer: if anything happens, i cannot refer to ms. gallagher, and i cannot refer to her by name, and yet he is using, and the defense now is now referring to so, i mean -- the court: going forward, say "counsel for plaintiffs." mr. bideau: i'm happy to do that. i did not fix that up yet. i apologize. (sidebar concluded and the following was held in open court:) mr. bideau: so plaintiffs to provide any information that the actual filters in this case, 5174 the kent filter, the parliament filter, did not meet or exceed every suggestion by the public health authority. so they can throw around general statements and they can throw around little quips from ads, little quips from articles talk generally about filters. but we are talking about dominick tullo. this is not the litigation world over here that ms. gallagher was talking about. this is the dominick tullo world. we are talking about the cigarettes that dominick tullo smoked. and there is not a bit of evidence that the filters on those cigarettes did not do exactly what the manufacturer said they were doing or what the public health authority said they were doing. now, there was some discussion yesterday. can you put that last slide back up. i'm sorry, the one before that. ms. gallagher talked to you a little bit yesterday about the concept of compensation and she went, again, through a whole lot of discussions about that, and this last line really refers to the issue of compensation. and that was the issue dr. burns was talking 25 about when he said things like, well, one of the 5175 reasons these filters do not work is smokers compensate, they smoke more cigarettes, they smoke differently, things like that. and ms. gallagher showed you all of the articles, all of the letters, all of the studies that related to compensation. but in this case, not the case dr. burns was talking about, but in this case there is no evidence, as ms. gallagher pointed out to you, everybody's testimony, dominick tullo smoked the same number of cigarettes, whether he was smoking nonfiltered or filtered, and he smoked them the same way. there is simply no evidence of compensation. in fact, dr. burns actually acknowledged that he did not see any evidence of compensation in this case one way or the other. then dr. burns talked about the fact that, well, the cigarette companies kind of hid the issue of compensation, that nobody knew about compensation. and again, ms. gallagher yesterday put up a number of submissions that were done by the cigarette companies to the government, she put up a number of articles. you just saw dr. wynder's 24 article about 1957; and dr. wynder's article is talking about compensation, so it was well-known. 5176 can you put up slide 11 for me? this is lorillard, my client's report to the surgeon general in 1963. and in that report my client is quoting from the surgeon general leroy burney. in a statement surgeon general burney made on november 28th of 1959, okay, in which he was talking about the fact that the surgeon general was aware of the issue of compensation. so the notion that these tobacco companies somehow hid the issue of compensation, again, there is simply no facts in the record that would support that. the clerk: counselor, 15 minutes. mr. bideau: thank you. ladies and gentlemen let me remind you of one thing in this case, plaintiffs have the burden to prove their claim against each and every defendant, they have to prove each and every claim against each and every defendant. the only thing plaintiffs told you in their opening about my client was that mr. tullo smoked 22 some of my client's cigarettes. in closing he told you it was a really small amount of my client's cigarettes, did not smoke them for very long, that is why we are here. 5177 and so one of the things you are going to have to look at is did lorillard do anything that caused or substantially contributed to mr. tullo's injury? i submit to you, ladies and gentlemen, there is no facts in this case that would support that. look, cigarettes are legal in this country, whether you like it or do not like it, cigarettes are legal, okay. the law is that we can manufacture and sell cigarettes and the defendants cannot be liable just for selling cigarettes. ms. gallagher talked to you yesterday about the very first question on the verdict form: was dominick tullo addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine; and, if so, was such addiction a legal cause of his death? and she explained to you in great detail why the answer to that question is "no," okay. it was dominick tullo's decision to continue smoking, that was the legal cause of his lung cancer. when you look at every question on the 21 verdict form, ladies and gentlemen, you are going to see the phrase "legal cause." literally every question has the issue of legal cause, okay. you are going to have to find legal cause for every question. ms. gallagher told 5178 you yesterday there is simply no basis for that. there is no basis in this evidence for you to find legal cause as to any of the questions on the verdict form, if you were to get by question one. and we agree with ms. gallagher that a "no" to question one, based on the evidence in this case, is the appropriate answer, and at that point you do not go any further. i do want to talk just for a minute about the issue of punitive damages. now, i do not think you ever get there, so again, for all the reasons ms. gallagher said. and as she told you, the law that you -- burden of proof of punitive damages is clear and convincing evidence, it is a higher standard to which you judge this part of the case on. if you look at the evidence, ladies and gentlemen, there is no conduct by lorillard or, 19 frankly, there is no conduct by any of the defendants in this case that would satisfy that high standard, and certainly none that effected dominick tullo. there is not a shred of evidence that dominick tullo ever took any action or failed to take any action based on anything lorillard did or said. 5179 they have not even shown you any documents that related to dominick tullo. they have not shown you any lorillard documents. there are no internal lorillard documents in this record to contradict anything lorillard was saying publicly, there is nothing there. he smoked kent for just a few years and the kent cigarette that he smoked met or exceeded all of the recommendations in the public health authorities, like dr. wynder, in reducing tar. and in short, ladies and gentlemen, there is no basis for you to find an entitlement to punitive damages on my client, if you ever got to that last question. well, i heard gina say i was already at 15 minutes, so my time's about up here today. i do want to thank you for your time, for your effort 18 and for your patience. now, when we all sit down -- mr. geise is last -- when we all sit down plaintiffs get to get up and give you rebuttal argument and we do not get to get up after that and put into context what plaintiffs talk about; so, what i would like you to do is, as you listen to plaintiffs counsel when they get up and talk about their rebuttal, if they 5180 show you documents, if they talk about pieces of testimony, please look at that -- those documents and think whether those documents relate in any way to dominick tullo, think about whether those -- any of the testimony that he talks about relate to dominick tullo, think about the timing, what is the date of the document and what was dominick tullo doing at that point in time. because based on the evidence you have in this record, there is the litigation world over here, and none of that related to dominick tullo. so we would ask you, since we do not get to get up again, if you would please just take a look at the documents, take a look at the evidence and put them in context for us. 16 every witness has told you that dominick tullo was an intelligent guy, he was a strong guy, he was a guy who did not like his decisions questioned, and he is a guy who knew how to make decisions. there is nothing, folks, that lorillard or any of these defendants could have done or said that would have changed any decision that dominick tullo made. thank you. mr. geise: counsel, mrs. tullo. good morning, once again. i had good afternoon because i thought we were going to get to this point yesterday, but we did not. we are 21 nearing the end. you remember in opening statements it coincided with opening day for baseball. and i think now we can say we are in the ninth inning or maybe we are into the tenth inning now since we have 5192 kicked over to this morning. you have been incredibly punctual throughout this whole trial. i think this is the rare trial where we have never had to wait on a juror once. now, i know you all have had to wait on us sometimes when we are in here taking care of legal issues, and we thank you very much for your patience. we have tried to move this trial as quickly as possible because we know how important your time is and how you have dedicated to the jury process. and your civic sacrifice that you have made the last three weeks is something that we cannot pay back to you as much as we should. thank you. and you know by now that the eight of you are the judges of the facts. and when it comes to my client, the facts are critically important. and the plaintiff has the burden to prove 19 those facts. and i realize memories fade and it is hard to recall things that happened 50, 60, 70 years ago. but inside a courtroom, in a lawsuit to recover money, the plaintiff has the burden of proof. hazy memories do not suffice. only proof does. and i asked you at the beginning of this case 5193 to demand proof, do not accept punches and suspicions and could-be's; demand proof. and proof is evidence you hear from the witnesses. and in this case there is very little proof about the smoking history of mr. tullo of my client's brands. my client's brands that mr. tullo is said to have smoked are lucky strike, camel and pall mall, and i want to talk about the evidence about those three. you heard that mrs. tullo saw mr. tullo smoke a lucky strike cigarette in the neighborhood when they were about 11 or 12 years old. and from that mr. hammer wants you to assume that from the mid-1930s until the mid-1940s mr. tullo smoked lucky strike. the problem is that is not what the evidence is in this case. now, first of all, it is important to remember 18 that these are events that took place 75 years ago. and as mrs. tullo told mr. hammer her memory is not that great, and that is understandable. who can remember what happened that long ago? and mrs. tullo also told you that when they met they were kids, they were both in school and they did not see each other that much, and you heard yesterday she does not know why dominick tullo 5194 started smoking and she does not know why he started smoking lucky strike. she does not know. no proof. now, then we hear dominick tullo goes away to the army and he comes back and when he returns they start dating. and she believes that by that time in 1947 he is smoking chesterfield. we do not know what he was smoking when he was in the army. no proof. now, mrs. tullo assumes that he quit smoking lucky strike and went to chesterfield. but look at what dr. cummings said. can i have number three, please? this is evidence in this case. he was asked: so she does not know how long he smoked lucky strike? 16 and she also said that there could have been many cigarette brands in between lucky strike and chesterfield, correct? and the answer is: that is right. that is the evidence. and you also heard -- contrary to i think what was in mr. hammer's closing yesterday -- that mrs. tullo does not know how long mr. tullo smoked lucky strike. can we see number two? 5195 the question: how long do you recall mr. tullo smoking lucky strikes? that i cannot answer. this, ladies and gentlemen, is the evidence in this case. she does not know how long, she does not know how many, and you cannot assume that it is something different than the evidence. they have to prove it, and they did not. and mrs. tullo is the only person you heard from who mentioned that mr. tullo smoked lucky strike. that is it. no other family member, no other friend, no one saw him, no one ever heard him say that he did. now, with regard to this period of time, 15 mr. hammer made a point yesterday that dominick tullo was addicted in the '30s and '40s. and this remind me of something my two boys would say if i said that to them, they would say "really?" mr. hammer: judge, objection. may i approach? (sidebar held as follows:) mr. hammer: he refers to his -- mr. geise: i will move on. the court: you will move on, okay. 5196 (sidebar concluded and the following was held in open court:) mr. geise: with regard to this period of time, the question is how is mr. hammer so sure when his own expert dr. burns is not? can i see number four, please? dr. burns was asked: now, as to when mr. tullo became addicted, you do not have a specific age or year that you think he became addicted, correct? no, we do not have much description in detail of his smoking behaviors as an adolescent and young 13 man and, therefore, there is no way to know with any reasonable certainty precisely when that happened. you cannot even say for sure whether he was addicted before he got married in 1947. answer: i cannot say with certainty, that is correct. when your expert said there is no way to know and cannot say it with certainty, you have not met your burden of proof on that fact. next brand, pall mall. you heard from mr. tullo's daughter, stephanie casino, that she recalls mr. tullo smoking a camel cigarette when she was 6 or 7 years old in 1957 or 1958 when they 5197 lived in that house on east 45th street with a number of relatives, a number of relatives who also smoked. and she told you she does not know how long he smoked camel and she does not know how many camels he smoked. and that is fair. stephanie casino is the only person who identified camel as a brand that mr. tullo smoked. and you need to ask yourself, her brother, louis tullo, did not identify it. and, more importantly, mrs. tullo never identified camel as a brand that 12 mr. tullo smoked. so you need to ask yourself as the judges of the facts what makes sense to you, the recollection of a 6-year-old from 50 years ago or the woman that lived with him for over 50 years. because the only evidence about camel smoking is from the 6-year-old, not his wife from over 50 years. the last brand that mr. tullo is said to have smoked from my client is pall mall, and again, mrs. tullo cannot remember when he smoked pall mall. now, you heard that he may have smoked pall mall cigarettes because they were a longer cigarette. dr. cummings told you that. and dr. cummings said if he wanted a longer cigarette, that is what 5198 he got with pall mall, it was five millimeters longer than the other cigarettes. mrs. tullo does not recall exactly how long mr. tullo smoked pall mall, but she thinks it was between three to five years. and during that period of time she does not know how many cigarettes he smoked per day. can i see number six, please? this is her testimony: so, can you tell us, 10 in terms of pall malls, do you know how many cigarettes of pall mall he would smoke in a day? answer: i would -- no. it is not one pack per day, it is not two packs per day. it is "i do not know." that is the evidence in this case. and just like lucky strike and just like camel, only one witness testified about pall mall history. now, i did a chart trying to keep track of these histories throughout trial, and i want to look at that now. can i see number seven, please. this is a chart of the different brands that we heard somebody say did mr. tullo smoke. and mrs. tullo told you the order was lucky strike, chesterfield, kent, marlboro, and parliament, and then i added the camel from 5199 stephanie casino. if you look at this, mrs. tullo said that pall mall was after chesterfield, kent and marlboro and before parliament. but her daughter and her son do not remember that. ask yourself, is not it odd that three people living in the same house and only one of them recalls the brand? and especially with stephanie casino, she 9 remembers a camel cigarette when she is 6, but does not remember three to five years of pall mall when she is a teenager? in his testimony dr. cummings talks about the importance of unanimous testimony, i do not know if you all remember that, he says it is when multiple people see the same thing. well, what does it mean when it is not unanimous? and there was one other witness in this case who is not on this chart right now who told us about dominick tullo's smoking history, and that was dominick tullo himself. he did not take the witness stand, unfortunately, he is not here, but he did speak to us through documents that were created when he was alive. you saw three surveys that the tullos sent in to philip morris, and the surveys asked about 5200 smoking history, asked about things that are important in this case. mr. hammer talked about the frank statement. i'll represent, these are dominick's statements about his smoking history. and there were three of them. now, if we can look at the first one, number 7 eight, please, he identifies his current brand of cigarettes, parliament, and the previous brand, marlboro. can we look at the second one, please. he identifies his current brand of cigarettes, again, parliament, and his previous brand chesterfield. can we see the third one, please? current brand, parliament, previous brand, kent. mrs. tullo told you that pall mall was the cigarette before parliament. kent, chesterfield, marlboro before pall mall, parliament after. does that make sense? can i see number 11, please? dominick tullo, when he identified his current brand as parliament, he identified his previous brands as kent, chesterfield and marlboro. he never said his previous brand was pall mall. did 5201 he forget? not once, but three times when he had the opportunity, that is the evidence in this case. and i submit to you that the surveys that the tullos sent in to philip morris were surveys sent in before there was a lawsuit to recover money. 6 and i think you need to consider that as you judge the facts. because if you believe dominick tullo and his children, he did not smoke lucky strike, he did not smoke camel and he did not smoke pall mall. that is the evidence. can you take that down? thank you. now, if you accept the biggest possible smoking history for the reynolds brands, you get mrs. tullo's uncorroborated testimony that it is about three to five years max. now, we have heard about dr. burns and his chart and the proportion and that, so i'm not going to repeat what you heard about that. but dr. burns did not tell you anything about the brands. he did not offer even a guess about the proportion. but the problem for the plaintiff in this case is dr. cummings did. dr. cummings did talk about it. and you do not need to take my word about the smoking history. we can take dr. cummings' word. 5202 and remember how hard it is to get dr. cummings to agree to anything? it was tough. can i see number 12, please. 4 this is what i asked him. so if we add those together, mr. tullo's smoking history of those three brands is less than five years, is not it? and originally said: i would not agree with that, we just do not know. now, we do not know does not equal evidence, but he said "we just do not know." so i followed up: and because no one can recall, there is no evidence in the record that you reviewed that it is greater than five years, correct? and he said: that is true. dr. cummings telling this is significant about a smoking history that is insignificant. and mr. bideau and mr. rosenstein touched on it, and it is the next point from dr. cummings. could i have number 14, please? it is the pack-year threshold. dr. cummings says that you need a ten-pack year threshold for an increased risk. and dr. cummings admits that the maximum reynolds smoking history is five; and that is if you believe the testimony, it is five. it comes nowhere near the threshold, not at all. 5203 according to dr. cummings, the risk from smoking reynolds cigarettes is minimum, and it is 3 that of a person who has never smoked, and it is far short of the threshold needed to cause disease. now, why is that important? why is that important? well, it is important because of the concept of legal cause. other folks have addressed that before, i'm not going to dwell on it. i agree with ms. gallagher, that addiction is not the legal cause of mr. tullo's lung cancer and death. in addition, reynolds smoking history is not the legal cause. they are not the but for cause, because the evidence does not support the conclusion that but for smoking reynolds brands mr. tullo would have avoided lung cancer. so your answer on the verdict form to every question that asks you about legal cause should be "no." the engle findings, they are in the jury instructions that you have, they were read to you yesterday. the one thing that is very important about that is there is an instruction that do not mean that the plaintiff is entitled to prevail in this case. the plaintiff has to do more. the plaintiff has to take the findings, you 5204 1 have to apply the evidence, and then you have to decide if the plaintiff met her burden that the defendants conduct was a legal cause of mr. tullo's smoking and ultimately his death at age 74. now, as i mentioned in my opening statement, i like to picture the findings as kind of being in that parking garage across the street, and there is the walkway and there is the courthouse on this side of the street after the walkway. and the plaintiffs have to take and they have to build that walkway with evidence to connect the findings in the garage to the testimony and the facts in this courtroom. and i submit that they have not done that. they did not build that walkway. they are still in that parking garage, with lots of documents, but no connection to dominick tullo. mr. hammer spent a great deal of time yesterday talking about filter fraud and the illusion of filtration and my bet is he is going to spend some more on it when i'm done today. i'm not going to touch the filter fraud argument. and i'm not going to touch it for one simple reason, lucky strike, pall mall, and camel are all unfiltered cigarettes. so the part where 5205 1 he talks about filter fraud, i do not have anything to respond to there. during this trial, through the great help of dr. cummings, the plaintiffs picked from about 60 million tobacco company documents to show you some, and they picked the worst ones to put on display here, the dirtiest of the dirty laundry you can imagine to air out in front of the jury. mr. hammer talked a lot about the american public. it is critically important for you to remember that this case is not about the american public. this case is about mr. tullo. and what that means is you have to determine what any of those documents had to do with mr. tullo. the plaintiffs have to build a walkway from each of those documents to mr. tullo, and they did not do that. specifically, the court instructed you on the issue of concealment, and it talks about they have to prove that mr. tullo reasonably relied to detriment on a statement. first of all, there is no evidence that mr. tullo heard, read or saw any statement from a tobacco company. can i see number 18, please. 5206 this is the evidence in this case. doctor, my question is that there has been no testimony in this case that mr. tullo heard, read or saw any particular statement by a tobacco company. that is true. you have no information from the testimony in this case to indicate that mr. tullo ever saw or heard any of the video clips that you played to this jury? answer: either way, that is true. and for reynolds, there is no evidence that he heard or saw anything from reynolds. can i have number 19. did your husband ever tell you that he had ever heard, read or seen any statements from rj reynolds tobacco company? answer: i never heard. that is the evidence. there was no evidence that anything reynolds did or any of the other tobacco companies did had any impact on mr. tullo's decisions. there is no evidence that he ever relied on anything reynolds said. and similarly, there is no proof he relied on something reynolds did not 25 say. 5207 without hearing, without seeing, without reading, and most of all without relying, they cannot build that bridge. and when you get to questions five and six, specifically, where you are asked whether dominick tullo reasonably relied to his detriment on any statement, your answer for all of the companies has to be "no." that is the evidence. if he did not see it and he did not rely on it, it has to be a "no." this case is not about somebody else in the american public. this case is about dominick tullo, and this case is about the evidence about dominick tullo. now, the plaintiffs theory is that if reynolds or somebody else had said something publicly that was in an internal document that might have made a difference to mr. tullo, he might have quit. well, "might" does not cut it. they got to go the next step and say it would have made a difference, absolutely. and they have put on no evidence to prove that either. and ask yourself, does it make any sense to say that there is reynolds or anybody else that said 24 smoking causes lung cancer, that it would have made a difference to his decision? of course not. 5208 mr. tullo was not the kind of guy that listened to anybody; not the media, not his wife, and certainly not a tobacco company. you heard that mr. and mrs. tullo had a fabulous marriage, a terrific marriage. but if you do not care what your spouse tells you over and over for four to five decades, do you think a different statement from a stranger is going to matter? of course not. now, i want to talk briefly about some of the reynolds documents that dr. cummings showed you. and in those documents, were some stupid statements made? yes, absolutely. on your verdict form, is there a question whether stupid statements were made? no. and is there a connection between any statement and document and dominick tullo? no. dr. cummings' presentation of the documents is meant to be an invitation to ignore the facts of dominick tullo's smoking history and focus instead on the extraneous, on the irrelevant and the prejudicial. 22 dr. cummings combs his archives and looks for the most inflammatory statement to put before you, but as i showed you, there is not a bit of evidence that mr. tullo saw any of the documents, saw any of 5209 the ads, saw any of the statements; and, moreover, there is no evidence that any of the internal documents would have impacted his decisions if he had them in front of him to read. there is no evidence. now, i want to mention a couple examples about reynolds documents. remember the 1990 letter to an elementary school principal in western new york? could i have number 20, please. this is what i asked dr. cummings: now, in 1990, mr. tullo was retired, on medicaid, living in florida, correct? that is right. he was not in elementary school at willow ridge in amherst, new york, was he? no. he never lived in amherst, new york, did he? no. and mr. tullo never saw this letter, did he? no. 21 and what dr. cummings' testimony about that letter prove? well, it proved reynolds did not sell candy cigarettes, reynolds did not sell toys, reynolds did not sell video games. but it was a document generated by dr. cummings, went to the 5210 school, he encouraged it, so that he could bring it with him every time he testifies. it does not matter who the plaintiff is. it does not matter how old the plaintiff is in 1990. it does not matter where they lived; any trial, any time, anywhere is good enough for dr. cummings. there was a document from 1973. now, this is a decade or so after mr. tullo's stopped smoking my client's products, it is a decade later. so what it could have to do, i'm not sure, but in 1973 there is a document talking about future brands for a quote/unquote youth market. in 1973, mr. tullo was 50. now i know we are aging gracefully now, and 50 is not as old as it used to be, but 50's not a youth. dr. cummings takes these documents from courtroom to courtroom to inflame you, not to inform you. and there is some documents that they 19 do inform, but only when you get the whole story. dr. teague, 1953, mr. hammer mentioned it yesterday in his closing -- and you may see it again when i sit down -- it is a review of published literature done by an employee at reynolds. can i have number 21, please. this is the question i asked dr. cummings: 5211 and all of the literature -- all 78 references, it will be in evidence, go look at it, 78 references -- all of the literature that was reviewed in this document had been published and publicly available and accessible to anyone that wanted to access it, correct? yes. it was available to the surgeon general? yes, it was. it was available to the national cancer institute? correct. anyone could have done this research? yes. anyone. anyone could have gone down to the public library and done the same thing dr. teague did in 1953. 18 none of the information was secret. none of it was concealed from the public. in fact, dr. teague got his information from the public. there was another document, a 1959 document from mr. rodgman where dr. rodgman observed eight of the polycyclic hydrocarbons isolated from the smoke are known to produce cancer in mice. so the thought is reynolds knows in 1959 there 5212 are polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons in cigarettes. it is got to be a secret to reynolds, right? no. remember i showed you it was in reader's digest the same month? can i see the next slide, please. i asked dr. cummings: so, obviously, eight polycyclic hydrocarbons were not secret to reynolds in 1959, correct? no. they were known in the medical literature and in the public literature? yes. i was not aware of the citation in the reader's digest, but reader's digest usually reports in lay terms what is in the medical literature. 16 so why come before you and tell you that this is something that was not available to the public when i have to be the one to show them, oh, really, it is in reader's digest the same month. mr. hammer told you dr. cummings is biased. folks, that is bias gone too far, if you ask me. the last reynolds document i want to talk about is another one from the 1970's, again, long after he stopped smoking my product. but dr. cummings talked about it, so i feel like i need 5213 to address it a little bit and put it in the proper context. it is one that i think it is been said it is evidence that reynolds manipulated nicotine, to have the right amount of nicotine to keep smokers smoking, and that sounds pretty sinister. but the story we got from dr. cummings and dr. farone tells you something about that document that is not so sinister. and the story is that reynolds scientists were aware of the recommendations from the public health community and were acting on those recommendations. now, in the document, dr. teague talks about changing the tar-to-nicotine ratio. and what he is 15 saying is if you lower the tar in a cigarette and keep nicotine the same, you change the ratio. and the thought is, if smokers are smoking to get nicotine, if they have a level of nicotine they have to get, if they want a dose they are searching for, if they get that dose and get less tar, that could be better for them, because the tar's the stuff that they think causes cancer and tar's the bad stuff they are trying to eliminate. so if you can get the nicotine and get less tar, that can be a good thing. now, is this an 5214 idea known only to dr. teague and only to reynolds? no. let us look at who else had this idea. dr. michael russell. can i see number 25? i talked to dr. cummings about this: so, when dr. teague is talking about reducing the tar to nicotine ratio in this document, he is talking about keeping the same level of nicotine while reducing the tar, right. among other things, he is talking about that, yes. it was a strategy that had been discussed by 13 scientists like dr. russell and other members of the public health community for potentially making cigarettes safer? answer: yes. who else? how about the surgeon general, the highest public health official in the country. may i have 26, please. well, you are familiar that in 1981 the surgeon general's report discussed the idea of changing the tar-to-nicotine ratio as a potential approach for making a safer cigarette? yes. the surgeon general's report reviewed the 5215 literature, some of which came out in the '70s. and specifically, the 1981 surgeon general's report, this is a report that dr. burns was involved in, and they agreed with this approach. and they were not alone. may i have slide 27. this is from dr. farone, another person, another witness, another expert called by the plaintiffs, and he was asked: during the course of the tobacco working group -- and you remember, the tobacco working 12 group was a group of people from the national cancer institute and the tobacco companies working together toward a safer cigarette. that is what the tobacco working group is. and during the course of the tobacco working group's efforts to develop a less hazardous cigarette, one of their suggestions was to increase the tar -- i'm sorry -- to increase the nicotine levels as relative to the tar to give people the nicotine that they wanted, right? yes. and the thought was that they want nicotine, let us give them the nicotine, but let us try to reduce the level of tar because tar is the stuff 5216 that causes cancer, right? right. and that is an idea that you support, right? yes. dr. farone supports it, the 1981 surgeon general's report with dr. burns supports it. and the other thing you heard is until 2000, until the year 2000, after dominick tullo had developed lung cancer, dr. cummings himself 10 continued to advocate increasing the level of nicotine in cigarettes. now, that is the evidence in this courtroom. if all of these public health officials and organizations are touting an idea to make cigarettes less hazardous, is it a surprise that the idea was discussed in a document that reynolds had? it is far from negligent for a cigarette manufacturer to pay attention to what is going on in the public health community about cigarettes. and, in fact, i think dr. cummings -- mr. hammer: judge, can we approach? the court: sure. (sidebar held as follows:) mr. hammer: that comment by saying "it is far 5217 from negligent" is challenging the finding. the finding is they are negligent. it is an improper argument, and i request the court to cure that. mr. geise: i think it is very similar to what mr. hammer said, saying "is this negligent," i do not know, what, maybe he was challenging the findings, i'm not sure. mr. hammer: no, judge. when i was saying 9 "this is negligent," and i went to the findings, and yes, of course it is. the court: you can suggest this, and let us just move on. mr. geise: i will clear that up and tell them the findings has negligence. (sidebar concluded and the following was held in open court:) mr. geise: the findings you have say that the tobacco companies are negligent. i'm not challenging that. but i do not think you can challenge what is in a document when reynolds has the same thing that the public health community is advocating. and as a matter of fact, dr. cummings would probably have been here criticizing reynolds if they did not have that in their documents. 5218 the clerk: ten minutes left. mr. geise: the idea was not a secret. it was not concealed from the public. the public health community not only knew about it, but they proposed it, and now 40 years later reynolds is criticized for being right on par with the public 7 health community. if reynolds did something wrong with that, then mr. bideau and mr. rosenstein need to slide on over and we better make room for dr. russell, for the national cancer institute and the surgeon general. mr. hammer: judge, can we approach? the court: sure. (sidebar held as follows:) mr. hammer: that is an improper argument; saying that other people should be defendants, that is an improper argument, that is exactly what he just said, that they should slide over and other people be sitting here. the court: that is what the issue, based on that document, based on the information, based on that in this lawsuit, just similar, that this based on that document. mr. geise: okay, all right. 5219 (sidebar concluded and the following was held in open court:) mr. geise: ladies and gentlemen, my last statement about the national cancer institute and the surgeon general and dr. russell was limited to 6 the last document where dr. teague had the same thing that they were proposing. i'm going to talk just for a second about punitive damages. i do not think you should get to the consideration of punitive damages, that is probably not a surprise; and if you do, you need to remember that the burden of proof is even higher, it is clear and convincing evidence for punitive damages. but i want to discuss one thing mr. hammer brought up yesterday in his argument in support of why you should find punitive damages, and that was in 1994 testimony by tobacco executives in front of congress. and, in particular, he played a video that had the ceo for reynolds who said he disagreed that cigarettes and nicotine was addictive, using the classic definition of addiction, which required intoxication. that is what was on the clip. now, i want to look at testimony you have seen 5220 in this case. can i see number 28. this is a question asked in the case: if the 4 definition used in 1964 had been used in the 1988 report, then once again cigarettes and the nicotine in them would not have been found to be addictive, correct? and the answer is: right. if the requirement was that it caused intoxication, then one would not have labeled nicotine addiction, you know, nicotine as addictive. now, from what mr. hammer said, you would assume this is probably testimony from one of the tobacco company employees, right? no. it was testimony from dr. cummings. he told you about the changing definition. he told you about the classic definition. and he told you that under that classic definition it requires intoxication; and if you still use that definition, it does not meet it. now, it is not clear and convincing evidence in support of punitive damages when the plaintiffs expert says the same thing. now, there is one thing you probably noticed 5221 throughout the morning, there are a number of things that mr. hammer and i disagree about. 3 one thing we do agree on is what he said yesterday, that this case is all about money. you can take that down. thank you. they have suggested to you to award an enormous amount of money against the defendant and specifically against reynolds, despite the fact that mr. tullo smoked our cigarettes for no more than five years. and i agree with ms. gallagher, and i also take the position that reynolds should not be liable and should not pay mrs. tullo any money whatsoever for that limited smoking history. mr. hammer told you that they accept responsibility, partial responsibility for dominick tullo's lung cancer and death. now, you never heard any witness on the stand say that they take partial responsibility. i submit to you that this is a game lawyers play. mr. hammer: judge, objection. (sidebar held as follows:) the court: what is the -- mr. hammer: you know, is there was a motion in limine filed by defense counsel saying they 5222 1 cannot denigrate defense counsel telling this jury that we are playing games, that is about as denigrating as you can get. they are violating their own motion on this court's order. mr. geise: i'm not aware of the order or motion that he is referring to them violating. i do not think i'm violating anything. this is closing argument. i think that is an absolutely fair statement. mr. hammer: saying that plaintiffs counsel is playing a game in this court? mr. geise: with regard to accepting responsibility. mr. hammer: no, that is calling what we are doing, challenging, not challenging, it is denigrating, what you are doing, which is exactly what -- the court: i will sustain the objection. mr. hammer: i would like a curative on that, judge. that has to have a curative. that is a distinct violation of this court's order. the court: we will deal with it. (sidebar concluded and the following was held in open court:) mr. geise: as i was saying, you heard 5223 1 mr. hammer say mrs. tullo accepts partial responsibility for dominick tullo, but you did not hear mrs. tullo say that on the witness stand. the plaintiff wants to accept responsibility here while using the concept of addiction to paint mr. tullo as a powerless individual. but if you think the concept of addiction is an excuse for your actions, then do not accept responsibility for that. you cannot have it both ways. mr. hammer talked a number of times yesterday about heroin users and heroin addicts. if a heroin addict goes on a binge and overdoses after decades of warnings from the people closest to them, is the heroin addict partially responsible or responsible? you cannot just accept some responsibility. now, from what we have heard and learned about dominick tullo in this case, how do you think he would have answered the question on responsibility? would this gentleman who was his own man say someone or something else was in control of his decisions? or would he say i am responsible? we saw lots of pictures of dominick tullo throughout his life, from a young man, from a shoe shine boy growing up, getting married, having 5224 children, having grandchildren, going to his granddaughter's weddings, we saw beautiful pictures of a man who lived a full and complete life. and the pictures depict a man who did what he wanted to do and enjoyed. but beyond the photographs, we got another picture of who dominick tullo was. he was a man who made decisions and there was nothing you could do about his decisions once he made them. whether it was his decision to move to florida after he retired over the objection of his wife, whether it was his decision to keep smoking over the objections of his wife, he did not like to have his decisions questioned. we never heard in this case that he ever second-guessed his decision to smoke. and if he did not second-guess it, you should not second-guess it either. it was his decision. and i want to end on that decision point with a clip you saw earlier in the trial. may i see number 29, please. (video clip played as follows:) voice: if you smoke cigarettes, you increase your chances of dying early. in this kind of a 25 country, it comes down to you whether you like it 5225 or not. no one is going to forbid an adult to smoke, and it is now quite clear that no one is going to tell him it is good for him either. the decision is his, the decision and the health that may depend on it. (video clip concluded.) mr. geise: ladies and gentlemen, the decision was his. i thank you so much for your time and attention this morning. i thank you so much for your patience the last three weeks, you have been a terrific jury. mr. rosenstein: counsel. good morning, ladies and gentlemen. you will be glad to hear that my remarks, i will try to keep them around 15 minutes long. it is been a pleasure to be before you in judge sasser's court, and you have all been exceptional jurors, so i just thank you for that. when this trial began i gave a brief opening statement where i talked, i told you a little bit about my client and i told you what the evidence was going to show about mr. tullo. now we are at the end of trial and ms. gallagher did an excellent job covering yesterday why the lawyers in this case have failed to meet their burden against the defendants on all their claims. please remember, this case is not about whether cigarette smoking caused dominick tullo's cancer. we know that it did. that is not what 5182 we are here to decide. we are also not here to resolve whether 3 cigarette smoking is addictive, we know that, nicotine is addictive. instead, this case is about two things. one, it is specifically about mr. tullo and the way he lived his life, smoking for 60 years; and two, it is about whether any of these tobacco companies did anything or said anything that influenced mr. tullo's decisions or behavior. and the evidence is clear in this case that nothing any of the defendant companies did affected mr. tullo's behavior. now, the evidence you heard during this trial shows that mr. tullo started smoking some time way back in the 1930s, obviously, that was a long time ago, and it is not easy for anyone to remember specific details going back that far. but what did we learn? mrs. tullo, along with her daughter and her son, told us he smoked at least seven different brands throughout his life. they may have added a couple vivid memories about specific brands or others that they recall him smoking for certain periods of time. but what did not they tell us? 5183 ladies and gentlemen, please remember, you are 2 the investigators here and you are looking at the evidence in this case through a detective's eyes because, after all, you are trying to determine the truth based on the evidence. among other things, your job is to figure out the who, what, where, when, how and why about the facts in this case. now, i have to ask you what do we know about my client's brands, what do we know about liggett cigarettes? well, the who and the what, that is pretty easy. the who is dominick tullo. the what is chesterfield cigarettes, unfiltered cigarettes, by the way. the when and the where, that is also pretty easy. we know he is living back in new york city, and it was the late 1940s, or so. he recently got married or got involved and then married with his wife, mrs. tullo. the how and the why, however, they did not exactly say that. sure, we know he switched smoking the chesterfields at some point before the first smoking house studies came out linking smoking to cancer. but the details become kind of 5184 1 hazy about chesterfield cigarettes. in other words, we do not know exactly why dominick tullo started smoking or switched to smoking chesterfields in his mid-20s. we also learned that he switched -- i'm sorry -- and it still remains vague about how much he actually smoked. well, we know he switched to chesterfield around the late 1940s. we also learned he switched to five different brands over the next decade or so. truthfully, as we sit here today, we still do not know much about his use of any of those brands, and those brands including chesterfield. please remember, plaintiffs counsel, mr. hammer and mr. gdanski, they have the burden of proof here, it is their job to prove their claims against each defendant, and yet they never provided details about mr. tullo and any of these brands. now, if the people working at liggett asked me today how long did mr. tullo smoke chesterfield cigarettes, i would have to say, honestly, i do not know. his wife told us something about how he switched to smoking them some time around 65 years ago, but she did not really tell us much else. you have to speculate to determine the amount 5185 or length of time that he smoked chesterfields. in other words, you have to guess to solve the investigation. you cannot do that because this is a court of law. your role is to determine the truth, and the evidence leads you to draw a giant question mark about why and how much chesterfield cigarettes mr. tullo smoked among some of the other brands over half a century ago. for that reason alone, plaintiffs have failed to meet their burden. but it does not stop there. to find against liggett in this case you have to ask were liggett cigarettes, were the chesterfields, the legal cause of dominick tullo's death? did chesterfield cigarettes substantially cause or contribute to his lung cancer? you have heard that before from some of the other lawyers. in other words, you have to ask yourself, would mr. tullo have gotten lung cancer if he had never touched liggett cigarettes back over 60 years ago? and the answer to that question is, of course, he smoked other -- dominick tullo smoked other brands other than chesterfield for a majority of his life and he still would have gotten lung 5186 cancer. because of that, liggett cigarettes could not have been a legal cause of his death, but, of course, that very fact does not change that there was no evidence presented at trial proving that anything these cigarette companies did or said, and that is including liggett, affected mr. tullo and his smoking decisions in any way. these are some major problems with plaintiffs case. you will recall yesterday, you heard some bits and snippets about dr. burns and a few things he said. dr. burns said that each and every cigarette dominick tullo smoked contributed to his lung cancer. i'm not sure if you recall that, because it was a few days ago, that is an interesting choice of words. he said "contributed." are not you just a little bit curious why he did not say more than that? he did not tell you what does or how much or how many cigarettes is sufficient to cause lung cancer. sure, he drew some map out and did some sort of chain thing but he simply said each one contributes. what does that mean? think of it this way. does each and every 24 bucket of water contribute to filling the lake? sure, each bucket may contribute, but when you take 5187 a look at the whole lake, no single bucket can be considered a substantial contribution to filling that lake. and remember, in this case, you have to answer whether certain cigarettes substantially caused dominick tullo's lung cancer. sure, each cigarette may have contributed, but the evidence about chesterfields, as well as some of the other brands, it is so vague it cannot be considered a substantial contribution. in fact, you heard their own expert, and i think that mr. bideau just mentioned it, dr. cummings told you that a person who smoked less than -- had less than a ten-pack year smoking history and then stopped would virtually eliminate any risks to his health. based on the evidence, or the lack thereof, mr. tullo's use of liggett cigarettes was a fraction of that time. and common sense tells us that is not enough to be a legal cause of his death. now, the other day you were read the testimony of mr. morgan and you were played the videotape of 23 dr. farone. now, these two are really easy for me to talk about. simply put, mr. morgan and dr. farone did not say anything about liggett, 5188 nothing. both worked for other companies. it should be disregarded when it comes to my client, liggett. in fact, i still have no idea what mr. morgan or dr. farone had anything to do with mr. tullo. you also heard a lot of arguments in this case and testimony that used catch-all statements like the tobacco companies did this or the tobacco companies did that. well, there is a funny saying about generalizations. all generalizations, including this one, are false. in reality, generalizations are unfair, they are inaccurate, they are not really helpful at getting at the truth. with respect to my client, liggett, there is some more straightforward path to the truth. the evidence shows that even going back to the '50s, time and time again liggett acted independently and responsibly. for example, when the first studies came out 21 linking smoking to lung cancer back in the early 1950s, what did liggett do? well, you heard from dr. burns and dr. cummings, they confirmed a few things for us. it is undisputed in this case, liggett did not 5189 attend this 1953 plaza hotel meeting, liggett did not create or publish that frank statement to cigarette smokers. what did liggett do? instead, it chose to launch its own large-scale effort into smoking health research. this was confirmed by dr. burns and dr. cummings. then they went on and they shared all the results of the research with the surgeon general's advisory committee. that was in 1963. do you remember the letter i showed you? i wish i had some sort of overheads, but i do not. but i showed you a letter last week from the surgeon general where it basically praised liggett and their consultant group, arthur d. little, with respected effort and cooperation and eventual contribution to the 1964 report. and i think at one point you also heard dr. cummings -- this is much more recently -- he 20 actually volunteered this on the stand about a no-nicotine cigarette called quest which he finds is helping people quit smoking. well, that cigarette is also marketed by an affiliate of liggett. ladies and gentlemen, those are the facts 5190 about my client, liggett. as you know by now, like all trials, this is a case where we have search for the truth. and i will tell you in this case, based on the evidence, there is only one truth when it comes to dominick tullo and his smoking. and what we saw in this courtroom, that truth is no one knows the truth. as we sit here today, we still do not know anything about why mr. tullo switched to any given brand and we have to speculate about how much or how little he smoked of each of the brands they talked about. certainly, apart from making cigarettes, which is perfectly legal, perfectly legal in this country, there is no evidence showing that any of these defendants had any effect or influence on his lifestyle or decisions. 18 instead, what we do know about mr. tullo is he was a hard working man who lived a good life, he raised a great family and he did what he wanted to do. and those are the facts. and those simple facts show that dominick tullo made his own decisions and followed his own path through life. pure and simple, abraham lincoln once said: you cannot escape the responsibility of tomorrow by 5191 evading it today. that statement is as true today as it was 150 years ago. ladies and gentlemen, i ask you, please, use your intelligence and your common sense and retrace the evidence. and when you do that, you will find by the greater weight of the evidence there is no support for their claim for money against liggett and the other defendants in this case. thank you once more for your kind attention to my closing remarks and have a great day. thank you.