1 mr. hammer: thank you, judge. this case is about dominick, it is about mary. this case is important to mary tullo. it is 4 important because this is her opportunity, her day in court. you know, counsel for philip morris talked about litigation world and real world. this is the real world. this is the real world. the real world is where dominick tullo smoked cigarettes for 60 years of his life and died an agonizing death and this woman watched him; watched him, the man she loved, deteriorate before her eyes. that is what the real world is all about. litigation. do you want to talk about litigation and who was planning litigation? philip morris was planning litigation, in their documents. when they talked about if a prosecuting attorney were to take a case against us, we can no longer argue free choice when our product is addictive. that is the real world, and that is the litigation world that philip morris created. they created it. they created this litigation world. do not be fooled by that. and do you want to talk about litigation? findings. the engle court, the florida supreme court issued findings. 5241 can you turn this on, please. 2 this is the instruction you are getting: if you find that dominick tullo was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine, and if such addiction was the legal cause of his death, certain findings from a prior trial -- a trial that these defendants were a part of, the engle trial -- where finding were made -- findings from a prior trial will be binding on you. that is what we are here for. the litigation world, they created it and now they want to stand up here and say, oh, there is a real world and a litigation world. no. the real world is they killed dominick tullo, and because of that mary's suffering, that is what we got here, that is the real world. you know, in opening plaintiffs -- defense counsel said this case, it is about control, causation and responsibility. and yet not one of them talked about that. did they? do you know what it is about? it is about control. it is about control, it is about who controlled the nicotine in cigarettes, who manipulated the nicotine in cigarettes. the tobacco companies. 5242 1 why did they do that? so they could get their smokers addicted and keep them addicted, the tobacco companies. mr. rosenstein: objection, your honor. the court: sidebar. (sidebar held as follows:) mr. rosenstein: there is essentially no evidence in this case that my client controlled and manipulated the nicotine levels to hurt smokers, and that was the findings from the engle supreme court. the court: yeah, we are getting -- mr. rosenstein: it is getting into some areas -- the court: i'm going to sustain because it concerned the defendant, it does not for liggett. mr. hammer: i will address it. the court: sustained. (sidebar concluded and the following proceedings were held in open court:) mr. hammer: you heard from philip morris' own scientist, dr. farone, that philip morris, they were working on projects to manipulate the nicotine in cigarettes, by adding urea, adding ammonia, those are not products that naturally occur. they 5243 do that to enhance the nicotine, to addict their smokers. do you want to talk about control? that is where control is. do you want to talk about causation, cause that is what they put up here, that is what this case is about. they have all admitted, they have all admitted that their cigarettes were the medical cause of dominick tullo's death. they admit that their cigarettes caused his cancer and death. they have admitted that. none of them have gotten up here and said that, but they have have admitted it. that is not an issue in this case. we did not bring you any medical doctors to show you that. do you want to talk about responsibilities? that is what they talk about in openings, this case is about responsibility. really? how about the responsibility that they said they would undertake, the responsibility that we accept an interest in people's health as a basic responsibility paramount to every other consideration in our business. really? that was the frank statement. and do you know what, if the frank statement was published in 1954, 5244 and this is what it said, that would have been very responsible. mr. bideau: objection, your honor. (sidebar held as follows:) mr. bideau: he is got on the board up there, it does not say philip morris mandated, it says tobacco defendants, tobacco companies. the court: the defendants, you have the same objection, do not use that slide. mr. hammer: i just explained, i'm not going to use the slide. mr. bideau: it is sitting up there now. the court: objection sustained. objection sustained. (sidebar concluded and the following was held in open court:) mr. hammer: the frank statement, we all saw it. what did it say? it said we accept an interest in people's health as a basic responsibility paramount to every other consideration in our business. and if that was the truth, they could have had that right here and then, it could have said quit, smokers quit until our scientists develop a safer cigarette. that 25 would have been a frank statement. 5245 that would have been a frank statement and that would have been a responsible thing that the tobacco companies should have done. and do you know what, that would have continued the tobacco sales to drop like they were doing because of those scientific studies that were out there. and because it was dropping because smokers were quit because they were learning about the dangers of tobacco. and the link to cancer. but then when they came out there with the frank statement, it reassured smokers, listen, smokers, do not worry about it, we have got our scientists working on it, we are going to find a safe cigarette; and if it is bad for you, do not worry, we will take it out. they said that time and time and time again. and that influenced every smoker in america. and it influenced dominick tullo because, do you know what, if the tobacco companies said this to dominick tullo in 1954, he would have quit. he would have quit. if they said this on the tv in 1964 -- do you 23 remember you saw the clip yesterday with the tobacco executives sitting there smoking a cigarette responding to the surgeon general report? 5246 if he would have said, do you know, surgeon general report came out, we accept the responsibility in our customer's health, and i want to tell the american public we are working on a safer cigarette but we do not have it now, and so you should quit now, or working on quitting, and we will help you quit if you need help, but until then we are going to stop selling our cigarettes until we find a safe cigarette that will not kill you. now, if that is what he did on tv, if the tobacco executives would have done that on tv in 1964 after the surgeon general, what do you think would have happened to cigarette smokers? they would have quit. and what would dominick tullo have done? he would have quit. because we know from the evidence that he discussed the surgeon general report, he discussed the findings of the surgeon general report. and if mary would have said, dominick, the tobacco executive even got on tv last night and 22 said, hey, quit smoking, they are going to stop making cigarettes until they find a safe cigarette, what do you think would have happened? he would have quit. but they did not do that. why? because 5247 of money. because that is what this case is about. and they want to tell you, oh, it is about money and mary's seeking money. mary's seeking money because that is all she can seek. she cannot seek getting dominick back. she cannot do it. and if she could, she would be happy to walk right out of here hand-in-hand with him, but she cannot do that. and, you know, we do not know how long dominick would have lived after 74, after 74 years. but by the tobacco companies standards, hey, he lived the good life, that is good enough, 74, you are dead, that is good. really? mary's 87 years old. 87 years old. she lived 13 years past 74; 13 years that she could have been with dominick, but we do not know how long dominick would have lived. you know people today, they are living until 100. and dominick was a man who was healthy 20 everyday of his life. never went to the doctor. but they want to come in here and tell you 74, that is good enough, he had a long enough life. really? these are undisputed facts in the case. the judge read to you that i said yesterday it was 5248 stipulated, no. they are undisputed. i used the wrong word. they are undisputed, they are agreed upon; that cigarettes are addictive, cigarettes cause lung cancer, dominick died from lung cancer medically caused by cigarettes, and that philip morris, philip morris admits that their cigarettes were a medical cause of dominick's death. now, you know, these other companies, they got up here and they said, well, wait a minute, it was not our cigarettes because he only smoked for three years, he only smoked for five years, he only smoked for a few years. and dr. cummings, he said you got to smoke ten years for it to affect you. really? well, guess what, when you smoke one cigarette, two cigarettes, three cigarettes, you need to keep smoking those cigarettes, so it is to 19 bathe your lungs in the poison that they make. they make it. they put it out there on the market. and they have already been found to be negligent, they have already been found that their cigarettes are defective. those are findings in this courtroom. they are findings. they have already found -- been found to conceal 5249 information. and let me ask you something, how do you, as a smoker, as dominick tullo, how do you rely on something that is concealed from you? well, you got to think about this. because you got to say to yourself, well, if it was not concealed, would dominick have behaved differently? and if this was told to dominick and the rest of the world, if this was told to dominick in 1954, instead of telling him we accept the responsibility and we are going to find -- we are going to work on it and cigarettes are not injurious to your health, if they would have said this, people would have quit, including dominick. and we all know that. that is the concealment. that is when the concealment started. that is when it started. and liggett, they may not have signed 17 that document, but they became a part of the tobacco industry in 1958. and do you know what, that was a front, their own documents say it, it was a front for research, so that they could put their word out there and contest everything that was out there in the public. come on, this is the real world we are living in. and the real world tells you that a company 5250 that is responsible behaves responsibly. and to use the quote that was used by counsel where he said abraham lincoln said you cannot escape the responsibility of tomorrow by evading it today. well, guess what, folks, they evaded it back in 1954 when they said they would take responsibility, do not let them evade it today. because that is what this case is about. they took on the responsibility of their smokers, including dominick tullo, and they cast that aside for dollars, for the almighty dollar, that is what this case is about. and they talked about, oh, well, legal cause. really? let us talk about legal cause, because defense counsel was very careful in showing you the 16 legal cause instruction. but the legal cause instruction has two paragraphs to it. and the two paragraphs talk about legal cause and contributing cause. they left that part out. conveniently -- it is in here somewhere -- can i have the elmo? this is the full instruction. conveniently they read the first part to you. they never talked about the second part. the first part does require that but for the addiction to cigarettes containing 5251 nicotine, the injury would not have occurred. but do you know what, there is a second paragraph. the second paragraph said: in order to be regarded as the legal cause of death addiction need not be the only cause. it was very convenient when defense counsel got up here and said, oh, well, but for the addiction then, you know, too bad because, do you know what, he chose to smoke. but there is a legal definition, and you have got it sitting right there in the laps, and i beg you to look at it because that part of the definition says addiction need not be the only cause. addiction may be a legal cause of death even 14 though it operated in combination, in combination, with his choices, in combination with his decisions, that is legal cause. so we have testimony from the doctors who told you that his addiction led to him smoking that many cigarettes. did his choices do that, too? sure, and that is why we have accepted partial blame. did dominick tullo's addiction along with his choice cause his lung cancer? sure. are the two mutually exclusive? no. they are all part of the same process. he made a choice every time he did not quit, but neither of those 5252 choices were free choices that he was able to make without having to suffer the consequences of his addiction. they work hand-in-hand. sure, you have choices, everybody does. the heroin addict has a choice every time he puts the needle into his arm, but he is still addicted. the alcoholic has a choice every time he puts that bottle to his lips, but he is still addicted. and the smoker who was an addicted smoker, who smokes for 60 years day in and day out, has a choice, everyday he lights -- opens up that cigarette pack, pulls it out, puts it up to his 13 lips and strikes the match or hits a lighter, that is the choice he makes. but do you know what, it is driven by his addiction. and in combination with his addiction and his choices that is the legal cause in this case. do not be fooled by just that one paragraph. both paragraphs apply. and the reason they apply is because that is what happened in this case. the judge is giving them instructions, that is a legal instruction, because if the evidence in this case did not support that instruction, that part would not be given to you. the part would not be given to you. that is why it is given to you, to 5253 give you guidance, use that second paragraph because that is what is applicable with legal cause. do not be fooled. you know, they talked about litigation world and the real world. in philip morris' world, it is a world in which cigarettes are not cancer-causing, 'cause they told the world that for 50 years. in philip morris' world, it is a world in which taking responsibility and cooperating are synonymous with creating doubt and misleading 11 people. because that is what they told the world in 1953, and that is what they told dominick. we take on a responsibility. but for the next 50 years they mislead the american public and dominick, they created doubt for the next 50 years about what their product really did. in philip morris' world, the litigation world, the real world, philip morris' world, they talk about the illusion of filtration, which is as important as the fact of filtration. really? that is the real world, that is their world. that is the world we all live in, and that is the world we all lived in in the '50s and '60s and '70s and 80's and '90s when dominick tullo was smoking 5254 their products. that is the world. and yet they come in here and try to make a game of it talking about litigation and the real world, their world as it existed in the '50s, '60s, '70s and 80's, a corporation where -- a business where corporations worked together to deceive the american public. that is their world. that is the tobacco industry's world. a world in which 10 corporate profits are more important than an individual's life. their profits were more important than their customers' lives. that is the real world, and that was the world that these tobacco companies lived in. think about that. a world in which it is acceptable to deceive the scientists who are researching what lung cancer does and the addictiveness; a world where they supply misinformation to the world so that they can continue to sell their products, and they have already been found to have deceived, they have already been found to have agreed to deceive the public. there is already a finding. there is no question about it, it is already been found by 5255 another court, and it is binding in this case when you determine that dominick is a member of that class. and he is. he smoked for 60 years, he was addicted and his addiction, in combination with other things, were the legal cause of his death. there is no question about that. 8 it is a world in which a 71-year-old woman at the time who hates cigarettes, who is constantly telling her husband throughout the history of his smoking; it is a world where they come in and say today in this courtroom that she is been deceitful to you, that is what they are doing; they are challenging what mary says to you because she does not have a clear memory of exactly when he smoked and how much he smoked, folks, she is 87 years old. a man in which -- a world in which a man could smoke a cigarette brand, parliament, philip morris' parliament cigarette, with this unique filter that i showed you yesterday, for 30 years, but it has nothing to do with the unique filter, and yet, look at this document, the document that -- the document that was sent to him by philip morris that he filled out with regard to parliament cigarettes, 5256 asks, why do you smoke parliament? and there is a little box that he checks off. and the options -- there is three options, four options, actually. and he says -- it is hard to read -- what makes parliament lights unique? it is a light refreshing taste, the special 7 offers, the recessed filter? what is checked off? all of the above. this was not done for litigation, as they want you to believe, the litigation world. this was done, as they said, evidence by dominick himself. the clerk: counselor, five minutes. mr. hammer: thank you. you know, this case is about the fact that each one of these cigarettes killed dominick tullo. and they talked about, well, if you pour one bucket into a lake, is that going to make a difference? well, do you know what, maybe not one bucket. but do you know what, it takes all of those buckets to fill up the lake. it takes all those buckets to fill up the lake. and do you know what, if -- if companies get together and they get together to deceive the world, they should be held responsible. they created a psychological crutch for their smokers 5257 and for dominick. that is in their documents. do you know, this case by their actions is not only negligent, it is grossly negligent. for a corporation, these four corporations to behave the 5 way they did, to get together and deceive the american public, have their executives stand up there and swear to tell the truth and lie for their executives to get up on tv and say if there is something bad about our product we will go out of business, if there is something bad about our product we will take it out, that is reckless conduct, they do not care about the individuals and they kill people. and that is reprehensible, that is reprehensible conduct, and they should be punished. and that is why punitive damages should be awarded in this case. and punitive damages, folks, check off the box for entitlement, and then we come back for a day and you decide how much. that is your decision. you know, i wish i had a lot more time to talk to you, but i do not. but i do not think there is any question that dominick was addicted to cigarettes. and never one time in his life did any of these companies, any of them, tell the truth to dominick tullo about the addictive nature of their 5258 product or about how much -- how it would kill him. and you need to compare the acts of the two. dominick's acts of smoking, because he was 4 addicted; and their actions, which are really reprehensible, they really are. and the most important thing is, you know, when you talk about the truth, trial is a search for the truth, the truth is that they deceived dominick. and if they told him the truth in 1954, and the rest of the american public, it would have changed things. because if they said until our scientists develop a safe cigarette, stop smoking, because we care about you, we accept the responsibility in the health of our customers, we are a responsible corporation. they did not do that. and they have to pay for that. that is what is fair. do not send mary home alone tonight, let her go home tonight and say, do you know what, dominick, we got them, finally, the jury did the right thing. send her home proud. you should be proud in your verdict. you should be able to look back in a year, five years, ten years and be proud of what you did in this 5259 courtroom for the past two-and-a-half weeks because 2 what you are doing is important. what they did was reprehensible. and do not let them fool you and minimize what they did, because they did it to dominick tullo, they did it to mary. do not let them fool you, it is not right. that is why, that is why your verdict should speak loud and speak proud, and you should go home tonight feeling proud about your verdict, because that is the right thing, that is the just thing, that is the truth thing in this case. you know, it is been said that "the arc of the moral universe is long, but it bends towards justice," martin luther king said that. and it really applies in this case because that arc started way back in 1954, and it just kept going. it is a long arc. it is a long arc of deceit, a long arc of lies. the clerk: time's up. the court: mr. hammer. mr. hammer: but it bends towards justice. and it bends towards justice in this courtroom. and that is what we are seeking in this courtroom, justice, justice for mary for her loss. and the only way to do that is to say tobacco 5260 1 companies, the lies you created in 1954 and perpetrated upon this country and dominick tullo for the next 50 years, that was wrong. do mary right. do her proud. the court: thank you, mr. hammer. mr. hammer: thank you.