22 mr. hohnbaum: i want to add my thanks for your service and your attention. being a juror is not easy. and one of the reasons being a juror is not easy is you are listening to a flood of information in this case, seven or eight days, and it is like you are trying to drink from a fire hose. and you are not given the instructions, you are not given the law until the end of the case, and there are very good reasons for that. but it makes it very challenging, as you are listening to evidence, to figure out, how is that evidence going to help me decide the issues in this? and the plaintiff, except on the statute of limitations, has the burden of proof. they have to tie what you heard on that witness stand to ms. wilkinson. because this case is not about some smokers, other smokers, people who may have been deceived, many people. it is about one person who smoked for 50 years, despite knowing from a very young age that it could kill her and ruin her life. that is not disputed by any of the witnesses you heard from that witness stand. what the plaintiff did in this case, they called their first witness, live, it was dr. cummings. right? dr. cummings talked to you for about a day and a half about general things. that is where the generic comes from: general things. did mr. -- did dr. cummings know anything meaningful about ms. wilkinson? well, he acknowledged on the stand: i know when she was born, i know when she died. i know a couple of brands she smoked. but i do not know why she smoked, how long she smoked. i do not know when she smoked a particular brand. he did not know, nor did he even try to find out, about ms. wilkinson, right? i did not read the depositions. i was not asked to give opinions specific to ms. wilkinson. that was dr. cummings' own testimony in this case. and so what dr. cummings did is he came in and he told you that everybody smoked, right? smoking was normalized. no one knew it was dangerous. information was hidden. that is what dr. cummings told you about what was going on generally, without knowing what was going on with respect to ms. wilkinson. in fact, i asked him: do you know whether her parents forbade smoking? do you know if her brother warned her 100 times that smoking could kill her? and his honest answer was: i do not know. i do not know. so they brought you dr. cummings, and, again, this is what he did not know. he wants to tell you general stuff, but you need to focus to answer the issues on the verdict form, because every issue on the verdict form has one name on it, and it is ms. wilkinson. it is not everybody else. this is ms. wilkinson's issue. they want you, in deciding what ms. wilkinson knew -- this is what she knew: she knew about her father telling her it was bad, her brother telling her it was bad, her sister telling her, her first husband, who she married when she was 16 years old, her first husband telling her smoking is bad for her. sister, the warning labels. at school, at church. she was surrounded by warnings throughout her life. and when you heard testimony from her brother joseph via videotape: i warned her a hundred times. did you hear him say she denied it? she was confused about it? she doubted it? no. when you heard from malloy, mr. malloy and the sister, did anybody say, anybody in this case say she was confused, doubted it or did not understand what she had been told her entire life? dr. cummings comes in here. he shows documents, campaign of doubt, controversy, confusion, people were confused. this was working. he did not know anything about ms. wilkinson. the evidence will -- with ms. wilkinson is, she did know. is there any evidence in this case that she was confused? that she doubted it? that in any way she absorbed the controversy? and the answer to that question is "no," from her own mouth. at some point in time, if somebody is telling you, would not you expect if it was confused and she doubted, that she would say, i do not believe that, i do not believe that? well, i'm not so sure about that. not one single, solitary time in her entire life. generic testimony from dr. cummings, who does not know her, versus very specific factual evidence about ms. wilkinson, because it is her case. plaintiff cannot prove their case by putting up a bunch of offensive documents -- and they are offensive -- and say there is some connection to ms. wilkinson, because there have to be facts connecting, and there are not. she knew throughout her entire life, by the people she trusted, the people who were respected in her eyes, the people she loved, the people who knew, she knew were looking out for her, her entire life, and she told those people -- those people told her smoking is going to ruin your life, it is going to kill you, you should stop. not one single time: confused, doubt. plaintiff's generic case. again, dr. cummings. did he render an addiction opinion in this case? did he say ms. wilkinson was addicted? no. he was not even asked to. he was not asked to give that opinion. he comes in, he talks about all regular smokers are addicted, nicotine, cannot quit, and addicted smokers continue to smoke until they develop a smoking-related disease. okay. that is dr. cummings talking about general people. what do we know about ms. wilkinson? barbara walsh, who knew her for over 20 years, said she smoked willingly, willfully and enjoyable. that is her contemporary, the person she is seeing on a regular basis for over 15, 20 years. and what did ms. walsh say about ms. wilkinson? she knew it. she knew what she was doing. she knew that smoking could kill her. how could she not know that smoking could kill her? she knew it could kill her. and the evidence is she could have quit any time, and i'm going to talk more about that. she did quit. and she could have quit at any point in time. mr. rosen discussed documents in the '20s and the '70s about marketing to youth and studying youth. i'm not here to defend that. the question is: what do documents in the 1970s about youth marketing have to do with vivian wilkinson, who was in her 30s and 40s in the 1970s? where is the dot? where is the connection? where is the proof? and ask yourself, why are you hearing evidence about documents in the '70s with respect to youth, when she was 30, 40 years old? no one knows why ms. wilkinson started smoking. mr. wicks, who knew her best, did not have any information about that. he did not have any information about what brand she smoked right out of the box. and we do not know what brand -- we do not know what brand of cigarettes she smoked before the 1960s, when she was an adult, because the only person who gave you testimony about that, first-hand observation, was vivian turner. when she was in elementary school and before that, we do not know what brand she smoked. what did those who knew her tell you about ms. wilkinson? what did the people that knew her tell you? again, ms. walsh. we are going to talk about ms. walsh. willingly, willfully, enjoyably for 50 years, knowing that it could kill her and ruin her life. that is from the family member. i want to start marching through the legal issues and the evidence in this case with the second issue on the verdict form. the second issue on the verdict form is the question of the statute of limitations. it is the only issue in the case that defense has the burden of proof. and it is an issue, as mr. rosen says, that if you resolve this, that the plaintiff's claim is barred by the statute of limitations, the case is over. and that is why i want to address it first. and this is the instruction i'm going to march through. this is the instruction, minus the last paragraph. the last paragraph tells you what the result is if you answer yes or no. this is the meat of the statute of limitations instruction, and i want to go over that with you. ms. wilkinson knew or should have known that she had copd/emphysema, and the date that we know by now is may 5th, 1990. all three pulmonologists in this case, that is, dr. reed, dr. gidel and dr. farber, all three of them agree that she had copd in the 1980s. no dispute in this case that she had the disease. family members and friends, i'm going to show you this, mr. wicks, ms. walsh saw her in the '80s with the hallmark symptoms of copd, and that is shortness of breath. ms. wilkinson knew her shortness of breath was caused by smoking. how do we know that? do we have to guess at that? do we have to speculate about that? how do we know that? she said it. she said it to her brother. and we are going to play that clip. and ms. wilkinson self-treated shortness of breath throughout the 1980s with inhalers. she knew it was caused by smoking. she was using inhalers to help with her shortness of breath. and there is no evidence in this case, zero evidence, for any other explanation for what was causing her shortness of breath other than copd. you heard otherwise healthy. otherwise healthy. excellent health. good health. there is no other explanation for why she was short of breath. barbara, dr. reed, dr. gidel appeared by transcript. so we do not have a picture of them, but they all agreed that she had the disease. and i want to point something out, make this very clear: reynolds does not need to prove that ms. wilkinson was actually diagnosed with copd/emphysema before may 5th, 1990. the issue is not whether there is a medical record, whether we can prove that she had a diagnosis from a doctor prior to may 5th, 1990. the first records we have are in 1993. we do not have to prove that she was actually diagnosed. the issue for purposes of the defense, the critical event is not when she was diagnosed, but when her copd/emphysema first manifested itself. we know when her symptoms first manifested itself. and we know she had the disease, right? we looked at the pft from 1993. the pft showed that she had very severe copd in 1993, in april of 1993. and there was some discussion about whether or not that was at baseline. and we are going to talk about that, whether that pft was at baseline, whether she was at baseline. you heard testimony that you would not give a pft unless somebody was around baseline. why would you do it? why would it help you? the fact of matter is, they gave her a pft, and they gave her a pft because she was around baseline. otherwise, why do it? this is not a debatable proposition. according to her own witnesses, dr. gidel and dr. reed, did she have severe copd in 1993? "it is your opinion that ms. wilkinson had severe copd, correct? "yes. "and based on numbers like this and the spirometry, would you agree it was very severe? "yes." and remember, folks, this is the grading for copd. very severe is less than thirty percent. severe is 30 to 49 percent. so even if for some reason she is straddling the severe/very severe, she had copd. she was diagnosed with severe or very severe copd in may of 1990. and we know from every single witness in the case that she had it in the late 1980s, and i do not have to guess at it. you do not have to guess at it. here is the testimony from dr. reed, who came in to this courtroom. and what did he tell you? "you agree that more likely than not she had some degree of copd in the late 1980s, correct?" and what was his answer? "yes." no hedging. no fudging. yes. the testimony from dr. gidel. he is never seen anyone go from initial symptoms to severe in less than five years. ms. wilkinson had copd. do not have to prove that it was diagnosed. have to prove that the symptoms first manifested itself. the first hurdle is to prove she had the disease. we have proven that she had the disease. we have done it from their own witnesses, from their mouths. she had the disease. and what do we know from dr. gidel? we know that even patients in the moderate range -- let us go back to that. moderate. way down the spectrum. you have got very severe, severe, moderate. are there patients who have moderate copd and do not experience symptoms? and what was his answer? i would say unlikely. unlikely. even patients with moderate copd, according to their own expert witness in this case, the person who treated ms. wilkinson, testified it was unlikely; that somebody with moderate copd should have at least moderate copd in the 1980s. she had symptoms when the disease first manifested itself. was it before may 5th, 1990? barbara walsh's testimony. dan, can you play that? (thereupon, a video clip played as follows:) "question: do you recall ms. wilkinson ever having any difficulty breathing? "answer: yes. "question: do you know approximately when you first observed her having difficulty breathing? "answer: i would say in the late '70s. "question: and how would you describe what you observed about her having difficulty breathing? "answer: that is air, gasping, short gasps, and she used those little inhalers. they were a small amount, but they were pretty good size. you pumped them. i have never used one, so..." (the video clip ended.) mr. hohnbaum: nobody asked her about the inhalers, and she volunteered it. she volunteered that: i saw her having shortness of breath at work, when she was working, and i saw her use the inhalers. she told you that. no one had to ask her a question about whether she was using inhalers. that is what ms. walsh distinctly remembers. what did ms. wilkinson's own brother say about her having symptoms of shortness of breath? would you play that, dan? 3 "question: did you tell vivian that cigarettes were causing her shortness of breath? "answer: yes. "question: did you tell vivian that cigarettes were causing her shortness of breath more than once? "answer: oh, god, yes. oh, yes. "question: did vivian ever deny that cigarettes were causing her shortness of breath? "answer: no, she never denied it. "question: did vivian ever agree with you that cigarettes were causing her shortness of breath? "answer: she knew it, yes. i do not know whether she agreed with me or no, but she knew it. "question: did she -- did vivian verbalize to you that she knew that cigarettes were causing shortness of breath?" (the video clip ended.) mr. hohnbaum: did she verbalize that she knew that cigarettes were causing her shortness of breath? yes. and the testimony from mr. wicks is that shortness of breath was in her 40s. in her 40s. exactly the time period that we are talking about. she had symptoms. you would have to disbelieve her own brother and you would have to disbelieve someone who worked with her and went to her wedding, her daughter's wedding, about her having her symptoms prior to may 5th, 1990, to find for the plaintiff in this case. so let me address this point. she knew or should have known that there was a reasonable possibility that her copd/emphysema was caused by cigarette smoking. okay? mr. wicks just told you. we proved that. she knew her shortness of breath was caused by her smoking. reasonable possibility that her copd/emphysema was caused by cigarette smoking. she was short of breath, and by her own words knew that that was because of her smoking. and it was not just joseph wicks. it was other family members, according to her brother that saw her have shortness of breath, and told her that smoking caused that shortness of breath. we just heard it from mr. wicks, and mr. wicks told you in that same testimony that her sister -- two sisters, kathy and mary ellen, also told her that her shortness of breath was caused by smoking. cigarettes caused it, and i preached that; lay off them, stop it. from mr. wicks' own mouth. so, look, we do not have to prove that she was actually diagnosed. the critical event is when it first manifested itself. the overwhelming weight of evidence is that it first manifested itself prior to may 5th, 1990. the overwhelming evidence says that. and we know from her own mouth that she knew that the cause of her shortness of breath was smoking. so let us talk about the top part: knew or by the exercise of reasonable care knew, exercise of reasonable care, should have known before may 5th that she had the disease. all right? that she had the disease. let us talk about that. what did dr. gidel tell you? he told you that he has had patients who self-medicate with over-the-counter bronchodilators when they have copd. what did ms. walsh say? will you play that, please? 9 "question: did ms. wilkinson -- did you observe ms. wilkinson regularly use an inhaler from the late 1970s until at least through the early 1990s? "answer: yes. yes. "question: you observed her using an inhaler after you became a customer? "answer: oh, yes, yes. "question: and do you know why ms. wilkinson was using the inhaler? "answer: she told me she had a -- in her words, bronchial condition. "question: and did she point to anything or demonstrate anything, what she meant by that? "answer: no. i knew, you know, bronchial had something to do with breathing, and i -- you know, that was -- that was her excuse for using the inhalers. "question: and you remember her using inhalers? "answer: yes. "question: and you remember her using inhalers for how long? "answer: since the late '70s until, i mean -- i mean, every time -- okay. i need to -- okay. where the cash register is here on the bar -- "question: okay. "answer: -- on a pedestal, cabinet, and there is a space around it, her cigarettes would be in one space, and right next to it would be an inhaler." (the video clip ended.) mr. hohnbaum: she knew and remembered precisely where her friend and co-worker, ms. wilkinson, kept her inhaler throughout the '80s. she kept it right on the cash register, next to her cigarettes. she was using an inhaler, and it was making her feel better, and she knew that the shortness of breath that she was having was caused by smoking. this instruction is very important in determining what she knew or by the exercise of reasonable care should have known. sorry. i got turned around. let us talk about barbara walsh. mr. rosen did not say much about barbara walsh. and there is a tension perhaps in the testimony of mr. wilkinson and ms. turner on this point, right? they say they did not observe their mom being short of breath before may -- before her hospitalization in april of 1993, right? that is their testimony. never short of breath. never saw her use an inhaler. then we have the testimony of ms. walsh that she did use an inhaler and she was short of breath. and i have a nine-year-old son. he loves to play -- mr. rosen: objection, move to strike. the court: jury, disregard the last comment, please. mr. hohnbaum: -- with jigsaw puzzles, jigsaw puzzles. the satisfaction of putting that piece of the puzzle together so that it fits. so that it fits. what do we know about barbara walsh? she worked with her, ms. wilkinson, for five years, often saw her at eddie's place when she was a customer, for 15 years. she received the same information that ms. walsh -- ms. wilkinson did, right? they were in the same environment. same generation and background. she was friendly with ms. wilkinson. she described her as nice, intelligent. she said she was a loving mom. she said ms. turner was a loving daughter. she came in and was talking about ms. wilkinson in a nice way. she said she was hard working. barbara walsh has not a single interest in this case. she has absolutely no reason to come into this case and not tell the truth, which is what she swore to do. pieces of the jigsaw puzzle. putting them together. putting them together. how can ms. walsh's testimony be true and the testimony of ms. turner and mr. wilkinson be true? and the fact of the matter is, it is not hard to see how that can be. we know from the testimony that she was not -- ms. wilkinson was not the type to complain about her health. she was not the type to complain about her health. she did not discuss medications with her children. she did not discuss what she was going through. vivian turner did not know she had been hospitalized. did not know that she had been hospitalized. that was on the medical record. her mom made a decision not to share that information with her daughter. ms. wilkinson -- ms. turner did not know she was taking an antibiotic. remember the doxycycline? "did you know your mom was on prescription medication prior to april of '93 when she was in the hospital? "no, i did not know that." they never noticed that she had a health problem before she was hospitalized. and mr. wilkinson: i never talked about the health risks of smoking with her. ms. wilkinson hid for her entire life, until the depositions in this case, the fact that she had three other children. hid from her, ms. turner, and mr. wilkinson, that she was married before, the name of that person. think of the energy and the resolve over the course of their entire life never to share anything about that. and ask yourself: how hard is it to hide an inhaler? you put it in a pocket. you do it in the bathroom. you do it when they are not around. and, of course, when she needed it the most was at work, when she was exerting herself. that is when she needed to use the inhaler. and who is the best witness? who is the one that was around for most at work? it was barbara walsh. we have to look at the undisputed evidence that we all agree to, to know that ms. wilkinson was quite good at hiding her physical discomfort. and why do we know that? in this case, she went in the hospital on april 20th, 1993. according to her children, before that, before that date, she was in excellent health. i have never seen her short of breath. she was doing great. in fact, ms. turner said it was a traumatic event. i had no idea. all of a sudden my mom is in the hospital. she is in the hospital. but what do we know about the six months leading up to it from ms. wilkinson's own mouth? her symptoms were getting progressively worse. she was not doing well. she was taking an antibiotic. she was so short of breath and was having such a problem, she went to the emergency room, which she apparently had never done before, and her children, who were around her, at least ms. turner, around her on a weekly, a couple-of-times-a-week basis, did not notice a thing. did not notice a thing. she did not want them to know. that is how mr. wilkinson and ms. turner are telling you she was in good health. i never saw her use an inhaler. but ms. walsh did. and we know how successful ms. wilkinson was at sharing some parts of her life with her kids and not sharing other parts of her life with her kids. so what did she know before may 5th, 1990? what do we know was on the packs of cigarettes? we know that after 1985, one of the rotating warnings was smoking causes what? emphysema. what did she know? she knew on the packs of cigarettes that smoking causes emphysema, for more than five years before may 5th, 1990. we had this saturday evening post article. mr. wicks said that was one of the publications that he saw in her house, the saturday evening post. emphysema, stalking the susceptible. and this was the checklist. remember we went through this checklist? do i smoke? am i short of breath? you should consult a physician. what do we know about her reading? she read. she was intelligent. she kept up with current events. what was she told from the newspapers? emphysema on the increase. quit smoking. needs treatment. and the disease that takes your breath away. that was the information she was getting. she was getting it on her pack of cigarettes from 1985 on. she was getting it from newspapers. and, of course, she was getting throughout her life that what she was doing was harmful to her. was harmful to her. i know that the smoking was causing my shortness of breath. she knew before may 5th, 1990, that she had copd/emphysema. but, look, even if you determine we have not proven that she knew that she had it before may 5th, 1990, the next clause, we certainly have proven that: by the exercise of reasonable care, she should have known this, she should have known. i jumped the gun before. this is the instruction that i wanted you to see. here is what it tells you about the standard of care: in the exercise of reasonable care, you may consider whether she was negligent in failing to learn that she had copd/emphysema, or that there was a reasonable probability that it was caused by smoking. negligence is the failure to use reasonable care -- here it is; what i want you to focus on -- which is the care that a reasonably careful person would use under like circumstances. for over a decade, she was self-treating with inhalers that she was getting from emergency medical professionals at the bar that she worked and frequented. for over a decade, self-treating. she should have known. by reading the articles, looking at newspapers, by talking to people, by talking to the people in the bar, she should have known. it is a nifty two-step to put up testimony that the tobacco companies were denying it at that point in time. that is not the question. the question is what she knew or should have known. what she knew or should have known. and we know what she was experiencing. and what would a reasonable careful person have done sometime in the decade or so that she is using an inhaler to treat the symptoms? what would a reasonable person do? a reasonable person goes to a doctor. sometime in there, go to a doctor. she is using an inhaler. what do you do? you go to a doctor. the inhalers, ladies and gentlemen, were working. why would she use them? they were making her feel better. they were helping her symptoms. why would you use something over a decade if it was not helping you? that is the recognition: that i've got a problem; this medication, this prescription medication is helping the problem. a reasonable person goes and sees a doctor. and what we know from the testimony on the witness stand was that if she had gone to a doctor and said, i smoke, i'm using an inhaler, it is helping me feel better, i'm getting shortness of breath at my work, what would that doctor have done? he would have done a pft, and we already know what that pft would have shown by the testimony of dr. reed, dr. gidel and dr. farber: it would have shown that, in fact, she had copd, all well before may 5th, 1990. a reasonable person experiencing those symptoms figures out what the problem is, or goes to a doctor and is diagnosed. this was from the opening. mr. rosen did something similar to this about our statute of limitations defense. remember he had barbara walsh on one side and the slide in the closing was checkmarked next to everybody else. but, look, joseph wicks, his testimony is spot on. she had symptoms prior to may 5th, 1990. she knew it was caused by smoking. joseph wicks supports the defense's statute of limitations. dr. gidel supports the statute of limitations: unlikely, very unlikely not to have symptoms, and certainly more likely than not had the disease prior to may 5th, 1990. she supports the defense. dr. reed, the same thing: she had the disease in the '90s. symptoms of shortness of breath are clearly related. and the medical records do not refute it. they support it, right? you cannot go from very severe or severe copd in 1993 overnight. it takes years to develop. those medical records of the severity of the disease in '93 and '98 support, and do not refute it, that she had the disease, and it was significant enough to cause symptoms. this is the law. this is the law to follow in this case. and the fact is we have proven by the greater weight of the evidence that ms. wilkinson knew or in the exercise of reasonable care should have known before may 5th, 1990, that she had copd/emphysema. can you flip this on? thank you. you have got the verdict form. you will have the verdict form. these are the questions that you will have to ask -- you will have to answer, okay? and the second question, that is the one i've been talking about: did vivian wilkinson know or by the exercise of reasonable care should have known that she had copd/emphysema, and that there was a reasonable possibility that the copd/emphysema was caused by cigarette smoke? and the answer is yes. thank you. okay. let me talk about the first issue on the verdict form: class membership. the plaintiff has to prove addiction and addiction causation. two components to that. must prove that she was addicted to nicotine, and even if they prove to your satisfaction by the greater weight of the evidence that she was addicted, they also have to prove that that addiction, as opposed to her decision to keep smoking, was a legal cause of her death from copd. and, again, this is the plaintiff's burden. the only burden of proof we have is on issue two on the verdict form. this is their burden of proof, and they have to do it like with everything else, like we just marched through with that: with evidence, with facts. let us talk about addiction. did plaintiff prove that ms. wilkinson was medically addicted? not addicted in the common sense of the word, not addicted in what you might think it means, not addicted in what somebody might think, but what a professional -- mr. rosen: your honor, i'm going to object. mr. hohnbaum: -- who diagnoses -- the court: sustained. mr. hohnbaum: -- what a professional -- mr. rosen: move to strike. the court: i sustained the objection, counsel. mr. hohnbaum: did plaintiff prove that she was medically -- mr. rosen: again, move to strike, your honor. it is not the proper standard. the court: counsel, go ahead. mr. hohnbaum: here is what they brought you. dr. drobes. he has not treated a patient in 13 years. he is a researcher. no harm in that. noble calling. somebody who spends his time doing research. for the last 13 years, he is not treated any patients for any sort of addiction, and he is not, by his own admission, a medical doctor. dr. reed, he came in and he told you that ms. wilkinson was addicted. but i asked him: do you consider yourself to be an expert on addiction? and what was his answer? no. he was very forthright about that. and, of course, he was not -- he is not a psychiatrist, has not been trained. and, of course, by the time she got to dr. reed, what did his notes say? she had already quit. so, of course, he did not treat her because she had already quit smoking. and dr. cummings, who, in fact, does see patients, has seen patients, written stop-smoking guides, did dr. cummings, with that level of expertise, "world-renowned" i think is the word we heard, did he give an opinion about whether or not ms. wilkinson was addicted? no, he did not. he did not have any information about her. this is one of the tests that dr. drobes used with you: the fagerstrom test. this test, as dr. barnett said, is not used to diagnose people with nicotine addiction. in fact, it assumes that whoever is taking the test is addicted, and at the bottom it says: how addicted are you? very low level to very high level. and there are questions on there that he answered -- this is one of those points where i asked him -- mr. keehfus asked him that first question: how soon after you get up do you start smoking? that is one of those questions you are not sure how that fits in. and he said: well, she does it within the first five minutes. but then when you drill down on that, the fact of the matter is no one knows -- no one testified to how soon she smoked when she got up. and so he is crediting that she smoked within the five minutes without any testimony. and why, if all you need to establish is that somebody smoked a pack a day for a year, five years, 10 years, 40 years, if all you need is quantity, why did it take him going through this test, why did it take him hours to talk about it? because more is required than just quantity. more is required than that. dr. barnett, the only psychiatrist to diagnose ms. -- to assess ms. wilkinson for nicotine addiction. the only psychiatrist. like dr. drobes, she applied what? the american psychiatric association diagnostic and statistical manual no. 5, put out by psychiatrists, used by psychiatrists. dr. drobes is not a psychiatrist. and she went through the criteria for you, and she said she was not addicted to the nicotine in cigarettes. she also said that half of all daily smokers are not addicted. half are, half are not. people who smoke -- a quantity -- if it just was, you have to smoke a pack a day for a certain number of years, check, that would be a pretty simple exercise. and it is not simple. it requires clinical judgment, is what dr. barnett told you. and it is what dr. drobes told you. it takes clinical judgment to determine whether or not someone meets the criteria under the dsm-iv. and, of course, we know that people smoke for reasons other than addiction. we know that people smoke for reasons other than nicotine. dr. barnett listed those. people enjoy the smell, enjoy the taste, they enjoy the ritual. it is satisfying to them. and we know that ms. wilkinson smoked. witnesses on the stand and through the videos said she enjoyed smoking. she smoked for social reasons. she liked going to the bar. she went to the bar that she worked at, where 95 percent of the customers smoked, even when she was not working there. she liked -- she liked to smoke. she liked to socialize with people at the bar. and she never told anyone that he was addicted. she never said, i'm addicted. ms. wilkinson was not addicted. that is the reason to answer that question "no." but even if you find that she was addicted, that is not the end of the analysis, because the instruction could not be clearer that you have to prove that the addiction -- that but for an addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine, the copd/emphysema would not have occurred. it is not enough just to establish that she was addicted. and this is a helpful way to look at it: did she have the ability to quit and chose to continue smoking, or was she compelled to smoke, leaving her no choice and becoming just sort of a robot that had to have the next cigarette. and here is what we know from the witnesses: addiction does not prevent smokers from quitting. addicted smokers can and do quit. any smoker, any smoker can quit. of course, we know she never tried to quit while she was smoking rj reynolds cigarettes. the first evidence that we have in this case that she started -- that she tried to quit was in the late '70s. millions and millions and millions and millions of people have quit smoking. heavily addicted smokers quit smoking. you can quit smoking. she could quit smoking. look, were the cigarettes she was smoking different than the cigarette that was smoked by the 60 million people who quit? of course it was not. did if affect her brain differently? were they exposed to advertising any differently? did she smoke longer? no. was she different from her brother, who we know chose to quit, and quit? of course not. she made the choice to continue to smoke. what do we know about her? what do we know about this woman? we know she was strong-willed, hard to move off an idea, intelligent, independent. she did what she wanted to do. this is what i was going to do. that is the type of woman that she was. if she set her mind to quit, she would have quit. of course, we know at some point in time she did have some problem with alcohol. it ruined her first marriage. she conquered that, managed that. she was able to work through that and successfully deal with it. what do we know, keith malloy never saw her try to quit. vivian turner never saw until early -- try to quit in the '60s. ms. walsh, her contemporary, ms. walsh never, in the '70s, '80s or '90s, the person she came back to the bar with and hung out with, the patron at the bar, never tried to quit, never talked about quitting, never said it was hard, never saw her try to quit. of course, what do the medical records say? she did quit. she quit starting at least by april/may of 1998. she did stop. dr. reed, i went through the whole exercise with him: "are those records accurate that she quit?" what did he say? "yes." and every record after that said that she quit. if somebody comes into the emergency room, that they have been smoking, do people know that they are smoking? can they smell it? of course they can smell it. he said: my records are accurate. she quit. the first issue on the verdict form: was she addicted? and even if so, was the addiction the legal cause of her chronic obstructive pulmonary disease/emphysema? the answer to that question is "no." it is "no" on addicted, and "no" on addiction causation. can you go back, please? the last question i'm going to address, and then i'm going to turn it over to mr. keehfus, the third issue on the verdict form: was smoking cigarettes manufactured by rj reynolds a legal cause of her copd/emphysema and death? there is only one defendant in this case: it is rj reynolds. this is the instruction. like with all of this, that is your guide. that is the law of the case that you have been instructed by the judge you must follow and that you have agreed to follow. the copd must be caused by reynolds' products. there is no evidence that she was ever impacted by advertising. did you ever see -- you heard a part on that by philip morris, but not by rj reynolds. never heard a statement by anyone at rj reynolds. no evidence that she started smoking a reynolds product when she started smoking. no evidence that she smoked a light cigarette manufactured by rj reynolds, or a low-tar cigarette. she smoked parliament for more than 20 years, from 1975 until 1998. the only light cigarette -- you heard testimony about lights -- was parliament light. and how long did she smoke it? intermittently, on and off for a year. we talked about this in openings. is it seven years? is it six years? is it 10 years? it is in that ballpark, ladies and gentlemen of the jury. and we know that smoking cigarettes for seven years, eight years, nine years, 10 years, is not enough. it is not sufficient to cause copd. not likely to cause it. and you heard from dr. farber that she would have developed copd/emphysema anyway, because you take that time period out, the six years, is it five years, is it 10 years, you take that time period out, and she still would have gotten copd/emphysema. of course she would have. she smoked for 50 years. was smoking cigarettes manufactured by rj reynolds tobacco company a legal cause of ms. wilkinson's copd/emphysema and death? the answer to that question is "no." thank you again for your service, and i'm going to turn it over to mr. keehfus. thank you. mr. keehfus: may it please the court. good afternoon, ms. turner, counsel. good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen. jurors: good afternoon. mr. keehfus: i have the pleasure today to discuss with you the remaining questions on the verdict form, the questions that you are going to decide in this case. and those will be questions 4 through question 8. now, you should not get this far, because as mr. hohnbaum explained, the evidence demonstrates that you should return a defense verdict on the issue of statute of limitations, question 2. and further as mr. hohnbaum described to you, there has been a failure of proof, a complete failure of proof on the plaintiff's part that ms. wilkinson was a class member. but i have an obligation to discuss all of the issues in the case. so in the event that you do get this far, i'm going to discuss with you why there has been a complete failure of proof on the rest of plaintiff's claims. i'm going to start with questions 4 and 5 because they go together. and those are plaintiff's claims of concealment and agreement to conceal. and, ladies and gentlemen, you heard judge murphy read the instructions to you this morning. those instructions in this case are critical. no matter what it is in our lives, whether it is putting together legos, whether it is fixing your toilet at the house, whether it is putting in a new flood light, the instructions tell you everything that you need to know. and this case is no different. the legal instructions that the judge has read to you tell you everything you need to know to answer the claims in this case. those are the legal principles and the legal rules that you have to apply to the facts that you have been presented to render your verdict, the facts that you have been presented, not argument. as the judge instructed you, lawyer argument is not evidence. rhetoric, catch phrases are not evidence. you need proof. you need facts to apply. for example, a lawyer saying that ms. wilkinson relied on concealment and that reliance was a legal cause of her copd/emphysema is not evidence. that is not facts. that is an argument. so we are going to look at the facts, because the instructions are critical. and because the instructions tell you what you need to know to answer these claims, i want to take a look at those. this is instruction no. 15 in your booklet. number 15. and instruction 15 and instruction 16 go together. they deal with those questions, no. 4 and no. 5, on concealment and agreement to conceal. and what i would like to do is highlight three very important parts of instruction no. 15 for you. again, these are the rules that will guide you in your determination. and what you were instructed on plaintiff's claim for fraudulent concealment is that the issue for your determination is whether vivian wilkinson reasonably relied to her detriment on any statement of material fact by rj reynolds tobacco company that concealed or omitted material information not otherwise known or available, not otherwise known or available, concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes. that is the first critical part of the instruction. the second part, we are going to focus on as we go along is that of material facts. we know that the plaintiffs have to prove a material fact, that something that was concealed was material. it was a game-changer. what does that mean? a material fact, as you were instructed, is one that is of such importance that ms. wilkinson would not have acted as she did but for the concealment or omission of that fact. it is one -- it is one of such importance that she would not have acted as she did. that is plaintiff's burden, to prove to you with evidence that but for concealment of some fact, ms. wilkinson would not have acted as she did, she would not have continued to smoke. if she had known that material fact, she would have changed her behavior by quitting smoking. that is the inquiry when you get to question 4: did the plaintiff prove to you with evidence that ms. wilkinson would have changed her behavior had she known something else. they did not. there is a complete failure of proof on that point. and we will discuss that. the third section i would like to highlight of this instruction is critical. ms. wilkinson cannot be found to have reasonably relied on a statement if she knew it was false or its falsity was obvious to her, or if the fact allegedly concealed was already known to her. she cannot be found to have relied, if that fact, allegedly concealed -- if she already knew it. so those are the three critical parts of this instruction that we need to keep in mind as we go through the verdict form. and the plaintiffs very simply have failed to prove concealment. they failed to prove that ms. wilkinson relied on some tobacco industry statement that concealed or omitted information that she did not already know. they have to prove this connection, this link between statements the tobacco industry made and ms. wilkinson's conduct and ms. wilkinson's injuries. and they failed to do that. there is zero evidence in this case. again, the instructions are important, because they tell you, you cannot conceal what someone already knows. and that makes perfect sense. you cannot take that knowledge away from someone after she knows it. you cannot conceal something from someone who already knows that fact from another source. you cannot hide something in plain sight. plaintiff has to prove that a statement made by rj reynolds reached ms. wilkinson and it impacted her in a material way, in order to succeed on this claim. they failed to do that. why did they fail to do that? we know. we know from your instruction, she cannot rely on a statement if the fact that was allegedly concealed was already known to her. as mr. hohnbaum briefly explained earlier this afternoon, and i'm going to go into more detail, ms. wilkinson was warned about and knew the dangers of smoking her entire life. that information was known and available to her throughout her life. what was the evidence on that? in summary, ms. wilkinson knew that smoking was dangerous in the 1940s. she knew that smoking could kill her in the 1940s. and she never disputed that smoking was dangerous and addictive; not once throughout her entire life. you cannot conceal something from -- you cannot conceal from someone when she already knows it, and ms. wilkinson knew it. you heard several times in this case about doubt, confusion. there was no doubt and no confusion. there was no evidence that ms. wilkinson ever expressed doubt or confusion about the dangers of smoking. instead, she verbalized to those around her that she understood those dangers. ladies and gentlemen, if there is one fact in this case that is beyond dispute, ms. wilkinson understood the dangers of smoking since the time she started smoking. how do we know that? well, we have the testimony from her brother joseph wicks. 21 "question: when you were growing up, did your parents allow you to smoke in the house? "answer: no, i never smoked. my daddy would not allow that, period. "question: what did your dad say to you about smoking when you were growing up? "answer: i can remember, when he caught me and my brother sneaking his cigarettes, and he made us set down and smoke a pack, and we almost died. i do remember that. "question: did he say anything to you when he caught you smoking? "answer: yes. you know, he was always against that. bad health, you know, ruin your health, ruin your life. "question: did your father tell you that cigarettes were bad for your health? "answer: yes. "question: did your father tell you that cigarettes would ruin your life? "answer: yes. "question: did he tell you those things more than once when you were growing up? "answer: lots of times. lots of times. "question: were you the only sibling that your father told those things to? "answer: no. my brother, too. i'm pretty sure he lectured my sisters, too. "question: your father was an equal opportunity lecturer on the subject? "answer: yes "question: do you think that your father told you that cigarettes were bad for your health more than 10 times when you were growing up? "answer: oh, god, yes. oh, yes. "question: it is something that he told you a lot, huh? "answer: a lot. "question: did your father continue to tell you that cigarettes were bad for your health after you were an adult? "answer: yes. i can remember when i came back from world war ii, i went to meet my dad." (the video clip ended.) mr. keehfus: ladies and gentlemen, this was the environment that ms. wilkinson grew up in, the environment where her parents did not allow smoking; where her father was such a staunch antismoking advocate when he discovered her brothers smoking that he sat them down and made them smoke an entire pack of cigarettes. and you heard how mr. wicks reacted to that. you heard a lot about the culture back then, how things were different. in ms. wilkinson's home, that was the culture; the culture of smoking being prohibited, and her father telling her and her siblings that smoking would ruin your life. that was the culture. that was the environment ms. wilkinson grew up in. that was the information known to her. as mr. hohnbaum told you the evidence is overwhelming that ms. wilkinson lived in a world of warnings, surrounded by warnings from every source: family, friends, pop culture, slang, her sister, her own body. ms. wilkinson knew. she knew smoking was dangerous. and she knew it for 50 years. that is the information that ms. wilkinson knew. she cannot be found to have reasonably relied on a statement if the fact allegedly concealed was already known to her. you heard the testimony of ms. walsh. i do not think we need to play it again. but you heard the testimony of ms. walsh that their boss, wanda sarussi, at eddie's place, sat them down and had a very frank and candid conversation with them about the dangers of smoking. you will recall ms. walsh testified that ms. sarussi had quit smoking. she talked to both of them, ms. walsh and ms. wilkinson, together. and she said: quit smoking. what else did she say? a familiar refrain in ms. wilkinson's life. ms. sarussi told her: smoking will ruin her life, just like her father has told her, just like joseph wicks had told her. ms. sarussi just confirmed what ms. wilkinson already knew: smoking was dangerous, and it would ruin her life. and she chose to continue smoking. and ms. walsh was right there for the conversation. she was able to observe ms. wilkinson's reactions. and what did she testify to? i'm sure she knew. of course she knew. the evidence is overwhelming that she knew, and there is been no attempt to say that ms. wilkinson did not know the dangers of smoking. it was not simply in ms. wilkinson's home. the dangerous and addictive nature of cigarettes has been public knowledge for more than 100 years. that is what dr. cummings told you on cross-examination. now a word about dr. cummings. he is the witness the plaintiffs -- the first live witness the plaintiff's brought; and as you heard, he is the witness that travels from courtroom to courtroom testifying against tobacco companies. he is testified in over 80 trials against tobacco companies. and he is been doing it for 20 years. and this is what he conceded on cross-examination. now, it was not always easy. mr. hohnbaum, over 20 times, had to show him his prior sworn testimony, but this is what he conceded: for over 100 years, the public has known nicotine occurs naturally in tobacco; that it can be difficult to quit smoking; smoking is dangerous and addictive; and tobacco use can cause cancer. remember, the plaintiff has to prove reliance on a statement that concealed information not otherwise known or available. this was known and available for over 100 years. what else did dr. cummings tell you? by 1954, virtually everyone knew that smoking caused disease. and we know in this case, ms. wilkinson knew 10 years prior to that, when she was growing up in the 1940s. that was the testimony that you just heard from mr. wicks. mr. wicks told you when he came back from the war, he started warning her that smoking would kill her. ten years prior to 1954. now in 1954, ms. wilkinson was 21 years old. she had three children and was married. she was an adult. dr. cummings told you that this conspiracy to conceal started in december of 1953; and then in cross-examination, conceded that by 1954, virtually everyone knew smoking could cause disease. known and available. the public had been extensively warned prior to 1964. dr. leroy burney, the surgeon general at the time, in the moment, in real time, in 1957, dr. burney said: the message is getting out. we have informed the public. dr. heller, the national cancer institute, similar. boots on the ground. in 1957, not looking back 40 years, he was there in real time: excellent job covering the problem, and a very objective job, a valuable way of informing the public. the message was out there. this information was known and available. what were smokers doing with that information? well, we know millions of highly addicted smokers quit before ms. wilkinson ever smoked an rj reynolds cigarette. you can see on this timeline. between 1950 and 1965, over 17 million people quit. between 1964 and 1979, 30 million people in that 15 years quit; two million people every year. the information was out there, and people were making a decision to quit. now, there was some discussion in this case about the warning labels that went on in 1966. you may recall dr. cummings' testimony about what little effect they had. but on cross-examination, he conceded that between 1966 and 1970, 13 million people quit in those four years. in those four years, after that warning label on went on, 13 million people quit. what did dr. cummings say? that was the largest four-year decline in american history. the message was out there; the information about the dangers of smoking was known; it was available to ms. wilkinson; and it was getting through to people. dr. cummings conceded that virtually everyone had heard about the 1964 surgeon general's report at that time. how do we know that? well, the evidence was it was major news across the country, and in florida. you may recall that map of florida that showed the newspaper articles north to south, from tallahassee to miami, and east to west. every major newspaper in florida covered the story above the fold, front page, publicizing the conclusions of the 1964 surgeon general's report that smoking was a cause of cancer. the information was known, and it was available. and we know that ms. wilkinson heard about the 1964 surgeon general's report because her brother told her about it. he learned about it in 1964, and he told his entire family, including ms. wilkinson, about the surgeon general's report. you cannot conceal something from someone when they already know. that is the instruction you have been given. there is warnings by the public health community. dr. daniel horn, in 1968, he was one of the famous researchers that you heard about that worked with the american cancer society, one of the leading experts on the dangers of smoking in the 1950s, '60s and '70s. this is what he said: you can stand on a rooftop and shout "smoking is dangerous" at the top of your lungs. you would not be telling anyone anything that they did not already know. no one needed to stand on a rooftop at ms. wilkinson's house because she already knew it. by 1968, she had known for over 20 years that smoking was dangerous. we know the warning labels were on cigarettes. every pack of reynolds' cigarettes, anyone who saw ms. wilkinson smoke, carried a federally mandated warning label. there is no dispute that ms. wilkinson saw those warning labels at least 20 times a day. she picked up that pack of cigarettes 20 times a day. can there be any dispute that she saw that warning label? she continued to smoke. and that was her choice. the court instructed you regarding the warning labels that after july 1, 1969, those warning labels are adequate as a matter of law and cannot be challenged. the only advertisement that any witness recalled ms. wilkinson seeing was after 1969. why is that important? because after 1969, every cigarette advertisement -- i'm sorry, after 1971, every cigarette advertisement had a warning label. every one, including the parliament ad. the one parliament ad you heard about carried a surgeon general's warning label, saying that the surgeon general has determined that cigarette smoking is dangerous to your health. the information was known and it was available. let us talk about advertising for a minute, because you some saw evidence about that. what did not you see? well, there was no evidence that advertising caused ms. wilkinson to begin smoking. there was no evidence, there were no facts presented to you that advertising caused ms. wilkinson to begin smoking. as mr. hohnbaum pointed out earlier, no one knows why ms. wilkinson began smoking. but there is certainly no evidence that advertising caused her to start smoking. no witness mentioned that ms. wilkinson saw any reynolds advertisement. we know that cigarette advertising was legal. and you have an instruction in your booklet that says that: the manufacture, sale and advertising of cigarettes is legal. that is an issue that our congress has decided. and we know that all advertising had warnings starting in the early 1970s, years before ms. wilkinson tried to quit. now, let us talk about this one parliament advertisement that mr. wilkinson recalled at the beauty parlor. that was the only evidence you heard about ms. wilkinson seeing an advertisement in this case. and the testimony was that she saw this advertisement sometime in the 1970s, 30 years after she had been warned. she had received 30 consecutive years of warnings about the dangers of smoking before there is any evidence that she saw the cigarette advertisement. by the time she saw this advertisement in the 1970s, her brother had been warning her; she had heard about the 1964 surgeon general's report; she knew that smoking was dangerous. and there is no evidence that that advertisement had any impact on her whatsoever. there is no evidence that that advertisement was material in her decision to continue smoking. there is no evidence that ms. wilkinson was going to stop smoking if she had not seen that one parliament advertisement issued by philip morris, who is not a defendant in this case. you heard dr. cummings testify that cigarette advertising was wallpaper. well, dr. cummings was never in ms. wilkinson's home, because we know that wallpaper was not in her house. instead, she was surrounded by warnings. she was surrounded by personalized, direct and candid warnings from her family and friends throughout her entire life. there was discussion about filters and lights, and it was suggested to you that ms. wilkinson smoked filtered cigarettes because she thought they were safer. you will recall that testimony. the only time that testimony was mentioned was during the cross-examination of dr. barnett. at no other time. ms. turner did not tell you that ms. wilkinson smoked filtered cigarettes because she thought they were safer. mr. wilkinson did not tell you that ms. wilkinson -- mr. rosen: your honor, i object. the court: what is the objection? mr. rosen: i was precluded from asking the question. hearsay. the court: sustained. rephrase, counsel. mr. keehfus: certainly. ladies and gentlemen, the only time you heard that evidence was on the cross-examination of dr. barnett. there was no specific evidence on that point. what do we know about the generic filters and lights case that you heard? we know that ms. wilkinson smoked light cigarettes for less than a year in the late 1980s. less than a year. and we know that the evidence is that when she did smoke lights, she switched back and forth between lights and regular full-flavored cigarettes. is someone who is switching to light cigarettes because she thinks they are safer then going to go and switch back to full-flavored cigarettes? that does not make any sense. less than a year in the late 1980s, those filtered and light cigarettes carried the exact same warning label as every other cigarette. during this one year in the late 1980s, plaintiff claims that ms. wilkinson was still trying to quit. why is she trying to quit if she thinks that light cigarettes are safer? she did not think that. she was smoking light cigarettes because she liked light cigarettes. and then she went back to her regular brand. the only brand of light cigarettes ms. wilkinson smoked was parliament light, not a product made by rj reynolds. and we know from dr. cummings' cross-examination, the public health community, during ms. wilkinson's life, concluded that filtered and lower tar cigarettes were safer, and they encouraged people to quit smoking or switch to them. that was the message coming from the public health community in the 1970s and the 1980s. plaintiff's generic evidence on filters and lights has nothing to do with this case. ladies and gentlemen, i submit to you, it does not help you answer a single question on your verdict form. this is all of the evidence you heard from dr. cummings, a day and a half of statements, press releases, video clips. not a single shred of evidence that ms. wilkinson saw or was impacted by it at all. remember, in your concealment instruction, she has to have relied on a statement that concealed a material fact, something that would have impacted her, it would have changed her; that she had seen it, she would have changed her behavior. there is simply no evidence of that. we asked ms. turner and mr. wilkinson on the stand -- you may have wondered why, why would we ask about statements by the tobacco research committee or the council for tobacco research. we asked both of them: did your mother ever discuss with you any statements made by any of these entities? and the answer was "no" every single time. that is the evidence that you have in the record before you. that is the evidence that you have to apply to the law that the judge has instructed you on. this is, again, a material fact instruction. this is your guide. this is your instruction book that will help you navigate through the verdict form. and you see there the material fact instruction: would not have acted as she did if not for the statement concealed. they have not proven a statement that she saw or was impacted by; and they have not proven that she would not have acted as she did but for that statement. now, on this issue of material information, what we do know is, we do have evidence of how ms. wilkinson did respond when she was given warnings. we know how she reacted when people warned her about the dangers of smoking. what was the evidence? when ms. sarussi told her you need to quit smoking, it is going to ruin your life, ms. walsh told you she fluffed it off. she did not at that point try and change her behavior. she did not at that point say, you know what, i'm going to try to quit. instead, she fluffed it off. barbara walsh told you it did not matter, it did not matter, she was going to do what she wanted to do. and she did it willingly, willfully and enjoyably. ladies and gentlemen, ms. wilkinson did not develop copd/emphysema because the health effects or addictive nature of cigarettes were unknown or unavailable to her. the evidence is relentless. it is consistent and continuous. ms. wilkinson knew the dangers of smoking. that information was available to her, surrounded her, her entire life. and you cannot conceal something from somebody that they already know. ms. wilkinson knew that cigarettes could kill her. what more did she need to know? those stark warnings she got in the 1940s, cigarettes can kill you, she knew it. was there any evidence in this case, any evidence whatsoever that she needed to know that there was ammonia in cigarettes and that would have been the game-changer for her? there is no evidence of that. was there any evidence in this case that she needed to know that flue-cured tobacco was in cigarettes and, you know, that was going to be the material fact that made her quit smoking? mr. rosen: your honor, i again object to this. the court: sustained. mr. hohnbaum: there is no evidence in this case that ms. wilkinson was waiting on tobacco company -- mr. rosen: objection, your honor. the court: ladies and gentlemen, rely on your own recollection of the evidence. proceed, counsel. mr. keehfus: ms. wilkinson had that information. she had the information about the dangers of smoking. what more did she need to know? there has been a complete failure of proof to you on that. the evidence is overwhelming that ms. wilkinson knew the health effects and addictive nature. you cannot conceal what she already knew. for those reasons, ladies and gentlemen, remember, questions 4 and 5, there is similar analysis for both on the question of concealment, reliance on concealment, and the same question on reliance on agreement to conceal. the same analysis, the same answer. and when you get to those questions, we submit to you that your answer should be "no." okay. question 6. again, i submit to you that you should not get this far, but if you do, i would like to discuss with you the evidence and how it fits into the instructions that you have been given. and this is the question of fault that you assign that was a legal cause of ms. wilkinson's injuries. a legal cause of her injuries. the assignment of fault relates only to those actions that were a legal cause of ms. wilkinson's emphysema and death. the assignment of fault can only be related to the conduct the plaintiff linked up or connected to ms. wilkinson specifically with facts. now, dr. cummings showed you some stuff; some wrong stuff, some bad stuff. but that is not the issue before you. the issue before you is what kind or actions were a legal cause of ms. wilkinson's injuries. stated a different way, reynolds cannot be assigned fault for actions that were not a legal cause of ms. wilkinson's copd/emphysema or death. and the engle findings do not establish that reynolds is at fault for ms. wilkinson's copd or death. it is not a comparison of choices; it is not a comparison of whose choices are worse. the assignment of fault relates only to that specific conduct that you find was a legal cause of ms. wilkinson's injuries. now, it was suggested to you earlier this morning that perhaps ms. wilkinson had as little as ten percent fault. ten percent fault. but the evidence demonstrates that ms. wilkinson was the only cause of her copd/emphysema. ms. wilkinson chose to smoke for decades without making a serious quit attempt. decades. she was not confused about the dangers and addictive nature of smoking. she knew that information her entire life. every smoker has the ability to quit, including ms. wilkinson. and ms. wilkinson had the responsibility to quit smoking if she wanted to do that. the court: five minutes, counsel. mr. keehfus: ms. wilkinson could have quit smoking at a time that prevented her death. as dr. cummings told you, a smoker is fully responsible for making the choice to quit. and, ladies and gentlemen, when you get this question on the verdict form, i submit to you, state the percentage of any fault that was a legal cause, that ms. wilkinson's actions were the only legal cause of her copd/emphysema. you heard plaintiff's claim for damages. plaintiffs asked for $2 million in damages each. you will be instructed that any damages must be just in light of the evidence, and plaintiff has the burden to prove every dollar. plaintiff is not seeking damages for ms. wilkinson's four other children, her pain and suffering, loss of wages, funeral expenses, her support and services. the plaintiff failed to prove that ms. turner and ms. wilkinson are entitled to $4 million because their mother chose to smoke, despite knowing the dangers her entire life. respectfully, ladies and gentlemen, plaintiff's claim for $4 million defies common sense. remember, in reaching your verdict you were instructed, do not let bias or sympathy play a role. finally, on this verdict form, question no. 9, punitive damages. you remember that punitive damages can be awarded only for concealment that was a legal cause of ms. wilkinson's death. you may not punish reynolds for harm suffered by anyone other than ms. wilkinson. it is a very specific inquiry on the conduct that you find to be connected to ms. wilkinson. punitive damages are in addition to damages that fully compensate the plaintiff and mr. eugene wilkinson. and they can be awarded only to vivian turner and eugene wilkinson, not to anyone else, not to any other organizations. punitive damages only go to the plaintiff and mr. wilkinson. and it is clear and convincing evidence. it is the higher burden. it is the highest burden we have in civil trials. plaintiff has to prove to you by clear and convincing evidence that, without hesitation, they have met their burden, their higher burden. and what does that mean? that means when you are deliberating, if there is any hesitation or doubt plaintiff has not met their burden to prove to you entitlement to punitive damages. you may not consider the engle findings in determining whether punitive damages are warranted, and they do not establish that plaintiff is entitled to punitive damages. this is the key point: mitigating evidence. you may consider mitigating evidence in determining punitive damages. what did you hear from dr. cummings? the fda has regulatory control over the tobacco industry since 2009. the federal government has regulatory control over the tobacco industry since 2009. you have seen the warning labels. you have heard from dr. cummings: ctr funded $500 million of research, published scientific and medical articles, 600 articles in the surgeon general's reports, 10 nobel prize winners, funded research at ivy league institutions and universities around florida. should reynolds be punished? the evidence clearly is no. you saw ctr funded this article in 1963 which concluded that cigarette smoking was addictive, sponsored in part by grants of the american cancer society and the tobacco industry research committee. in 1963, they funded that research. you heard about premier and eclipse, reynolds' efforts to develop a safer cigarette. dr. cummings admitted to you there is no such thing as a safer cigarette; but he also told you that reynolds has tried to reduce the level of cancer-causing chemicals in cigarettes since the 1950s. they started this heat-not-burn technology to try to make a safer cigarette. they spent over a billion dollars to develop a less harmful cigarette, but it failed because people did not like the taste. and dr. cummings told you developing a safer cigarette was a responsible thing to do; and he told you that just because premier failed, reynolds did not stop. they tried to do it again later with that cigarette called eclipse. they kept trying. it demonstrates that reynolds should not be punished. you heard about youth smoking. what did dr. cummings admit? youth smoking rates have drastically plummeted. florida has the second lowest youth smoking rate in the country, after utah. today, 93 percent of florida high school students are not smoking, even a single cigarette in a month. that is youth smoking today. in florida, nine out of 10 high school students not smoking even a cigarette in a month. ladies and gentlemen, when you get to the question of compensatory damages, we submit to you the answer should be zero for ms. turner and mr. wilkinson. and when you get to the question for the entitlement to punitive damages, the plaintiff has not met that higher burden of clear and convincing evidence, and your verdict should be "no," if you get that far on the verdict form. ladies and gentlemen to wrap up, this case is about one smoker, ms. wilkinson, who smoked for 50 years, knowing smoking could kill her and ruin her life. i thank you on behalf of our team, on behalf of plaintiffs and everybody, thank you for your time, your attention, being prompt every day. we so appreciate it. the system would not work if it was not for you. when you came to the courthouse, you guys did not choose to be on this case, but you were selected. we thank you for your diligent attention. the only thing we ask of you when you go back into that jury room, take your guide book, your instructions; you apply the legal principles embodied in these instructions; you apply them to the facts presented here; and we ask that you return a complete defense verdict, based on the overwhelming presentation in this case for rj reynolds. thank you very much.