4 mr. rosen: it has been just shy of two weeks since we started this process, just shy of two weeks, and i think we are actually a little bit ahead of schedule. so that is good. i tried to move quickly through witnesses, and i know sometimes things got a little bit slow, but i hope that we presented some interesting, unique issues, you got to learn some science, medicine, and that you got to see some great witnesses in this case. the information that you now have, you know, i really -- thinking about this, you probably have more information about the tobacco industry and smoking and health than probably 99 percent of the us population. i feel confident in that. and that information is powerful. okay? because i think -- i think i said this early on in the case: what you thought you knew about cigarettes and about smokers and about the cigarette industry might be very, very different than what you learned in this courtroom. i want to thank every one of you for your patience and for sacrificing and being here on behalf of vivian and william. we thank you. all right. and so now we are coming to the end of this case, for you to make a decision and to decide the outcome of who wins, who loses, what is right, what is wrong. and so what is going to happen in probably a couple of hours is you are going to go back to that jury room and you are going to get a verdict form. the judge read you these instructions, and you are going to have to review all of those instructions. you are going to have the verdict form. the way i'm going to try to go through it is as succinctly as possible. you are going to have the verdict form. i'm going to run through it right now with you to understand what the issues are and what we are going to be talking about. you heard and saw a lot of evidence. you heard a lot of evidence about the tobacco industry, and you heard and saw a lot of evidence about vivian wilkinson. you heard about the engle class and what we need to prove and whose burden it is to prove who is an engle class member. so we are going to start. hopefully, it works. about class membership: "was vivian wilkinson addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine, and if so, was that addiction a cause, a legal cause of her copd/emphysema? you are going to see in those jury instructions that it is not about fault, it is not about what vivian wilkinson knew or she did not know. this is the question: "was vivian wilkinson addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine, and if so, was such addiction a legal cause of her chronic obstructive pulmonary disease?" if you answer is "no" to this question, the case is over. rj reynolds wins, and we go home. okay. if you answer is "yes," and i'm confident you are going to answer "yes," that vivian wilkinson was addicted to cigarettes and that her addiction was the legal cause of her copd, we are going to go on to the next question. but i want to talk about this first question because you heard and saw a lot of evidence whether addiction, about smoking, not about fault -- it is not about whether addicts can quit or not. you are going to see, you are to read the instruction. it is not about that. nowhere in there does it talk about that, whether the smoker shares any responsibility. that is a question that is later on in the verdict form. and we are going to talk about that later also. it is not about whether she relied on industry statements, what -- whether she relied on what they were talking about. and you are not going to see anything about choice, okay? it is not about whether she chose to smoke or did not choose to smoke. we are going to talk about addiction and the greater weight of the evidence. that is what we have to prove. that is our burden, whether by the greater weight of the evidence, the more persuasive and convincing portion of the evidence, whether she was addicted and whether that addiction caused disease. vivian wilkinson was 13 years old when she started smoking. that is the evidence in this case. she was 13. the time when she started smoking, you know, was around in the 1940s. i'm not going to go through all of the advertisements. we went through a ton of advertisements. i'm not going to make you sit through more advertisements. you saw them all. that was life back then. it was a different world. people smoked everywhere. little kids. this was her older brother. joseph wicks says it was common for girls to smoke. he came back from the war and kids were smoking. all right? it was a different time. they were giving out cigarettes to the soldiers back then. all right? it was part of society. i think the testimony and the evidence was more than fifty percent of people in the united states smoked. and so it was a different world, and she was 13 when she started smoking. and we have the history in her medical records. you saw the over 40 pack-year smoking history, 40-pack-year history of smoking. and her medical records, you know, they want to deny it, but her medical record -- mr. rosen: objection, your honor. the court: overruled. this is argument. proceed. mr. rosen: they want to deny it, but this is what the medical records say, her own doctors that were treating her: history of tobacco abuse. i asked dr. barnett, we are going to talk about her in a minute: was there a history of abuse? she would not agree that abuse is something that people think about in terms of substance abuse or addiction. she would not agree to it. this is in her medical records. there is another document here: history cigarette abuse. it was actually written. this is just some billing code. no, it is in the medical record. it is a handwritten note. and there was another diagnosis of tobacco-use disorder. all right? these are doctors, the people who were responsible for her well-being. this is what they wrote. and that was back in 1998. and so the instruction that you are going to get on legal cause is: was addiction to cigarettes -- the addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine is a legal cause. it does not have to be the only legal cause, but a legal cause if it indirectly and in natural sequence substantially produces so that it reasonably can be said that but for the addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine, the copd would not have occurred. so, but for addiction, but for addiction, would she have smoked for 40 years? forty years, a pack of these a day. if i sat here -- i was thinking about doing it. i'm not going to do it; it is going to take too much time. if i were to take one cigarette at a time, put it in my mouth and smoke it, put it down, and then took another one and light it up and sit here, how long do you think that is going to take? that is one. there is 20 in here. do you think someone is going to do that for 40 years if they were not addicted? and, again, there is no issue on choice. you are not going to see anything regarding choice on the legal cause of addiction causing copd. just remember, it is stipulated, it is that her smoking caused the copd. her smoking caused her copd and her copd caused her death. that is not even an issue. so why did she continue to smoke for 40 years? and i also talked about, this is called a concurring-cause instruction: addiction does not have to be the only cause. all right? it could act in combination with other factors. i can go through the -- going to go through this. listen, if you look at the amount of time, the amount of time of her lifetime smoking, it is astonishing. this is one and a half packs. you can go more or less, depending on what you think she smoked. the testimony is on -- is in different ranges. some people say a pack; medical records say a pack; some say a pack and a half to two packs. but look at the actual time. using the substance over a lifetime is 12.5 years. 12.5 years of smoking. was she addicted to nicotine in cigarettes? start at 13. you heard the testimony. she smoked first thing in the morning. the pack a day, she would smoke around her kids. she would smoke before going to sleep. she would wake up in the middle of the night. she would smoke in the car filling up gas. you heard all of the testimony about what this lady did, what vivian wilkinson did. okay? and so, was it just because she loved the way smoke -- the taste of smoke? did she -- did she love that so much, she just loved the feel of a cigarette in her hand? no. it is the nicotine. and we are going to talk about that in a minute. you learned so much about it, all right? and i suspect the things you did not know before, and i suspect you learned about the things that they concealed and hidden what they were doing with nicotine. and we talked about her quit attempts. i mean, listen, i think william said on the stand, he says 50 times he remembers, and vivian was talking how many times, dozens. there is no dispute she tried to quit many times from the late '70s going forward, you know? and she was not successful. she was never successful. she smoked all the time. she would cry, her brother would talk to her, her brother joseph wicks, a 91-year-old guy, we have a video of him, he would talk to the sister: i beg you, you have got to quit. and she would break down crying. what would she say to him? i'm trying, i'm trying to quit. did she want to smoke or did she want to stop smoking? and then, you know, again, dr. barnett just denied any of these withdrawal symptoms. you heard the testimony about how she would become anxious. she would get irritable, become a different person. wake up william in the morning, she would be a different person. you knew that is when she was quitting. that was one of the days. what happened? it would only last a day or two, and she would go back, because there is an incredible driving force behind what is in this pack and in this cigarette. this is not just tobacco rolled up in a piece of paper; this is sophisticated, highly designed, highly engineered. there is a reason 500,000 people die every year from smoking. twenty million died since the 1960s. it is not because people just all want to walk off a cliff. there is a driving force. and they know it. and they have known it for years. they are in the business of selling nicotine. that was -- that goes back to '63: this dominant specification should be nicotine delivery. it is a potent drug. the industry is based upon the design and sale of attractive dosage forms. this is a dosage form of nicotine. this is a dosage form of nicotine. i thought this was just a cigarette. and it is an essential commodity in a habitual act. they talked about it in records. they compared smokers to rats. they are going to keep going back and hitting that lever because they need it. you know, they admit that she smoked enough to get copd, but not enough to be addicted? she smoked enough to get a deadly chronic illness, but not to be addicted? and so you think about that. dr. barnett, they brought an expert for you to -- a psychiatrist. i had the chance to cross-examine her. you heard about who she is. before she was contacted by the tobacco lawyers, she never did any type of research on nicotine addiction. it was never published. she was not any type of authority in the field of tobacco use or abuse. i mean, she is a psychiatrist. that is fine, okay? and, really, i mean, i understand she is a medical director for this public corporation, where she is creating a sleep apnea program. maybe that is her thing, but addiction to nicotine, that is not her thing. that is not her thing. she advertised her services, and now the industry hires her. how many cases has she been hired to talk about -- in every single case she is testified, none of the smokers are addicted. there was a person, she had a guy, 35 pack-a-day smoker, not addicted, right? and so you will have the opportunity to weigh her credibility, and you can reject her testimony. that is what the instruction said, okay? and i suspect you will. what did she say about the surgeon general of the united states? "i do not find him to be authoritative." the surgeon general, who is been writing about this since 1964, who publishes every year, we have the book, i was asking dr. farber questions about it yesterday, but, i mean, the surgeon general is not an authority on smoking and health? and then what was -- this -- you know, this shows where she comes from: that someone -- this was a question that was asked by defense counsel: someone who continues to smoke, is addiction a factor? no. how is addiction not a factor in someone's continued use of an addictive substance? it makes no sense. no sense at all. this was the testimony, this was the evidence on addiction, is that every single person, from vivian, to her doctors, to her medical records, all say she is addicted. who is the only person? dr. barnett. no, she is not addicted; she was not addicted. and so you will have to -- you will make this decision. i mean, this is what they say internally: without the chemical compound, the cigarette market would collapse, we would lose our jobs and consulting fees. these are internal documents that were not available, and you learned about these documents. and that is going to be important: about the timing, when this stuff came to light. this stuff did not come to light until the 1990s, right? and that is going to be something that you are going to decide. they are going to argue that she should have known, she should have known she had a disease caused by smoking, when all of this information, what they knew, did not come out until the 1990s. but she should have known about it before 1990. we are going to get to that. this was another important document. and all of these are in evidence. you can look through them. examine them, read them. they are very interesting. and this is a window into the soul of rj reynolds and these other companies: we cannot ever be comfortable selling a product which most of our customers would stop using if they could. they know their customers cannot stop. and the exit gate suddenly opened. if people are going to stop smoking, they are going to be out of business overnight. what do they have to do? they have to make the cigarette more addictive so people keep smoking. was vivian wilkinson addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine? the answer is "yes." for no. 1, the answer is "yes," okay? and you are going to have the verdict form back there. i do not know if i have a copy of it. that is all right. and so when she is a class member, that is the class membership question. is she a class member? you apply these findings. the findings apply in this case, okay? reynolds concealed material -- omitted material information that was not otherwise known or available. that is what they did. those findings are binding. if they did not -- and that is going to apply in this case. what else? reynolds agreed with other companies to conceal or omit information regarding the health effects of cigarettes or their addictive nature, and they did it with the intention that the public would rely on it. okay? they did it intending for the public to rely on it. those are two that are so important. then no. 3: they placed these cigarettes in the market that are defective, cigarettes that have ammonia compounds, okay, that change the form of nicotine, so that it absorbs faster, gets to the brain. that is effective. that is the problem. and then smoking cigarettes causes disease, including copd. remember something, okay? remember, before these findings, before these -- the jury found these findings, they denied all of this. they denied all of it. and we saw the video. we are going to show you a couple in a little bit. they said historically, right up until 2000, cigarette smoking does not cause disease; our products are not injurious to human health. if there is an issue with them, we will remove it. they lied to everybody, to their customers, to the -- to everybody. and you know why they lied? they lied for money. and i'm going to get into that a little bit more when we talk about punitive damages. but this was a corporation that lied, concealed, denied, deceived, with the purpose and motive and intent, okay? and the reason -- the motivation was money. a lot of money. the next question is going to be the statute of limitations defense, and the judge is going to give you -- has given you some instructions on whether she knew or should have known before may 5th, 1990, that by the exercise of reasonable care, she should have known before may 5th, 1990, that she had copd, and that there was a reasonable possibility that it was caused by cigarette smoking. vivian turner's testimony. this is her daughter. this is the person who lived with her, who saw her. she was at -- vivian wilkinson was at her daughter's wedding. and we showed you a picture of her smoking at the wedding. the question is: before 1992, did you see her use an inhaler? never. before 1992, at your wedding, did you see her having shortness of breath? never. did you ever see her wheezing before 1992? no. coughing of sputum? no. hacking cough? no. nothing before 1992. i mean, that is critical. before 1992, did you see her having a smoking cough? no. tell us about your mom at the wedding, all right? and she talked about her mom. she was walking around. she was dancing. she was having a good time, okay? in 1992, if she had this severe emphysema that dr. farber talked about yesterday, she had a severe emphysema by 1993, she could not do anything. there is no way she is walking around like this, having a good time, dancing at the wedding. there is no way. it does not happen. and you have photos of her. you heard about the colorado trip even after she was diagnosed. this lady went to colorado and was able to spend time and run around and do things with the kids and the family. william wilkinson. and you heard this gentleman spent a lot of time with his mom at the beauty parlor. poor guy. at the beauty parlor, okay? he joined the military in 1987, rose to the ranks of the top 1 percent of the united states military, retired chief master sergeant, okay? it is the highest ranking for an enlisted personnel. it is comparable to a general, okay? this man has led squadrons, all right? before you joined the military -- and this is testimony under oath, 1987: before you joined the military in 1978, did you see your mom using an inhaler? no, sir. before you joined the military, any shortness of breath? no. before you joined the military in 1987, had you observed any health problems? no, sir. and between 1989 and 1991 when you visited your mother, how as her health? it was excellent. she was in great physical condition. this is absolutely consistent with the medical records that we have in this case, all of the documentation. did there come a time in the early 1990s where you learned your mom was diagnosed? yes, sir. what year? '93. he remembered exactly where she was, and before that time, at the very bottom of this, he talks about how no observations of his mom having shortness of breath, breathing problems or using inhalers. 1993. that is when she was diagnosed. and we have the medical record, and you are going to see it in evidence, right? it states right there. this is april 20th, 1993. she has a 40-year smoking history, who has noted progressive shortness of breath over the period of the last six months. much worse in the past three days. all right. that is 1993, when she was diagnosed with copd. and the defense is arguing that she should have known back in the 1980s that she had copd. she should have known about it. and what was her report to the nurse? you know, how long did you have these symptoms that you could not breathe? it was last wednesday. that is what she reported. dr. barry reed. i asked him questions. based upon your review of the records, was there any notation or any symptoms or anything relating to copd before april of 1993? no. was there any evidence of symptoms associated with vivian wilkinson's copd prior to may 5th, 1990? no. now, the testimony is that if you have a certain level of copd -- because it is a slowly progressing disease. it takes time to develop, okay? if she has either moderate or severe copd in 1993, she is probably going to have some level of it before 1990, okay? she is probably going to have -- it does not mean she should have known about it. it does not mean she should have found out about it. the records here show she went in 1993 to the doctor. there is more records that suggest she was actually seen by other doctors before that, and she never reported being diagnosed with copd. do any of the records indicate before may 5th that she was having symptoms? no. again, this is her doctor. this is not an expert from indiana, flying down here to testify in court. this is a doctor that has his office in miami, who still sees patients down here, who takes care of his pulmonary patients on a daily basis, and who is the person who was there on the front lines taking care of vivian, trying to keep her alive, trying to keep her from suffocating to death. this is what he has to say about the information with respect to whether or not she had copd before 1990, whether she had symptoms associated with it. and i asked him, because this was important, because everyone is saying that she had this certain level of copd in 1990, in 1993. and this is dr. gidel. this was the doctor that diagnosed her. if you look at the record, he does not write "severe copd." he says: copd, decompensating chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. and he testified that when you are having an acute exacerbation, meaning you have to go to -- you are going because you have an acute bronchitis, which the medical records show she had, okay, when you go in, in that condition, and you give a pulmonary function test, it is going to be different. and dr. farber yesterday agreed with that. he agreed you are not supposed to give someone a pulmonary function test if they are having exacerbation, because it shows abnormal or more abnormal results than a normal test would show. is it hard to tell how severe her copd was just based on the pulmonary function test because she was suffering from an exacerbation during that time? yes. that is the doctor who was taking care of her back then. and dr. farber, their expert, admitted he would not order a pft if the person was not at baseline. she was not at baseline. she was two days there into a five-day stay at the hospital. and the records say that they actually had her do it at bedside because she could not get up. she was not well enough. she was so ill at the time she could not get up and go give the pulmonary function test. what else? dr. farber, every case he is hired, never found someone to be a member of the engle class. it is impossible for people to become a member of the engle class, right? i mean, she is diagnosed in 1993. he agreed that the definitive test of copd is a pulmonary function test. a pulmonary function test is what diagnoses copd. she never had one before 1993. there is no evidence that she ever had one before 1993. and even if she had shortness of breath, it is not always associated with copd. a person can have fifty percent of their lungs operating, fifty percent of lung function and not have symptoms. and he agreed he is not seen a person with severe copd work full-time on their feet. the testimony is you have social security earnings records. vivian wilkinson was on her feet bartending all throughout this time. she gets sick in 1993; she is back on her feet and back working. and this talk about -- he agreed this was an article that he said was authoritative that he cited. it is normal for people to show up late in the disease of copd. it is normal, right? and so, you know, listen, in hindsight, can anyone go to a doctor earlier? or hope that maybe if they go to the doctor, the doctor is going to get the right diagnosis? this says with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, people seek it late. and my question to him: is it normal, not unreasonable, is it normal for people to go late to the doctor late in the disease of copd? then he also agreed to the fact that people even with copd, when they start to develop either shortness of breath or something, they modify what they are doing, right? they probably do it subconsciously. they start to shift things around a little bit so they are not feeling like they were. it is not unreasonable for someone to go late when they get diagnosed. what is their burden of proof? we talked about our burden of proof. we talked about our burden of proof. on the statute of limitations, they need to prove it to you. that is their burden. all right? that she knew or should have known by the use of exercising reasonable care that she had copd and it was caused by smoking. that is their burden. and this is the burden of proof on that issue. on that issue. right? every witness, every medical record, no symptoms prior to 1990, except who? barbara walsh, okay? barbara walsh. and what did she say regarding symptoms? 11 "question: you said before that you did not observe her wheezing, right? "answer: no, i do not recall her wheezing from it." "question: you do not remember her having a chronic cough, a hacking cough? you do not -- "answer: no. "question: -- remember her ever having a chronic cough? "answer: no. "question: you do not remember her coughing up sputum? "answer: no. lord, no." (the video clip ended.) mr. rosen: and she is asked about these inhalers. she is asked about inhalers, and counsel got to ask this question. he asked her: did you -- did you associate vivian wilkinson's shortness of breath with smoking? and what was her answer? no. there was no association, because back then they did not talk about it. it was not an issue. and you want to know why it was not an issue? i'm not going to play this, but she talked -- she had conflicting testimony about how often she actually saw vivian wilkinson. in one sentence she says: well, i would see her two or three times a week. you know, let us just play it. 18 "question: were there times in the 1980s where you would not see her for weeks or even months? "answer: yeah. it would depend on my work schedule." (the video clip ended.) mr. rosen: so she did not see her all the time. it was not every week. that is the testimony from william also, is that when he would go, she was not always there. what else was going on? i mean, the argument, the argument is that she knew or she should have known that she had copd and that it was caused by cigarette smoking. they want to hold -- the defense wants to hold vivian wilkinson to a higher standard than their own ceos and executives. i mean, you remember the open debate campaign. let us see what the ceo of rj reynolds tobacco company was saying in the 1980s about whether smoking caused emphysema. that is what they say she should have known: it was caused by smoking. 17 >>: cigarette smoking does not cause cancer, yes or no? >>: it is not known whether cigarettes cause cancer. it has not been causally established. >>: cigarette smoking, no causal relationship between cigarette smoking and emphysema? >>: despite all of the research to date, there has been no causal link established. >>: no causal relationship between cigarette smoking and heart disease? >>: no. as a matter of fact, there are studies that while we are accused of being associated with heart disease, there have been studies conducted over 10 years that would say, again, that science is still puzzled over these forces. (the video clip ended.) mr. rosen: that is the ceo of r.j. reynolds, this company, the company that counsel represents, all right? the defendant in this courtroom. the ceo in the 1980s is saying that cigarettes do not cause emphysema. that is the manufacturer of this product that vivian wilkinson is smoking. she had a right to believe them, okay? and they cannot come in 30 years later and say that she should have known, she should have known we were lying about that and concealing information about that. she should have known it. she was much smarter than we were. i mean, they spent -- and i'm going to talk about this. the resources and the amount of money and effort that they put behind this machine was tremendous. all right? they talk about, can we have an open debate campaign? that was part of the huge campaign in the 1980s, where they are talking, there is other evidence. some people are saying it is harmful. here, there is other evidence. you are ignoring the significant evidence to the contrary. our product is not harmful. where were we? back then, we were coming to the peak of smoking, all right? we are at the peak. this is the same gentleman that i just played the video of, all right? this is the same gentleman under oath, in 1994, a year after vivian wilkinson was diagnosed with copd. all right? now he is the former ceo of rj reynolds in 1994. does cigarette smoking cause cancer? not in my opinion. what is that opinion based on? the fact that there continues to be statistics that underlie the issue or problem. there is still no scientific link that there is a direct cause-and-effect relationship. does cigarette smoking cause any diseases? not in my opinion. fundamentally, he believes that. all right? they cannot hold vivian wilkinson to a higher standard. they cannot do that. they cannot say she was negligent for not going to a doctor, when they lied and deceived and told the public that their product did not cause harm. this is the actual ceo in 1994. all right? they lined up. and this is in deposition he testifies: is it your position that it has never been proven that cigarette smoking has caused a single person to die? that is my position, yes. that is the head of the head, the top person at rj reynolds tobacco company. so on the statute of limitations defense, on whether she knew or should have known, look at the medical records, the ideas -- look at what is the more persuasive and convincing force and effect of the entire evidence. the entire evidence in this case. and the answer to this is no. if you answer "yes" to this question, plaintiff loses. we go home. the case is over. rj reynolds wins, okay? if the answer to this question is "no," she did not know before, and she should not have reasonably, through the exercise of reasonable care, have known. was smoking cigarettes manufactured by rj reynolds a legal cause of vivian wilkinson's copd and emphysema? i do not think this should be an argument. it is admitted, it is stipulated that smoking caused her disease, all right? smoking, even their own expert talks about -- this is a stipulation: smoking cigarettes was the cause of her emphysema and copd. she died from copd and emphysema, right? we have the testimony from vivian turner, her daughter, talking about the earliest memory is lucky strike. that is rj reynolds. there was winstons all through the '60s, into the '70s, right? it was rj reynolds brand cigarettes. it was winston and viceroy. there was parliament, which is not an rj reynolds brand cigarettes. and that happened -- oh, and also, even after she switched, even after she switched to other -- to parliament, she still saw her mom would smoke pall mall, barclay, and i believe true. pall mall, barclay, those are both rj reynolds brand cigarettes. so even after she switched to parliament, occasionally she would be smoking still rj reynolds' cigarettes. this talks about, again, through her high school years and when did you make the switch. yes, it was after i graduated high school or around there. all right? and then who testified with the -- with the memory, all right? of spending quality time with his mother, all right? at the beauty parlor, right? what does he say? when did your mother switch from smoking the winston, the viceroy to smoking parliament? it would have been after 1978, when we started going to the beauty parlor, and he had a distinct memory. i asked him, do you have a distinct memory of that? yes. so we have a smoking history of rj reynolds brand cigarettes; we have actual evidence, people talking about it, right from the '60s into the late '70s, all right? now, let us talk about -- because they want you to think that vivian turner -- excuse me vivian wilkinson -- mr. rosen: objection, your honor. as to what we want. the court: sustained. mr. rosen: i mean, the evidence here is not that vivian wilkinson all of a sudden started smoking lucky strike the first time that vivian turner remembered seeing her mom. vivian turner stuck with cigarettes for a very long time. she stuck with parliaments for a very long time, winstons, viceroy. it is not that all of a sudden she popped up smoking viceroy -- excuse me -- popped up smoking lucky strike. lucky strikes were huge. rj reynolds' market share was huge, and i'm going to show you that, but what does joe wicks remember about cigarettes when he was growing up, back when they were kids? he remembers lucky strike advertising: smoke, i seen them come out of the airplane, lucky strike in the sky. you remember as a boy seeing a plane flying over? they would have planes flying over, okay? with smoke that says "lucky strike." and this gentleman, 91 years old, remembered that from back in the '40s or '30s, whenever he remembered it. and what other brand does joe wicks remember with respect to rj reynolds? go ahead. 17 "question: what brand of cigarettes did you see your sister smoke? "answer: i do not know that. i thought it was winston. "question: you said you do not know, but you thought it was winston. why did you think it was winston? "answer: because i remember seeing the packs lay around, the winston cigarette packs. "question: where did you see the packs? "answer: in her house. "question: when did you see the packs? "answer: god, what year, i do not know. because her husband smoked. you know, they all smoked. "question: did you ever see vivian take a cigarette out of the packs of cigarettes and smoke it? "answer: yeah, i seen her take it out of the packs. (the video clip ended.) mr. rosen: he remembers winston. he remembers lucky strike as being the heavily advertised cigarette. and then we have the documents. these are in evidence. the big three. okay. what cigarette do you think she was smoking before -- before vivian turner can testify about what her memory is? what do you think she was smoking? this is -- rj reynolds has 70 -- over seventy percent of the market, seventy percent of the market, and the other part of the market share was chesterfield. and no one said anything about her smoking chesterfield. they do remember her smoking lucky strikes. this was her doctor. i asked him just a question: just assuming, let us just assume that she just smoked rj reynolds brands for a 10-year period, from '65 to '75. is that a substantial contributing caution of copd in 1993? "answer: yes, they substantially contributed." everyone agrees, you cannot just pull it out. you cannot say smoking those brands did not contribute substantially to producing the disease. this was their expert: do you agree that the total smoking history, every year of it, contributes to the development of copd? yes. and you agree that a person's history of smoking which contributes is cumulative? yes. then i asked him: and you agree if someone smokes one brand from '46 to '65 and then switches and smokes another brand for the next 10 years? what was his answer? "each cigarette contributes to copd, whatever brand. "was smoking cigarettes manufactured by rj reynolds a legal cause of her copd/emphysema? "yes." okay? the answer is "yes." now i want to talk about punitive damages, the path to punitive damages. all right? there is going to be two questions on the verdict form, and it has to do with reliance. it has to do with whether or not vivian wilkinson relied on their lies and whether she relied on their conspiracy to lie. and this is the first question: did vivian wilkinson reasonably rely to her detriment on any statements of material fact made by the defendants? we know, we know with the findings we have, the engle findings, they did it. they concealed material information. they failed to disclose material facts. the question is whether she relied on their fraud, all right? and then the next question on this topic, on this issue, first let us talk about fraud, what they concealed. all right? and dr. cummings talked about this, about the modern cigarette, about the flue-curing, about sugars, making it more inhalable. it was not inhalable. the disease of lung cancer did not exist before 1900. that is an epidemic that was created and sustained by this company. all right? by the tobacco companies. it did not exist, and we have the chart here, and you have seen the chart. but, i mean, this is lung cancer. it does not exist before 1900. okay? and it was with the advent, the invention of the camel cigarette, the modern cigarette. additives: they would put additives to adjust the ph, to maintain certain levels of nicotine. bronchodilator. bronchodilators. their expert, farber, talked about what a bronchodilator is. it relaxes the lungs, right? it makes -- you are able to breathe easier. they put bronchodilators in cigarettes. the amount of carcinogens and deadly chemicals that are in this cigarette, that they know about, that they have always known about, right? they put bronchodilators so people can inhale them easier into their lungs. did vivian wilkinson know that? did she know that they were adjusting the ph and manipulating the levels of nicotine, putting flavors in it to make it easier to smoke? leaf blending to manipulate nicotine? filter vents? she switched to filters. she switched to filters. she believed they were safer. she switched to light cigarettes. she tried those because she thought they were safer. ammoniation. they put ammonia in cigarettes. ammonia, like the stuff under your sink, in a cigarette because it freebases nicotine. it changes the form of the nicotine so that it gets into the system faster, and it has a higher impact and addiction potential. reynolds is legally responsible for the conduct and the statements made by the other companies and the tobacco institute and ctr. that is the law of this case, right? there was a conspiracy, and whenever everyone gets together for a conspiracy, the other people making statements, right, you are all together in it, and they are bound by that. and so what did the industry conceal? we went through a ton of evidence, and i tried to keep it interesting, and dr. cummings was here, and we talked about all of the documents. they formed a conspiracy. right? they formed a conspiracy to conceal the health effects. they met at that plaza hotel. we have the documents. you saw the documents. they hired doctors and scientists to mislead the public. they misled the surgeon general. they knew how highly addictive nicotine was, and they concealed and lied about it. they publicly stated it was not addictive. they studied teenagers, the base of their market. they knew that teenagers, kids, children were the base of their market, and if they could not get these kids, if they could not target these kids, their business would fall apart; they would go out of business. right? they talked about how the rise and decline of every industry deals with the youth market. i mean, fifty percent of all smokers die. right? they knew how many people it was killing, and they lied about it. we just talked about this, but as far as what they knew about manipulating the levels of nicotine, about the chemicals in their cigarettes; that the filters were not working; that they were an illusion; that everyone is buying and smoking filters; they think they are better, they think they are safer, it does not work, it is a joke. and this was the goal: how to free millions of americans from the guilty fear that is going to arise deep in the biological depths every time they light a cigarette. that is what they did. all right? they embarked on a multibillion dollar campaign, with more power, more resources, right, and more drive, right? to convince and to confuse and create doubt, so that people keep smoking. and it worked. and along the way, 20 million people died. vivian wilkinson was one of those people. they boasted about it. this was in the 1950s. internal documents we did not have before. their scientists are saying: fortunate for us, cigarettes are a habit they cannot break. boy, would not it be wonderful if our company was the first to produce a cancer-free cigarette? they made public statements about whether or not -- the industry got together, and they made a public statement to reassure the public we are going to look into it; we are going to help society. they lied about it. they state they believe their products are not injurious. they are going to cooperate closely with the public. did they cooperate closely with the public? ask yourself that. when you are answering the question of, was there reliance by vivian wilkinson, ask if they cooperated with public health, or did they lie to them or they deceive them, whether they attacked the surgeon general and other public health authorities. and they knew, they knew -- we have these documents, you know -- they knew how deadly and how devastating this product was that they are selling to billions of people, okay? they knew how deadly it was, and they just kept it quiet and kept selling and selling, and people kept buying and people kept dying. 1958: the individuals we met with believe that smoking causes lung cancer. 1961: carcinogens are found in every class of compound of smoke. this is an rj reynolds document, 1962: the amount of evidence accumulated to indict cigarettes is overwhelming. the evidence challenge is scant. b&w document. this is an rj reynolds document, 1963: cigarettes have certain unattractive side effects. unattractive side effects. they cause lung cancer. human suffering. human suffering. and you are going to hear about human suffering, and i'm required to talk to you about it. and if they did not form this conspiracy, and they did not put together this tobacco industry research committee, this fake scientific organization, right, they would be in a deplorable position. they knew about it. it was a defensive operation. it was not to help anyone. they wanted to provide psychological crutches to smokers. obviously, the key word is "confusion." doubt is our product. the most important story is that which casts doubt on the cause-and-effect theory of disease and smoking. i mean, is that responsible? is that what a responsible corporation would do? that is -- you know, punitive damages, that is premeditated. that is deliberate. that is intentional. right? that is first degree. okay? mr. hohnbaum: objection, your honor, motion. the court: sustained. mr. rosen: this is what they said. 19 >>: we want to be the detective just as much as the surgeon general and the ama. we will cooperate in every way. well, obviously, a filter takes out certain tar and nicotine. i do not think the industry admits there are any bad elements. if there are bad elements, through our laboratory, through the surgeon general, through the ama, through acts of god and luck, we hope we may find them. if they are found, they will be removed. >>: we do talk to the question of whether or not cigarettes are hazardous. we do not believe that cigarettes are hazardous. we do not accept that because when, as and if any ingredient in cigarette smoke is identified as being injurious to human health, we are confident that we can eliminate that ingredient. (the video clip ended.) mr. rosen: it was the same line over and over and over and over again. and they wanted people to rely on it. that was the industry. the industry wanted people to rely on it. and you know what? people relied on it. vivian wilkinson relied on it. go ahead. (thereupon, a video clip played as follows:) "question: they wanted people to be able to believe them and rely upon them, did they not? "answer: i believe in general, yes. "question: as late as '88, '89 or '90, the tobacco institute was saying they did not know whether smoking caused cancer, correct? that is what they were telling the public, correct? "answer: they did not know. they could not make that determination, is what they said on the video. "question: and they wanted the people to believe them, correct? "answer: i would say they would, yes." (the video clip ended.) mr. rosen: they wanted people to rely on it. it worked. it was effective. and this is -- this is their -- this is right -- the strategy was brilliantly conceived and executed over years, right? they talked about it in their documents, how the strategy was brilliantly conceived and worked. and this was the most -- when i read this, you know, when i read this, a holding strategy, right? think about a holding strategy. the holding strategy is people are smoking and dying so that they can make more money. all right? a lot of money. $250 billion was just their marketing expenses over these years. a holding strategy. i mean, the families and the people that suffered from this. all right? vivian turner watched her mom suffocate to death. important battles for them? this was important for human life. right? for just normal, everyday people, who did not know what they knew. that the tirc was a shield and enacted as a front. the tobacco money: the ctr was the best and cheapest insurance that money could buy, that the industry could buy. let us pay these fake organizations that we created. it is the best insurance we have got. because if they keep lying, they are going to keep spreading doubt, and people are going to keep smoking. again, they talk in the documents, who ain't for more money? right? they did not want to be regulated. do we really want to tout cigarette smoke as a drug? it is, of course, but there are dangerous fda implications. i mean, this talks about they -- they are dealing -- they are dealing with representatives, right? they have contacts with senators and representatives. they influence society from the highest, highest level. mr. hohnbaum: objection, your honor. motion in limine instruction. the court: sustained. move on, counsel. mr. rosen: they influenced doctors. they influenced scientists. right? they influenced the public. they influenced consumers. and they knew filters -- the carcinogens are found -- this is what they told the surgeon general, right? this is an internal document that philip morris wrote: carcinogens are found in practically every compound in smoke. present technology does not permit selective filtration. what did they write to the surgeon general two years later: none of the chemical substances listed therein, to our knowledge, have been found by scientific research to be harmful to health. it is possible, of course, to modify chemical components of cigarettes by the use of filters. and they wrote that letter, philip morris wrote that letter on behalf of all the tobacco companies, including rj reynolds. they lied to the surgeon general. all right? the person who is looking out for public health. and this is their confession, okay? this is a confession. our basic -- mr. hohnbaum: objection, your honor. the court: overruled. mr. rosen: this is an internal tobacco institute document, and you heard that all of these executives were the heads of the tobacco institute. they ran it. they ran the show, along with the lawyers. our basic position in the cigarette controversy is subject to charge and may be subject to the finding that we are making false or misleading statements to promote the sale of cigarettes. they knew what they were doing, and they forged ahead without any care in the world. that is reckless. that is conscious disregard for human life. that is what they chose to do. that is what they chose to do. vivian wilkinson, she chose to try to quit smoking a bunch of times and failed, not knowing what they knew and not knowing what they were doing. filters are frauds. you saw the spike in how much -- it started out, it was unfiltered cigarettes, and then everybody was smoking filters. today the market is almost one hundred percent filtered cigarettes, and it all happened when? when was filtered cigarettes? well, look at that, right there in 1954. right when the health issue starts coming out, when the mouse painting studies, right when the frank statement comes out. there could be problems with smoking. what did the cigarette industry do? more filters. let us get filters. let us give light cigarettes. let us give low-tar cigarettes. and they spiked. it talks about how the industry has the filtered market. 1963: here's our triple, our quadruple, our quintuple filter, capable of removing whatever constituents are in tobacco smoke. and they knew the smoker of a filtered cigarette was getting as much or more nicotine and tar than they would have gotten from a regular cigarette. do you think vivian wilkinson knew that? do you think that she knew when she switched to a filter or light cigarette that every time she took a puff, do not you think she is getting something less, and they knew she was getting more, more of the bad stuff. because it was an illusion of filtration. i mean, they knew it. all of these documents, all of these companies knew it. the person who switches from a high filtration cigarette winds up smoking more units in order to provide themselves the same delivery that they had before. i asked this question of dr. barnett: it was reported vivian wilkinson switched to filters because she thought they were safer? there was somebody that reported that? yes. there was also reports that vivian wilkinson switched to light cigarettes, tried light cigarettes in the 1980s, because she felt they were safer? yes. she relied, she believed, and they capitalized on it. not just her, but millions and millions of people who all switched to light cigarettes under this false impression that it was actually going to help them. and all the while, happily for us, nicotine is both habituating and unique. this is an rj reynolds document. you heard about claude teague. you will see claude's teague name. he rose through the ranks of rj reynolds: happily for us, nicotine is both habituating. i mean, they are boasting about it. the nicotine levels are not obtained by accident. we can regulate nicotine fairly precisely. did you remember dr. cummings taking about taking all of the nicotine out, they can take it out; they put it back in, perfectly controlling precisely the amount of nicotine in every one of their cigarettes, uniform dosage form? any level management might require. it talks about ph levels. smoke ph increases an increased proportion. total nicotine occurs in the free form. i mean, they studied it. they knew it. and this is how they designed their cigarettes, so people keep smoking and cannot put them down. and what happens when their scientists -- when there are scientists that are trying to help the public? this was a doctor who was studying to find an antagonist for nicotine. that means that if you take a drug and it blocks your nicotine receptors, right, so you are not going to want to smoke, right? what do they do? if it goes forward, we are in the process of digging our own grave, right? their goal would have the potential of putting the tobacco manufacturers out of business. from the plaza hotel up until 1994, well, really until 2000, these folks, this industry, this company, this corporation lied, deceived, in an unspeakable, unthinkable manner. and that is what we are talking about, punitive damages. this was how much money they spent on their marketing and their campaign, right? how much money i read to you. i stood up and i think i read to you some requests for admissions, about how much they are paying the ti and the tobacco research committee, each company, millions and millions of dollars. the tobacco industry spent more on advertising cigarettes in one day than the government could spend in a year. they were outspending everybody. they want you to think that everybody knew, everybody believed that cigarettes -- mr. hohnbaum: objection, your honor. the court: sustained. mr. rosen: 1964, the surgeon general -- mr. hohnbaum: move to strike, your honor. the court: the jury is to disregard the last comment. counsel, talk about the evidence. mr. rosen: yes, your honor, sorry. 1964, the surgeon general report comes out. everyone -- everyone knows that cigarette smoking is deadly, right? in all of the other reports, it is all out there, everyone knows. everyone is just choosing to smoke. all right? holding strategy. the billions and billions of dollars worked. and this graph shows and proves it, okay? this graph does not lie. this graph does not lie. what they did worked, and it affected countless, countless people, with a level of, you know, untold harm and suffering. there it is. i knew it was somewhere. i mean, it is right there. you see, it keeps spiking. even after whatever report came out, whatever the government is trying to convey, their message was much, much stronger. and they had to lie about addiction. they had to keep it secret, because they knew that addiction was key to their argument that smokers just choose to smoke. it is their choice. it is their free will. they enjoy it. that is their choice. they knew that they cannot defend continued smoking as free choice if the person is addicted. 23 "question: throughout your tenure with american, it was not only american's position, but your position that cigarettes were not injurious to health; is that accurate? "answer: through my tenure? "question: yes. "answer: yes, that is so. "question: that is something that american tobacco wants the public to believe; is that correct? "answer: yes. "question: it is a statement that the american tobacco put great reliance on? "answer: we issued that statement, yes. certainly, we wanted them to believe it. "question: as far as you you are concerned, a person is justified in relying on that statement? "answer: yes." (the video clip ended.) mr. rosen: people, according to the tobacco, the head ceo, this was in the 1980s, were justified in relying on what they were saying: cigarette smoking is not injurious to health. that is what he said. there is an instruction -- this was the ceo of american tobacco company. i want to make very, very clear, okay, that rj reynolds is responsible for the harms of american tobacco company and brown & williamson. they are responsible. they are part of rj reynolds now. all right? and that is an instruction that you are going to get. and so did she rely on their fraud? did it work? did it have an impact on vivian? yes. did she rely on their conspiracy to conceal about filtered cigarettes and whether they were safe or whether they were unsafe? yes. state whether you find -- and this is the question on whether punitive damages are warranted in this case. and i know i told you we are close to the end, we are close to the end, all right? i told you we are ahead of schedule. i saw some you, your faces kind of lit up a little bit. we are ahead of schedule. if you answer "yes" to this question, we are going to have a very short second phase, probably come back tomorrow, but it will be very short, and i promise you, my intent, i'm going to play a video that is probably less than half an hour long. mr. hohnbaum: objection, your honor. the court: sustained. mr. hohnbaum: move to strike again. the court: the jury is to disregard the last comment. it is stricken. mr. rosen: if you answer "yes," it is a short second phase of trial, just on the issue of punitive damages, okay? we protect kids. we protect children. we do not addict them, all right? and rj reynolds is treated just like a person. a corporation is treated like a person. they targeted kids. vivian wilkinson was 13 years old when she started smoking. she was exactly who they were looking for, and she was their perfect customer. 20 >>: cigarettes manufactures are not interested in obtaining new business from teenagers in our society. >>: but how can you stay in business if you cannot hook the kids? >>: we have been in business very well, thank you, for some time now without attempting to hook kids. we do everything possible to discourage teenage smoking. (the video clip ended.) mr. rosen: i mean, the lies do not stop. they do not end. they have targeted kids, and it started back in the '20s, and we have the documents. they were running around the schools, big business. line up the most popular students. get these kids started early, because they knew that smokers do not start smoking over the age of essentially 25, and i think 80 to ninety percent under 18 is when they start smoking. that is when people start smoking. you do not see people start smoking at 30, 35. they have got to get the children. and they studied them. they stalked these kids. mr. hohnbaum: objection, your honor. the court: sustained. mr. hohnbaum: move to strike. the court: the jury will disregard the last comment. mr. rosen: high school students, freshman, sophomores, juniors, seniors in high school. that is how they create addiction. you heard dr. cummings. you heard dr. drobes talk about how the kids' brains are actually developing, the frontal lobe; how it actually affects and changes the kids' frontal lobes growing up. that is the part of the brain that deals with impulse. they studied the 14- to 20-year-old market in hopes to discover the secret of the instant popularity. creating a fad in this market could be a bonanza. that is what they wanted, a bonanza. this huge business opportunity for rj reynolds and the other companies. this is an rj reynolds document. in 1960, the young adult market, the 14- to 24-year-old age group, they represent tomorrow's cigarette business. the 14-year-old kids. she was 13. she was right in their sweet spot. they got her a little bit early. right here. i mean, this they studied how to induce a presmoker, right? we need to consider another aspect of the business. that is the factors which induce a presmoker. he does not start -- he does not start to smoke to satisfy a non-existent craving for nicotine. people do not start smoking for nicotine, right? they see other people, they see advertisements, they see it is cool, it is normal, it is risky, right? it is rebellious. but once they start, they cannot stop. it changes to that, to craving for nicotine. why do you think they spent the amount of money on all of the advertising, all of the television shows, and the flintstones and lucy and all of the other shows? because that had no effect on anybody, right? all of the advertising, all of the marketing, that did not have any effect on anybody. we do not want anybody to start smoking our product. realistically -- this is rj reynolds, some thoughts about the new brands of the cigarette market: realistically, if our company is to survive over the long-term, we must gain our share of the youth market. fourteen to 24. we need to increase penetration among the 14- to 24-year-olds. that is 1975. this is what they sent. they sent this letter in 1990, all the way in 1990. some kids contact rj reynolds, and what do they write? despite all of the research going on, the simple and unfortunate fact, scientists do not know the case or causes of chronic diseases reported. we would appreciate your passing this information. pass this along to the kids. let them know. to date, science has not proven it is harmful. go ahead and smoke. and what about nicotine? you know, nicotine, everybody knew that nicotine is addictive, right? everyone knew about that. they deliberately downplayed the role of nicotine. they deliberately downplayed it, right? so people do not know that is the reason why they have to smoke 20 or 30 or 40 cigarettes a day, day in and day out, for decades. youth market. twelve-year-olds. young adult smokers. replacement smokers. a replacement smoker, because people die, and they need to replace that person with a kid. with a fresh crop. vivian wilkinson was a replacement smoker. all right? she replaced the people that died on the other end. and they knew it, and that is what they wanted. and that is who they targeted. there is going to be another issue: percentage of fault you get to decide, okay? you get to decide relative fault on the parties. you can decide if vivian wilkinson had fault. maybe she did not try hard enough to quit. maybe she should not smoke after she got copd. you make that decision. all right? but when you make that decision, look at everything in context. all right? and the way i say you look at this, if two people come to the table, vivian wilkinson comes down and sits at the table, rj reynolds sits down at the table, who has more information? who has more knowledge? who knows what is going on with these cigarettes and what they were doing? so i would suggest to you, i'm just going to put a number, rj reynolds, ninety percent; vivian wilkinson, ten percent. and you can change that. that is up to you. this is your decision, okay? your decision. the court: you have 10 minutes, counsel. mr. rosen: thank you, your honor. corporations cannot conduct themselves in the way rj reynolds and these other companies did. they cannot do it. you cannot conceal. you cannot commit fraud. you cannot cause death. if you do, you are responsible for those harms. they are responsible for the harms they caused. okay? and this, the harm that this company caused, this family is the highest level of harm. it does not get more than this. okay? families destroyed. this family destroyed. they were a happy family, and vivian wilkinson worked hard, and she raised her kids, and she did her best, and she did a good job. she did a good job. and so you are going to have to decide, and i'm going to ask you, and i'm going to suggest to you a number. i want to explain this. the number is a suggestion. you can go higher or you can go lower. it is up to you. you make the decision, and vivian and her family will respect whatever decision you make, okay? i want to start with william wilkinson. i want to start with no. 2, okay? no. 8, excuse me. this gentleman took the stand, and he shared with you his feelings, and they were significant, and for a man who is a man like him, a soldier, a war veteran, okay? i'm sure it was not easy. i know you saw it. and it was serious, and it was deep, and it was right into the soul of this man. and i would suggest to you that he lost someone very, very dear. if you were to take that pain that this man has and spread it over a 700 man squadron -- mr. hohnbaum: objection, your honor. the court: sustained. mr. rosen: if you were to take that pain, you would not see a single smiling face, okay? you would not see a -- mr. hohnbaum: objection, your honor. the court: i sustained the objection previously, counsel. mr. rosen: you will decide the level of harm. vivian turner, she lost her best friend. that is what she said. and she watched and she was there. you have the medical records. you are going to see the last days, the last months, the last years, two years, you will see two years, vivian wilkinson in and out of the hospital with copd. end-stage chronic obstructive pulmonary disease is devastating. it is devastating. people cannot breathe. they are on oxygen. it is -- it is a slow way of suffocating, and she saw it, and she was there with her best friend. you decide how significant that is. and i suggest to you that level of harm is overwhelming. and so i'm going to suggest to you these numbers, and they are just suggestions. you make a decision whether you want to go higher or lower. it is up to you. all right. but i would suggest for each, for vivian wilkinson and eugene wilkinson, i would suggest $2 million each. punitive damages. that is going to be that last question. it is to punish and deter companies from doing similar conduct. it is so that other corporations, not just rj reynolds, it is to punish rj reynolds, but to let other companies know this is not the way we do business. we do not accept this in our country. and so you decide whether we have met our burden that they have risen to being guilty of intentional misconduct, whether we proved that by clear and convincing evidence. and you have all of the documents, and i do not think it would be any more clear or convincing -- mr. hohnbaum: objection as to "i do not think." the court: sustained. no personal. mr. rosen: it cannot be any more clear and convincing than those documents. you take a look at them and you decide. they stood before congress. this was a year after vivian wilkinson was diagnosed with the disease that killed her. 18 >>: placed under oath, do you or do not agree with the surgeon general's testament of over 400,000 smokers died? >>: i do not agree. >>: do you know how many die each year? >>: i do not know. mr. rosen: it is rj reynolds right there. >>: they agreed that smoking causes lung cancer. do you agree? >>: it may. >>: do you know whether it does? >>: i do not. >>: the medical experts agree that smoking causes emphysema. do you agree? >>: it may. >>: they agree that smoking causes bladder cancer, stroke and low birth weight. do you agree? >>: it may. >>: mr. tisch, i want to move to you for a moment. in a deposition last year you were asked whether smoking causes cancer. your answer was, "i do not believe so." do you stand by that answer today? >>: i do, sir. >>: you are head of a manufacturer of a product that is been accused by the overwhelming scientific community to cause cancer. you do not know? you do not have an interest in finding out? >>: i do, sir, yes. >>: and what have you done to pursue that interest? >>: well, we have looked at the data, and the data that we have been able to see has all been statistical data that has not convinced me that smoking causes death. >>: mr. campbell, you were also deposed, and you said, "to my knowledge, it has not been proven that cigarette smoking causes cancer." will you ever be convinced, and what evidence are you waiting for? >>: let us have the microphone passed over. >>: yes, i may be convinced. we do not know what causes cancer in general right now, so i think that we may find out what causes cancer, and we may find out some relationship which has yet to be proven. >>: let me begin my questioning on the matter of whether or not nicotine is addictive. let me ask you first, and i would like to just go down the row, whether each of you believes that nicotine is not addictive. i heard virtually all of you touch on it. just yes or no. do you believe nicotine is not addictive? >>: i believe nicotine is not addictive, yes. >>: mr. johnston. >>: congressman, cigarettes and nicotine clearly do not meet the classic definitions of addiction. there is no intoxication. >>: we will take that as a no. again, time is short. if you can just -- i think each of you believe nicotine is not addictive. we would like to have it for the record. >>: i do not believe that nicotine or our products are addictive. >>: i believe nicotine is not addictive. >>: i believe that nicotine is not addictive. >>: i believe that nicotine is not addictive. >>: and i, too, believe that nicotine is not addictive. (the video clip ended.) mr. rosen: are punitive damages warranted in this case? what they did? what these companies did? it screams punitive damages. so i would suggest you answer "yes." it is a lot. i really truly, on behalf of everyone here, thank you so much for your time. i understand it was a true sacrifice. thank you. mr. rosen: thank you, your honor. may it please the court. so now this is my last opportunity, okay? i'm sorry, i just keep coming back up. this is it, okay? from there, you do not have to listen to me. you are going to go back into the back and decide the outcome of this case. there is a saying that i heard before, and i think it is appropriate and i want to discuss it: many are called upon, but few are chosen. okay. there was a very large roomful of people here when we started jury selection, and it came down to you, you folks. and one of the primary reasons is because each of you showed that you can be fair and impartial jurors in this case. all right? and i think that you heard other jurors say how they think these cases are frivolous, people should not have a right to bring these lawsuits, and i would suggest to you that you can take that same impartiality into consideration when you look at some of the people's testimony in this case. barbara walsh. all right. she talked about willfully, enjoyably, and i believe it is frivolous. all right. when she testified, i asked her: how do you feel about these lawsuits? she said: angry that it would take 15, 16 years. i'm not too sure as when vivian passed away. it would take that long for her daughter to try to collect money for something her mother willfully and enjoyably, and i believe it is frivolous. it is a waste of everyone's time and energy, mine included. and she said: these lawsuits are frivolous and ludicrous. you know, that is not impartiality. that is not impartiality. she is an independent witness. okay? but she did come in -- she testified in this case with partiality. and the most -- the best evidence in this case regarding vivian wilkinson's health back then are the medical records. those are medical records from back in 1993. they are documented. they were documented back then, and they are not testimony from someone, from barbara walsh 20 years later or 30 years later. okay? and so this was -- this was the most important thing. can you bring up the admission note, the note from baptist hospital, please? and counsel brought this up. there is a note that talked about doxycycline, and we heard about that. it is a prescription medication. it is a prescription medication, and she reported it when she went to the doctor. all right? what did not she report? there is no report about using inhalers. i mean, she went to the doctor, and she could not breathe, and she was asked, what are you taking, and she said doxycycline. but she does not say, i'm taking proventil. she did not say, i'm taking some type of inhaler back then, before that time. she was not. she was not. maybe she had used an inhaler at some point in time before, but at the time of this visit, she was not using any type of inhaler. and you know what else this tells us? it tells us that she saw a doctor. she got a prescription medication. presumably, if she saw a doctor, right? would not that doctor -- she said she -- mr. hohnbaum: objection, your honor, speculation. the court: this is argument. overruled. mr. rosen: she should have gone to a doctor earlier, right? she should have gone to a doctor earlier. if she did, they would have done either a pft, pulmonary function test, and they would have found what she had, or they would have referred her to a pulmonary doctor, and they would have done it. we have evidence that she saw someone, and before she visits in april of 1993, when she goes to the doctor, they ask her, do you have any type of illnesses, issues, diseases, and she says none, no diseases, nothing. all right? and she reports no history, no other prior history. she talks about a car accident, right? she is hospitalized for a car accident at some point before this visit. all right? if she had a car accident and she was hospitalized, they would have examined her. they would have looked at and would have checked her out. and you know what? they did not diagnose her. so we have evidence of visits before this. so everything they are telling us -- if she had gone to a doctor, right, that is their argument. and so if someone says, well, she should have gone to a doctor, you can let them know. she did go to a doctor, right? she did go to a doctor, and they did not diagnose her with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. that is what this record reflects, a record from the -- from back then. this is also important. this is a video. barbara walsh was asked by defense counsel, back in 1983: did you connect her shortness of breath with her smoking? and what did she say? can you play that video, 116? 8 "question: in your own mind connect her shortness of breath with her smoking? "answer: not really, no. "question: ms. wilkinson ever do or say anything that indicated to you that she was aware that smoking could cause damage to your health? "answer: i do not think we ever had a conversation regarding that." (the video clip ended.) mr. rosen: she never made a connection. the person who is testifying about inhalers, she never made the connection that her shortness of breath equals -- was caused by smoking, and the defense is arguing, well, vivian wilkinson should have. and then this, you know, this is also, this is also important, 117. i asked her: sitting here today, do you believe that smoking is harmful to you? i'm not concerned about it, so i guess that has to be a no. you know, barbara walsh talked about willfully, enjoyably. she talked about the daughter waiting 16 years to collect money. she knew nothing about this case or the history, that this started back in 1994, or the history from 1953 going forward. she knows nothing about it. and she is judging it, she is judging it without any basis. and so to say that vivian wilkinson willfully and it was enjoyable, barbara walsh still thinks that. and, you know, you almost have to kind of feel bad because she testified she is a smoker. she is still smoking. mr. hohnbaum: objection, your honor. the court: sustained. mr. hohnbaum: move to strike. the court: the jury is to disregard the last comment. mr. rosen: we talked about -- counsel talked about dr. barnett. she admitted 23 million americans are addicted. she said half of daily -- half of the daily smokers are addicted. that was her testimony, right? then why not, in fifty percent of the cases she testified in, is the smoker addicted? is not that strange, that she says fifty percent, if you are a regular daily smoker, fifty percent of those people are going to be addicted, but the cases that she is hired by lawyers in these cases and she testifies, none of them are addicted. none of them, by her own statistics, you know. and then they are saying, listen, she is the only psychiatrist, she is the only person, right? you know, people do not -- she admitted people do not go to her for nicotine addiction. they go to her for other issues, bipolar or they have some other drug abuse problem. the nicotine addiction is secondary for her. no one goes to her. i think she said one out of thousands of people, right? people who have addictions to cigarettes, they get help from either their primary care physician, because they go in and have an issue, or they go to a doctor like dr. reed, a pulmonologist, and they cannot breathe anymore. dr. reed says you have to stop smoking; here is some medication; here are the things. those are the people on the front line: primary care doctors, the pulmonologists, the people who are taking care of these people getting diseases. by the time they are getting this help, it is too late. it is too late. by the time vivian wilkinson got that patch in 1993, it was too late. dr. gidel. i want to talk a little bit more about the statute of limitations. dr. gidel, he was the person that was treating her. let us bring up 114. this was question concerning the pulmonary function test and whether or not before 1990 it would be mild, moderate, severe. the next question: could you say with any degree of certainty whether she had copd? well, she may or may not have had symptoms. if you had done a pulmonary function test prior to 1990, she probably would show some changes, right? okay. and the question is: "you do not know if that would be mild or not?" "answer: i do not know if it would be mild, moderate or severe at that point, no. that is the doctor that was taking care of her. let us talk about -- talk about these people, right? her father. this is a person who influences her. he was a smoker. that was the testimony. he was smoking, and you think -- really, how bad do you think he thought cigarette smoking was when he gives his son, his own boy, a pack of cigarettes to smoke until he gets sick? right? he is a smoker. her sister, happy, josephine's testimony, she was a smoker. those are the influences. mr. malloy was brought up, right? about what he -- what he talked about and how he warned, mr. malloy warned vivian about the health risks of smoking. let us see if we can find this. no. 127. "did you ever hear any of ms. wilkinson's siblings warn her about smoking? "answer: no, not to my knowledge. "question: did any member of your family warn ms. wilkinson? "answer: not to my knowledge." that is the ex-husband. dr. farber, 126. this is their doctor: "you agree, sir, that copd is frequently underdiagnosed clinically, true? "answer: that is probably true, yes." all right. vivian wilkinson might have seen a doctor. we have records that show she had to have seen somebody for a car accident to get that doxycycline, right? it is underdiagnosed. they cannot meet their burden. she would have gone -- she should have gone to a doctor, and this doctor would have somehow done the pulmonary function test and told her, you have copd and it is caused by smoking. it is the farthest stretch. joseph wicks, right? joseph wicks. you know, sometimes you have to fact-check. that is what my job is, fact-check. i'm listening -- mr. hohnbaum: objection, your honor. mr. rosen: -- listening to counsel. the court: sustained. mr. rosen: you heard counsel bring up that it was -- she was in her 40s when she had breathing problems. i think that is what counsel said. 128, please. "when you say 48, 49, 50, are you referring to vivian's age? was that she got into her late 40s and 50s? "no. years, years. "you think she started coughing from smoking late 1940s? "yeah." next slide. 119. and this is my question to him: "i want to clarify because earlier you were asked about vivian's health. "yes. "okay. you said first noticed her having shortness of breath in the '40s? "yes. "in the '40s, vivian was 17 or 18? "no, it was not the '40s. he was talking about the years, the 40s. "and so to clarify for the record, the first time you observed vivian's shortness of breath was after reed was born, right?" what does he say? "yes." let us see the video, 115. now, this is what he said, and this is what he talked when the symptoms came and when he had conversations with vivian about it. 9 "question: you have two grandchildren? "answer: yes. "question: what are their names? "answer: david joseph and reed, thomas reed. "question: and david joseph was born in 1988? "answer: yes. "question: and thomas reed was born in 1990? "answer: yes, two years later. "question: was reed a little boy the first time you observed your sister vivian having health problems? "answer: he was smaller. i do not know how old he was then. "question: before reed was born, how was vivian's health? "answer: i think her health was all right before he was born. "question: before reed was born? "answer: yes. "question: based on your observations, she was in good health? "answer: yes. "question: to clarify for the record, was the first time you observed vivian having shortness of breath after reed was born? "answer: yes, yes. "question: and was the first time you observed vivian having a smoker's cough, was that after reed was born? "answer: yes." (the video clip ended.) mr. rosen: that is testimony. she was not in her 40s. i was very clear. we talked very clearly about the 1990s, when reed was born. that was an anchoring time that he was able to remember. ninety-one years old. the court: excuse me. counsel, slow down. mr. rosen: sorry about that. she is typing furiously. thank you. the court: i see steam coming out of the court reporter's ears. mr. rosen: dr. farber, i asked him about symptoms of copd, 128. it might be 123. 123. "there a lot of different symptoms associated? "yes. "cough? "yes. "wheezing? "yes. "sputum production? "yes." she had none of those symptoms, that is what every witness talked about, before 1990. none of those symptoms. none. and she should have gone to the doctor. 125. "you agree that it is possible for someone to have fifty percent lung function and a person is still not showing symptoms? "they may not, that is right." that is their doctor. fifty percent. she was operating on fifty percent, and she may not have symptoms. i asked dr. reed about inhalers for treatment of asthma, wheezing. it could be for bronchitis, helping to bring up mucous, for shortness of breath. they may be anxious or shortness of breath and other reasons, as well. "were there any inhalers that were available over-the-counter in the '80s and the '90s? "yes, there were inhalers available over-the-counter. "can you explain to the jury, what are some of the reasons people have shortness of breath? "asthma, acute bronchitis, restrictive lung disease, damage to the lung, lung trauma." it goes on. many, many other things. just because she may have had shortness of breath -- may have, okay, because i suggest to you the record does not support that -- if she did, it does not mean she had copd. you needed to go to a doctor, and they would have said, you have copd. you know, counsel brought up youth marketing, right? how does a youth marketing document in 1970 have anything to do with vivian wilkinson, right? pt 3400. 1984: younger adult strategies. this is rj reynolds. how does it have to do with vivian wilkinson, right? the critical factor in the growth and decline of every major brand over the last 50 years. okay? she started smoking over the last 50 years. this goes back. if you go from 1984 back 50 years, i think doing my math -- i'm not going to get it right. 1933, '34. that is what it looks like. that is why it is relevant, because they were targeting her back then. you know, i think barbara walsh did see vivian using inhalers -- mr. hohnbaum: objection, your honor, as to what he thinks. the court: sustained. mr. rosen: more likely than not, it was probably diagnosed after 1993, because she had inhalers and she was -- mr. hohnbaum: objection, your honor. mr. rosen: that is what -- the court: sustained. ladies and gentlemen, you are to rely on your own recollection of the evidence. mr. rosen: they are saying she was negligent for not going to the doctor. she was negligent? their conduct was intentional and calculated. we already talked about the car accident, the fact that she would have seen somebody, and she never had a diagnosis. can you bring up -- just that. do you have it? 1993. what major illnesses have you had? none. none. so if someone says that she was diagnosed with something or she should have known she had something, in 1993, when she asked, she thought she had none. she had health insurance. that is the testimony, she had health insurance. and they talked about alcohol. she was able to stop using alcohol, control her alcohol. do you know what that shows? you know, that shows that she was able to stop alcohol, but she could never stop using nicotine. right? she was able to stop one thing, but she could not stop the other. you know, she had -- she had a second chance, and she raised two beautiful kids. how many chances did rj reynolds have? how many chances did they have to change, to make a difference, to make things right? you know, they talked about there is no proof of reliance, there is no proof that concealment/reliance would have changed anything. you know, people have an instinct for survival. you make a decision whether all of this information would have changed the way vivian wilkinson looked at life and looked at smoking. right? about the flue-curing and the ph and the bronchodilators and the flavoring and the ventilation tricks and the ammoniation, and everything else that they do to these cigarettes. you know, if she knew -- they talked about everyone knew that nicotine was -- everyone knew that nicotine was harmful, addictive, right? i think that is what counsel said, everyone knew. pt 02077. it is a brown & williamson document. very few consumers -- this is what the tobacco industry -- what year is this? mr. philipson: 1978. mr. rosen: 1978. very few consumers are aware of the effect of nicotine, either its addictive nature and nicotine is a poison. everyone knew? not true. the industry knew that the consuming public did not know and they relatively were not aware. 1964. everybody knew, everybody knew that nicotine was harmful. you could stand on a rooftop and yell it, and this was a major event, and everyone is going to stop smoking. pt 19233. what is the industry saying? "propaganda blast was tremendous, and the penetration of the public opinion widespread. i have the feeling that the public reaction -- i have the feeling that the public reaction was not as severe in order to have the emotional depth that i feared." the industry had no problem with it. it did not have the impact. and they capitalized on it. you know, we heard about warning labels. there was a warning label on all of the packs, right? pt 01040. rj reynolds document. let us see what they say about warning labels. they looked at it as a plus. they looked at it as a plus because kids see a warning label, they think it is dangerous, it is a little risky, it is rebellious. they looked at it as a positive. they talked about dr. cummings said that, you know, in the 1970s and '80s, the public health authorities were telling people to switch to filters and light cigarettes. dr. cummings' testimony, it was a major mistake doing that. they never would have done it had they known. mr. hohnbaum: objection, your honor, motion. the court: sustained. mr. hohnbaum: move to strike, please. the court: jury is to disregard. mr. rosen: counsel, you know, i agree with one thing. i agree with one thing. many things said, but i agree with one thing: their conduct was offensive. all right? and i think mr. keehfus said dr. cummings showed some wrong stuff, some bad stuff. this is not wrong stuff. this is not bad stuff. this is pure evil. pure evil. mitigating evidence. well, now they are regulated. in 2009, 2009, they are regulated. forty-five years it took for them to be regulated. and you know what? this is what they said about regulation. pt 02009. "i will be more cautious in using the pharmacomedical model. do we really want to tout cigarette smoke as a drug? it is, of course, but there are dangerous fda implications to having such conceptualization go beyond these walls." these companies did not want to be regulated, and it took 45 years. and you know what that is? mitigation? too little too late. okay? because they were not regulated when vivian wilkinson was smoking. and then ctr. they just put something about the ctr. they funded all research, all of this great stuff. are they still saying that ctr was a good thing? mr. hohnbaum: objection, your honor. still. the court: thank you. counsel, just argue the facts, all right? mr. rosen: you have the evidence on what ctr was and what they did. okay? and who they influenced. this is who they were going after: the public health, the schools, mass media, popular culture, house rules, government, federal agencies, regulatory agencies. mr. hohnbaum: objection, your honor, motion in limine. the court: counsel, that is your board. he is reading off of your board. overruled. mr. rosen: this is ctr. this is who ctr is. it was an industry shield. it was a front. that is what it is. that is what ctr was, and that is who they influenced, and they spent millions and millions and millions of dollars to shape public opinion. so that why? that curve kept going up, and people kept smoking. mitigation. they have tried to make a safe cigarette, right? spent all this money on making a safe cigarette. you know what testimony you heard? rj reynolds just merged with lorillard. they just bought another company that sells the most popular menthol, combustible, traditional cigarette, newport. that is who they are today. they are not trying to make a safer cigarette. their conduct is despicable. and the evidence is overwhelming. they said to me about the evidence overwhelming. the evidence is overwhelming in this case on behalf of plaintiff. she was addicted to the cigarettes containing nicotine. it was a legal cause of her copd. she died from it. she suffered from it. her family -- can you bring this up? the court: wrap this up, counsel. mr. rosen: wrapping it up. it mattered. it affects people in the most profound way. i truly appreciate your time. thank you.