3 mr. geraghty: thank you, your honor. may it please the court. good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen. jurors: good afternoon. mr. geraghty: you know at this point that my name is bill geraghty, and i represent philip morris usa in this case. i think it goes without saying that it has been a long trial. and if you count the voir dire process, we have been together now the better part of two and a half weeks. and i think we are all happy to be getting close to the end of the case. and i want to start the same way mr. schlesinger did, and that is by thanking you for your jury service. we appreciate very much that you all have made a tremendous sacrifice of your time to be here for the better part of two and a half weeks. and we know from the questions that you yourselves put to the witnesses that you have been paying close attention to the evidence, and we really appreciate that. we are getting very close to the end of the case. and pretty soon, judge murphy is going to give you the final legal instructions and a verdict form. and that verdict form will have the questions that you will answer that will decide the issues in this case. but before you head off to deliberate, this is my opportunity to summarize the evidence that we have seen and heard over the last two weeks. and when i first spoke to you almost two weeks ago, i told you that the plaintiff would spend a lot of time talking about statements made and ideas held by philip morris and r.j. reynolds, many of which were made 30, 40, and in some instances, more than 50 years ago. and i also told you we would not try to defend those statements. philip morris and r.j. reynolds made statements and expressed ideas that today, no one would say or think. i told you that for too long, they denied the fact that cigarette smoking caused lung cancer, and that cigarette smoking could be addictive, long after the public already knew those things. and i told you all of that, ladies and gentlemen, two weeks ago before any of the evidence was presented. but i also told you that if that was all this case was about, if all the plaintiff had to prove was that cigarette company executives made inappropriate statements, we would not have spent the last two weeks together. but we did. and that is because, ladies and gentlemen, this case is not about all cigarette smokers. the case is not about whether you believe people should or should not smoke cigarettes. this case is about virginia varner, it is about her life, and the decisions that she made about how to live her life. and that is why when you get that verdict form from judge murphy, you will see that every question asks you specifically about virginia varner. not all cigarette smokers and not the general public. now, you have heard dr. proctor. and dr. proctor told you he has made $4 million testifying against philip morris and other cigarette companies. he showed you many of the same documents and videotapes that he has shown to literally hundreds of other juries in other cases in which he is testified. what else did dr. proctor tell you? he told you he knew absolutely nothing about virginia varner. he told you he had no idea whether virginia varner ever read or saw or heard any of the statements or any of the documents that he showed you. after being on the witness stand for four days during that first week of the trial, he told you nothing about virginia varner. but now you know that is what this case is all about. you learned during the course of the last two weeks that virginia varner was a strong, intelligent, and capable person who lived her life the way she wanted to live it. she told her daughter decades ago in a very matter-of-fact way, "these cigarettes are killing me." smoking is killing me. that is what she told her daughter decades ago. decades ago. and years later, years later in 1992, when her husband had a heart attack, when he quit smoking and when he encouraged her to quit for the very first time, what did she say to him? did she say: i want to quit? i've tried to quit, but i cannot? that is not what she said. what she said to him, again, in a very matter-of-fact way was, "i am going to die anyway." "i am going to die anyway." and, ladies and gentlemen, that tells you about virginia varner's attitude about cigarette smoking. and she made no effort to quit in 1992 because she enjoyed smoking cigarettes, she wanted to smoke. that is what she wanted to do. what else have you heard about virginia varner that is undisputed? well, mr. varner told you that he knew that smoking could cause lung cancer as far back as 1966 when those first warning labels appeared on cigarette packs. he told you he most likely discussed those warning labels with virginia varner. you heard that her mother was a heavy cigarette smoker who was diagnosed with emphysema in the late 1970s or early 1980s. her mother eventually needed a wheelchair and was bedridden from her illness. around that same period of time, virginia varner developed a smoker's cough and a smoker's wheeze. she discussed it with her own doctors. the doctors told her the cough and the wheeze are caused because you smoke cigarettes. she told her daughter lori at that time, "these cigarettes are killing me." she told her that cigarette smoking was addictive and cigarette smoking is bad for your health. the evidence has shown, ladies and gentlemen, that virginia varner knew cigarette smoking was dangerous and potentially addictive for decades before she got lung cancer. so ask yourself why plaintiff spent an hour trying to persuade you that ms. varner was somehow tricked into smoking. but what you heard is totally inconsistent with the evidence that we have seen and heard about virginia varner over the last two weeks. now, before i move on, let me say something about the findings from the earlier class action. you heard judge murphy's instructions, and there is no debate about this issue. those findings do not tell you how to answer any of the questions you will be asked to decide on the verdict form. and that is because, ladies and gentlemen, you get to decide based on your verdict in this case, based on the evidence you have heard over the last two weeks, whether those findings have any applicability to virginia varner and the lifestyle choices that she made. i told you in my opening statement two weeks ago this case presents a simple question. are we going to hold philip morris responsible, legally responsible for virginia varner's decision to smoke cigarettes and award joseph varner millions of dollars in damages when the evidence clearly shows that they lived their lives exactly the way they wanted to live it; they smoked cigarettes because that is what they wanted to do; and they had no real interest in quitting, until the very end. you now know, ladies and gentlemen, that virginia varner never made any real effort to quit smoking until 1994, when unfortunately she was diagnosed with lung cancer. you did not hear anything from mr. schlesinger about that at all. you are the only jury that has heard the evidence in virginia varner's case, and you get to decide the issues in this case. you get to decide that, ladies and gentlemen. now, in just a minute we are going to walk through the significant events in virginia varner's life, because this case is about her, and we will show you that everything i told you in my opening statement has turned out to be true. when i talked to you during the opening statements two weeks ago, i discussed what i called the sources of evidence. the sources of evidence. and i asked you to pay close attention to the important sources of evidence. and what did i mean by that? well, just about everything you saw during the course of this trial came from what joseph varner himself told us in his deposition and from what one of his children said in their depositions. and as i predicted two weeks ago, many of the things that joseph varner and his children tried to tell you during this trial are inconsistent with or contradicted by what they said in their deposition testimony under oath before the trial started. and i told you that you would get to be the judges of the facts. you get to decide what testimony you choose to believe in this case. judge murphy has given you the instructions. and in the packet that you have been given, there is an instruction on what is called the believability of witnesses. i believe it is instruction number 3 in your packet. and this is instruction number 3. it says: in evaluating the believability of any witness and the weight you will give the testimony of any witness, you may properly consider. and then there is a series of things for you to consider. among them is: any interest the witness may have in the outcome of the case. and by "interest," we mean a financial interest to what you now appreciate is to the tune of $10 million. the instruction goes on to say that you can consider the reasonableness of the testimony of the witness considered in the light of all the evidence in the case, and in light of your own experience and common sense. ladies and gentlemen, i encourage you, i ask you, i implore you to use your common sense and your everyday life experiences when you evaluate the testimony you have heard in this case. and that is particularly important when it comes to mr. varner and his two children who testified live in this courtroom. judge murphy has told you that you can accept or reject any testimony you hear in this case. and that is your job and your job alone. so let me give you some examples of when joseph varner and lori cohen and joey varner told you one thing from this witness stand during the trial, but said the exact opposite in their depositions under oath. you may remember when joseph varner, sr. testified, the plaintiff. one of the very first questions i asked him was: and you had never tried to quit smoking at any point before you had the heart attack in 1992, correct? and he started to say: i think i did. that is what he told you right from this witness stand under oath. but remember, ladies and gentlemen, we showed you his videotaped deposition testimony from before the trial, and we played it for you. can you show that, please? this is what he said before the trial on the same point. 21 22 follows:) question: had you tried to quit before the time you quit in 1992? answer: no. (video clip concluded.) mr. geraghty: so that was mr. varner in his deposition about a year ago in august, saying the exact opposite of what he tried to tell you from the witness stand here during the course of this trial. now, later i asked him if he loved his current wife, monique varner. this is the testimony from here in court. question: you loved monique, did not you? answer: no. well, is not it true that you used to love monique, but not anymore? his answer: i do not think so, no. but then you may recall the judge allowed me to confront him with the deposition testimony he gave again, about a year before the trial. and this is what he said. before the trial, in his deposition under oath, he said: so i do not love monique. i used to, but i do not no more. that was his testimony under oath in his deposition. so you have to ask yourselves, ladies and gentlemen, in a case in which he is now asked to be awarded millions of dollars in damages, if mr. varner is willing to deny under oath that he was in love with a woman he lived with for 20 years -- mr. schlesinger: objection. the court: excuse me, what is the objection? overruled. ladies and gentlemen, you rely on your own recollection of the evidence. proceed. mr. geraghty: if mr. varner is willing to deny under oath that he was in love with a woman -- mr. schlesinger: objection, your honor. it is mitigation, against the rule. the court: thank you. i've instructed the jury on this point, counsel. overruled. you can proceed, counsel. mr. geraghty: if mr. varner is willing to deny under oath that he was in love with a woman he spent 20 years with, can you believe anything he tells you when it comes to the substantive facts of this case? what about lori cohen? she told you she moved to south carolina around the time his father began a relationship with his second wife, monique varner. she told you she is only seen her father two or three times in the last 20 years, but if you believe what she said, she also said she would seen him five or six times just since january of this year. so what did lori cohen say? i asked lori cohen: you remember your mother singing a song called smoke, smoke, smoke that cigarette by a country performer named tex williams? her answer: i've heard of it. i do not recall whether it was my mother, but i do not recall -- but i do recall. do not you recall that your mother sang that song around the house? her answer: no, sir, she did not sing it around the house. that is what lori cohen told you from this witness stand in the last two weeks. but then remember, judge murphy allowed me to confront her with her deposition testimony given before the trial. here is what she said in her deposition testimony before trial. have you ever heard the song smoke, smoke, smoke that cigarette by a country western artist tex williams? answer: yes, smoke. question: when do you first recall hearing that song? my mother sang it. your mother would sing it? answer: yeah. that was lori cohen's testimony under oath before the trial started. what happened when i confronted her with other testimony in the case? she initially tried to tell you that her mother tried to quit smoking a couple of times, and when she did, she looked like a heroin addict coming off of heroin. that is what lori cohen told you from this witness stand. but when i cross-examined her, she admitted that her mother never tried to quit smoking when her grandmother was diagnosed with emphysema, when her doctors told her mother that the cough and the wheeze were caused by smoking and when mr. varner had a heart attack. and she also admitted to you that to her knowledge, her mother never went a single day without smoking cigarettes. that was lori cohen's testimony. and finally, what about joseph varner, jr.? he testified that his mother said she wanted to quit smoking numerous times. he said he heard it a lot. here is his testimony. again, this is on direct examination, when mr. hammer was asking the questions. question: based upon your observations, did you observe that your mom wanted to quit? answer: yes. tell us about that, please. answer: well, i've heard her say, numerous times, over the years. but this is what he said when i asked him questions on cross-examination. is not it true that you do not recall your mother making efforts to quit smoking before she was diagnosed with lung cancer? his answer: i do not remember. i do not recall, no. and then i followed up: and you do not recall your mother stopping smoking for even one day before she was diagnosed with cancer? his answer: i do not remember. i do not remember. and, in fact, one of you, ladies and gentlemen, asked him a very insightful question, which the court then read to him. and the question was: when did mrs. varner first tell you that she wanted to quit smoking? he hemmed and he hawed, but at the end of the day, he said he did not know. he did not know. so, ladies and gentlemen, you get to use your common sense, your personal life experiences, to draw reasonable conclusions and inferences from the evidence and to decide whether or not you are going to believe some of the things that joseph varner and his children have told you. and, again, ladies and gentlemen, this is your job and your job alone. now, you may remember at the very beginning of the case i told you this case was about two words: control and responsibility. and i asked you to simply ask yourself the following series of questions. and we are going to walk through all the significant events in virginia varner's life again. and again, i would ask you, ask yourself the following series of questions: who was in control of her lifestyle choices? who was in control of her efforts to quit smoking? who controlled her motivation to quit? whether virginia varner was ever motivated to quit at any time before 1994. was virginia varner addicted? and if so, was her addiction so strong, so substantial that it robbed her of her free will? or was virginia varner simply someone who enjoyed smoking cigarettes and had no real interest in quitting, until the very end? and finally ask yourself, did virginia varner rely on anything that philip morris or r.j. reynolds said about the health risks or addictive nature of smoking? and when you answer these questions, when you answer these questions on your own, you will know that virginia varner was always in control and therefore responsible for her own actions. in this country we all have the right to make decisions for ourselves, even decisions that today, with the benefit of hindsight, we might say were not in her best interests. we believe in free will. that is a fundamental principle upon which our country was founded. you have the right to make your own decisions in life, but with that right comes the obligation to accept personal responsibility for the consequences of those decisions. now let me just very briefly talk about the burden of proof. joseph varner bears the burden of proof on all of his claims in this case by what the court referred to as the greater weight of the evidence. so what does that mean? that means that mr. varner and his lawyers were required to bring you more persuasive, more convincing evidence than the mountain of evidence that we have presented that virginia varner was always in control; that she was not some hopeless, mindless addict who was robbed of her free will; that she was never motivated to quit smoking at any point before her lung cancer diagnosis in 1994. your honor, i'm going to move into something else. so it is 12:30 -- the court: perfect time to break. mr. geraghty: -- this might be a good time to take the lunch break. the court: all right. ladies and gentlemen, we will take our luncheon recess now. counsel, thank you. i do apologize. i did not realize the lunch was there, but it is sitting in front of me. i get a text from my clerk that it is there all the time. so i apologize for that. just remember the admonition. you are not to discuss the case. do not form any opinion about the case. do not allow anyone to discuss the case in your presence, certainly no research. just leave your notepads on your chairs. before you go in, my thought is we would like to continue. i do not know exactly how much time you need to eat your lunch. 45 minutes, is that enough time for everybody? jurors: yes. [#deleted recess#] mr. geraghty: thank you, your honor. may it please the court again. good afternoon, again, ladies and gentlemen. i hope you all had a good lunch, and i'm going to try to move along here and move us through the afternoon and cover the evidence you have heard. now i told you we were going to walk through all the significant events in virginia varner's life, and we are going to do that right now. and i'm going to remind you of what we heard over the last two weeks. and i just want to let you know at the front end, this is the same exact timeline that i showed you in my opening statement, exactly the same. and i'm going to show you that everything we told you in opening statement we have now proved over the course of the last two weeks. so let me start at the beginning. you know virginia varner was born on april the 22nd, 1941, in aiken, south carolina security, tobacco country. we know that her family had a farm back in south carolina, and they owned a general store where they sold cigarettes. and that is basically all we really know about her early years. you know her parents are ralph and gertrude woodward and that they are longtime cigarette smokers themselves. and that is important because both dr. difranza and dr. ticknor told you that a key predictor in whether someone will start smoking if their parents smoked cigarettes. so we know that her parents smoked cigarettes. they moved to miami sometime in the early to mid 1950s. we are not exactly sure when. they moved down the street from joseph varner. he begins to date his wife in 1957 or 1958. and you heard mr. varner tell you that he was smoking cigarettes, but he was hiding his cigarette smoking from his parents because he knew they would not approve. he knew during this period of time that his wife was smoking, but she also did not smoke cigarettes in front of his mother or father. so we do not know much about her cigarette smoking at this point in time. what we do know is they are smoking filtered cigarettes from the very beginning, filtered cigarettes. in 1959, joseph and virginia varner get married. you know that their children -- joseph, jr., born in 1960; lisa roberts, 1961; lori cohen, 1965. the family moves to hollywood in about 1962. now, you heard mr. schlesinger say that the american public did not know that cigarette smoking could cause cancer and could be addictive. but after the evidence you heard, you know that is simply not the case and certainly not the case as far as virginia varner is concerned. remember dr. proctor testified. he told you as far back as 1906 or 1907 that the florida board of health had determined that today cigarettes are looked upon by all as the worst form of tobacco addiction, the very worst form of tobacco addiction. that is in 1906, 1907. you heard about "coffin nails" and "cancer sticks" and "nicotine fiends" and "nicotine fits." these were terms people used to refer to cigarettes and cigarette smokers over a hundred years ago. and mr. varner told you he heard the terms "coffin nails" and "cancer sticks." he understood exactly what those terms meant. he heard the song smoke, smoke, smoke that cigarette. he told you he was sure his wife heard it as well. and they understood, even though they were joking about it, that it meant you can puff, puff, puff yourself to death. you heard that in the 1930s and '40s and '50s popular magazines like reader's digest published articles about cigarette smoking. and these are just some of examples that we showed you from 1935, '38, '41, '52. and these articles talked about the fact that cigarettes cause cancer. cigarettes have nicotine in them, and the nicotine in cigarettes can be addictive, and people can become addicted to smoking cigarettes. that is in reader's digest magazine in the 1930s, '40s and '50s. as we move further along on the timeline to the early 1950s, you heard that scientific studies are published that specifically link cigarette smoking with lung cancer. and you will remember the article in life magazine. this is "smoke gets in the news" from life magazine, december of 1953. we walked through all those pictures with dr. proctor. it says: doctors report tobacco tar induces mouse cancer. note: rise in cigarette use and human lung cancer. this is 1953. and you also heard that six months after this life magazine article comes out, there is a poll conducted that shows that ninety percent of the american public had read or heard something to the effect that cigarette smoking may be a cause of cancer of the lung. may be a cause of cancer of the lung. that is in june of 1954, when virginia varner would have been 12 years old, just 12 years old. now you heard that the publicity that cigarette smoking causes lung cancer continues to build throughout the 1950s and the 1960s, and that brings us to january of 1964. virginia varner is 22 years old, and in january of 1964, the united states surgeon general issues a report that says cigarette smoking causes lung cancer. can you see the screen? is this blocking the screen? let me move -- juror: i can see. mr. geraghty: okay. are you sure? juror: i can see. i appreciate it. mr. geraghty: okay. the surgeon general in january 1964 says cigarette smoking causes lung cancer, chronic bronchitis and increases the risk of dying from emphysema. and you know that those studies, the surgeon general's report, front-page news on newspapers and magazines all across the united states, including right here in broward county. this is the hollywood sun tattler, the paper that you heard lori cohen and lisa roberts say that the varner family got in their home. this is friday, january 10th, 1964: report to cite cigarette hazards. virginia varner is 22 years old. here is the very next day. same paper, hollywood sun tattler: cigarettes major health hazard. this is the one i showed in my opening. this is from the florida sun-sentinel, january 12th, 1964: smoking called "grave" hazard. grave hazard. we showed you the broadcast from cbs news and harry reasoner, so you know that every american, including virginia varner, was told in 1964 that cigarette smoking causes lung cancer. and this is a key event in the timeline. remember what dr. proctor told you. plaintiff's own expert, dr. proctor. he told you the 1964 surgeon general's report was the beginning of the end of cigarettes in this country. the beginning of the end of cigarettes. he told you it was the turning point on smoking rates. and he told you it began an unprecedented era of quitting smoking in this country. you heard mr. schlesinger talk about total cigarette consumption. well, dr. proctor told you in 1964 adult per capita cigarette consumption peaked in 1964, and it has been on a steady decline ever since, in 1964. so two years later, in 1966, the very first warning appears on cigarettes. it says: caution, cigarette smoking may be hazardous to your health. here is the pack you saw in evidence several times. it is a pack of marlboros with that warning label on the side. this warning was printed on every pack of cigarettes sold in the united states beginning in january of 1966 when virginia varner would have been 24 years old. 24 years old. and it appeared on every pack of cigarettes sold. filtered, unfiltered, you name it, that warning appeared on it. mr. varner testified that he learned a long time ago that cigarette smoking could cause lung cancer, and he referred specifically to this warning label as the source of why he believed that. he told you that he and his wife most likely discussed this warning label all the way back in 1966. mr. schlesinger: objection, judge, not a warning label. the court: thank you. objection noted. it is overruled. mr. geraghty: he said: i'm sure we probably talked about it. it is just common sense that if they put this on the pack of cigarettes you are going to talk about it. here's his testimony about the warning label; and it is a little bit long, but let me walk you through it. and i'm asking the questions. and it says: this is what you meant when you referred to the fact that you had heard -- and we are talking over one another. he says, answer, "that it may cause --" and i asked him: that cigarette smoking may cause lung cancer, quote, a long time ago? his answer is: yes. so you knew this warning was on the pack back in 1966? his answer: yeah. and a few minutes later, i asked him the following question: the label on the screen here, you remember that when you saw this label, you associated in your mind that the warning had something to do with lung cancer? and he says: yes. that is mr. varner's testimony that you heard right in this courtroom during the course of the trial. and remember now, ladies and gentlemen, at this point in time, he and his wife are both smoking marlboro red cigarettes. filtered marlboro red cigarettes. and all of this, ladies and gentlemen, took place more than 50 years ago. more than 50 years ago. let us go to the next page of the timeline. and we are going to start below the blue bar. i know it is a little tough for you all to see it, but i'll try to walk you through it. in 1970, congress changes the warning label. and the warning label as of 1970 says: the surgeon general has determined that cigarette smoking is dangerous to your health. and here's, again, a pack of marlboro cigarettes with that warning label that first began to appear in 1970, right on the side of the pack. one year later in 1971, all cigarette ads are taken off of television and radio here in the united states. and in 1972, this surgeon general's warning is required to appear on any cigarette advertisement in a newspaper, a magazine, or on a billboard. now, mr. varner told you that he and his wife did not really pay much attention to this warning because, as he put it: it did not tell them anything they did not already know. it did not tell them anything they did not already know. and think about it, ladies and gentlemen. you heard the evidence. during this period of time, the late 1960s and early 1970s, there is an incredible amount of information published about the health risks of smoking. you saw the public service announcements; bill talman, john wayne. we talked about john wayne. you remember mr. varner's testimony about john wayne. he referred to john wayne as one of his heroes. and mr. varner told you he knew that john wayne had been diagnosed with lung cancer because he smoked cigarettes by the early 1970s. he told you that. and you saw the public service announcement that he gave. now, the plaintiff has tried to tell you that somehow all these warnings and health messages were being drowned out by statements made by cigarette companies. but remember what even dr. proctor had to admit. he told you that between 1974 when that very first surgeon general's report came out and 1979, 30 million americans quit smoking. thirty million people quit smoking during that 15-year period. that is 2 million people every single year. and this is during the same period of time that you saw all those public statements by the tobacco institute saying: we do not know. maybe it does, maybe it does not. all during that same period of time. nevertheless, 30 million americans quit smoking because of the same warnings and the same health messages that joseph and virginia varner received. and remember again, this is during a period of time, there is no nicotine replacement therapy. there is no nicorette gum, there is no nicotine patch, there is no zyban, there is no chantix. but millions quit smoking cold turkey, and they quit for good. and that is the evidence you have heard over the course of the last two weeks. of course, ladies and gentlemen, the evidence now shows mrs. varner received those same warnings and health messages. how do we know that? well, we know that because you heard in the late 1970s or early 1980s, her mother, gertrude woodward, develops emphysema. and you now know that emphysema is a type of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, or copd, that is caused by smoking cigarettes. you heard the testimony from lori cohen and lisa roberts. so what all did you hear? you heard that gertrude woodward was a heavy cigarette smoker; that she was diagnosed with emphysema because she smoked cigarettes; that she had serious breathing problems. her condition got worse and worse over the years. lisa roberts told you that her grandmother, her mother's mother, had to use a wheelchair, and eventually was bedridden because of her emphysema. and, most importantly, you heard that virginia varner took care of her mother during this period of time, took her to many of her doctor's appointments for her emphysema. gertrude woodward lived in the house next door to mr. and mrs. varner during the period of time when this all happens. so, ladies and gentlemen, there is no question based on the evidence you have heard that virginia varner saw firsthand the serious health problems that cigarette smoking could cause in her own mother. in fact, during the same period of time, the early to mid 1980s, 1982 or 1983, you heard virginia varner develops a smoker's wheeze and cough. she attributes the smoker's cough and wheeze to her cigarette smoking. she goes to see the doctors. the doctors tell her: you are wheezing and you are coughing because you smoke cigarettes. you heard all of that from lori cohen. here is what lori cohen told you when she testified. question: your mother told you that her smoker's cough and her smoker's wheeze were caused by cigarette smoking, right? her answer: correct. your mother told you that her doctors told her that the wheeze and the cough were caused by her cigarette smoking? and her answer is: correct. that is what you heard from lori cohen. and, of course, you know virginia varner appreciates the significance of what the doctors told her. at first, lori cohen tried to deny this, but she eventually acknowledged that almost every morning, her mother would cough and wheeze and say: these cigarettes are killing me. smoking is killing me. here's the testimony. "when do you first recall having a discussion with your mother during which she said something to the effect smoking is killing me? "my mother would say that every morning when she got up and coughed and could not breathe." that is undisputed testimony you have heard in this case, ladies and gentlemen. undisputed. now, the plaintiff has suggested to you that even though the doctors told her that the cough and the wheeze were caused by smoking, that somehow the doctors never told virginia varner that she should quit smoking. but just think about that for one minute. judge murphy has instructed you that you can draw reasonable inferences from the evidence and use reason and common sense and your everyday life experiences. what was the evidence you heard? you heard from three medical doctors: dr. gup, dr. difranza, dr. ticknor. all of them have been practicing medicine since the late 1970s. and what did they tell you? all three of them told you they tell every one of their patients to quit smoking. they tell their patients to quit smoking, because when you quit, your risk of developing lung cancer and copd goes down, even if you have been smoking for many years. the sooner you quit, the better your chances are of avoiding a smoking-related illness. so, ladies and gentlemen, your common sense and your everyday life experiences and the evidence you have heard in this case tells you, of course the doctors told virginia varner to quit. but we know that virginia varner did not listen to her doctors. even lori cohen admitted to you, her mother did not try to quit smoking when the doctors told her the smoker's cough and wheeze were caused by smoking. and based on the testimony you have heard in this case, if ms. varner had followed her doctor's advice, she likely never would have developed lung cancer, and we would not be here today. now, in 1985 -- we move forward, we are below the blue bar here -- the warning labels on cigarette packs change again. one of the warnings says: surgeon general's warning. smoking causes lung cancer, heart disease, emphysema and may complicate pregnancy. that is what the warning label said. again, joseph varner told you he and his wife did not pay attention to this warning, because it did not tell them anything they had not already known for years at this point in time. so what did mrs. varner do with all this information? what does the evidence show? well, plaintiff's own experts tell you the most important factor that determines whether someone will quit is motivation. are you motivated to quit. dr. ticknor told you the same thing. simply put, unless you really want to quit, unless you really try to quit, you are not going to quit. and the evidence in this case shows that virginia and joseph varner enjoyed smoking cigarettes. and for many years, they simply had no interest in quitting. ms. varner enjoyed smoking marlboro red cigarettes. she enjoyed the taste of marlboro red. you heard she liked to double inhale. she taught her husband how to double inhale. she enjoyed smoking when she drank coffee in the morning, when she socialized with her girlfriends, after meals, when she drank alcohol, when her and her husband would retire to their bedroom and watch television in the evening. now, joseph varner, right here on the witness stand, denied that his wife enjoyed smoking cigarettes. that is what he did. he told you he knew she was addicted. he knew she was addicted, but he did not think she enjoyed smoking. he refused to admit that his wife, with whom he had spent 35 years together, enjoyed smoking. mr. schlesinger: objection, judge. what he admits. it is attacking the prosecution of the case, what he refused to admit. the court: i sustain the objection. mr. geraghty: he denied on the witness stand that his wife enjoyed smoking cigarettes, his wife with whom he had lived for 35 years. that is why we talked about all of the things that he and his wife enjoyed doing together. remember, he told you about the motorcycle club? what did he tell you? he told you his wife and he would ride on his motorcycle, go to the club, socialize with friends, shoot pool, drink beer, dance, and smoke cigarettes. and he told you that they enjoyed doing every single one of those things all the time, except smoke cigarettes. that is what he told you. but, of course, they did. who would not, ladies and gentlemen? these are all activities that your common sense and everyday life experience tells you people enjoy doing. but mr. varner denied that his wife enjoyed smoking cigarettes while doing many of these things. he is one hundred percent confident she is addicted, but he does not know whether she enjoyed smoking. and that is why, ladies and gentlemen, we asked him all those questions. because the truth is and the evidence shows you cannot live with someone for almost 35 years and not know what they enjoy, what they love to do. that is what being in a relationship is all about. and, of course, lori cohen and lisa roberts, her two daughters, what did they tell you? they said of course their mother enjoyed smoking cigarettes, and they gave you many examples. so how do you square the evidence you heard about virginia varner from her two daughters with the testimony that her husband gave? it is very simple. he said all those things on the witness stand after he is filed a lawsuit in which he is now asked you to award him -- mr. schlesinger: objection, your honor. the court: your objection is noted. overruled. mr. geraghty: he said all of those things to you on the witness stand under oath after he is filed a lawsuit in which he is now asked you, ladies and gentlemen, to award him $10 million. mr. schlesinger: objection, your honor, that attacks the prosecution of this case. the court: thank you. no speaking objections. if you want to approach, i'm more than happy to do it. mr. schlesinger: yes, i do. (the following discussion was held at sidebar:) the court: you do not think that goes to bias and motivation? mr. schlesinger: may it please the court. i think that -- the court: you do not believe it goes to bias? that is my question. mr. schlesinger: the money goes to bias and motivation, but the way he said it was that he is attacking his right to file a lawsuit. you can say does he have an interest in getting money. they completely have turned the idea of what you can talk about on its head and say anytime we say anything, we are attacking the defense. he has every right to file a lawsuit. they are attacking his right to file a lawsuit. they can say he is asking for money damages. you can consider his bias and motivation because he is seeking a monetary award. but they say because he had filed a lawsuit claiming money damages. he has an absolute right to do that. for them to attack that is directly on point with what they vociferously say we did. so in this situation, that was the directly improper wording of it. that is the directly improper wording of it. he can spin this case, he is seeking money. he can say you can consider that with his credibility, bias, because he seeks money. but you cannot say that after he filed a lawsuit, because you are attacking his right to file a lawsuit. the court: thank you. wish to be heard? mr. geraghty: no, sir. the court: objection is overruled. you said you wanted to know when an hour was coming up. you have an hour and ten minutes, approximately. mr. geraghty: i have an hour and ten? oh, i'm at an hour and ten? the court: you will be at an hour in ten minutes. i misspoke. i'm sorry. (sidebar discussion concluded, and the following was held in open court:) the court: counsel, when you are ready, you may proceed. mr. geraghty: thank you, your honor. that raises the question, did virginia varner make any serious effort to quit smoking before she was diagnosed with lung cancer in 1994? now, after two weeks together, you have not heard any credible or reliable evidence to support that. in fact, the overwhelming evidence you have heard demonstrates that she never made any effort to quit before her lung cancer diagnosis. first, you heard from joey varner, who he told -- he told you: i think my mother said she wanted to quit smoking. but he admitted he does not recall her ever making any effort to quit smoking at all. at any point in time. you heard from lisa roberts. lisa roberts told you flat out: my mother never said she wanted to quit smoking, and i never observed her ever try to quit at any point in time, until she had lung cancer in 1994. and mr. varner reluctantly agreed to the same thing. the only one who claims her mother tried to quit smoking a couple of times was lori cohen. and she told you her mother, after stopping cigarettes for a couple of hours, acted like a heroin addict coming off of heroin. that is what she told you. think about that, ladies and gentlemen. do not you think that if there was any truth to what lori cohen told you about that, someone else in the family would have observed that, remembered it, and told you the same thing here in this courtroom? after all, everyone said that they basically saw virginia varner every single day. mr. varner, his son joseph varner, lisa roberts. lori cohen's testimony simply does not square with everything else you now know about how virginia varner lived her life. to understand ms. varner's attitude about cigarette smoking, all you have to do is look at what happened when her husband had the heart attack in 1992. and that is right here. you may recall i told you i was not sure if the evidence would show it was '89 or '92. but mr. varner told you, in 1992 that he had a heart attack, he was rushed to the emergency room. the doctors told him: if you do not quit, you are going to have another heart attack and die, and he quit smoking cold turkey right there on the spot. that is what he told you. and then he said for the very first time in his life, the very first time in their marriage in 1992, he first encouraged his wife to quit smoking. that is what he told you. and this is what his testimony was about that. question: now, at the time that you had the heart attack and you quit in 1992, you told your wife, virginia varner, that she should quit smoking too? his answer: yes. and you looked right at her and you told her: do not smoke cigarettes? answer: yes. you told her: smoking will kill you, right? his answer: yes. and she kind of joked in response and said: well, i'm going to die anyway. his answer: yes. that is the undisputed testimony of joseph varner in this case. that is what he told you. and, frankly, this response tells you everything you need to know about virginia varner's feelings about cigarette smoking. mr. schlesinger told you 1992 was not an important date. it is the key date. because here we are, she smoked cigarettes at this point for the better part of 35 years. she is watched her mother develop emphysema. she is watched her husband have a heart attack. and what is her attitude? i'm going to die anyway. and it was not some fatalistic comment. he told you, she joked. so if this is what she thinks about cigarette smoking in 1992, after all of that, what makes you think that at any point in time prior to this date she ever really had any interest in quitting? there is zero evidence of that in the record. this is the most specific statement any of her family members have told us about her true attitude about cigarette smoking. and the plaintiff says it is not important. well, at the end of the day, ladies and gentlemen, you get to decide what evidence is important. but what you also heard, what you also heard is that virginia varner does make a significant change in her behavior. she stops smoking around her husband in 1992 when he quits. and everyone told you this, ladies and gentlemen. everyone. there is absolutely no dispute about this. joseph varner himself, lori cohen, lisa roberts. think about the significance of that. this is after they have been married for 35 years, during which they smoked around one another every single day. in the morning with coffee, after meals, in the evenings, when they are at the motorcycle club. they used to smoke together every single night in their bedroom watching the local news or the johnny carson show. mr. varner said it was a ritual. but in 1992, when it is important to her because her husband no longer smokes, ms. varner controls where, when, and how much she smokes, because it is important to her husband. and the fact that ms. varner could control where and when she smoked is important, because you heard if you can control your use of a substance, then you are not addicted. and when it was important, when it mattered to her, virginia varner controlled her smoking. that is the undisputed evidence in the case. that brings us to 1994. you have already heard all this. you know that she has -- she coughs up blood. she goes to see the doctor. dr. gup tells her that she probably has lung cancer. they have a bronchoscopy that confirms that diagnosis. and she is scheduled to have exploratory surgery to determine whether the cancer can be removed and she can be cured. and about two weeks before that surgery, virginia varner quits smoking. and this is that record. this record is in evidence. you have seen it a couple times already. but this is the record where on august the 18th, she tells the anesthesiologist who is going to be part of the surgical procedure: i quit smoking two weeks ago. that is what the record shows. now, you know that on august the 22nd, they have the surgery. and, unfortunately, the doctors determined that the cancer was inoperable; meaning, it cannot be removed, and there is no cure. and the doctors tell ms. varner and her family that she only has six months left to live. and, unfortunately, you heard that she passes away in january of 1995. now, you heard that virginia varner quit smoking a few weeks before the surgery. everyone agreed that she quit smoking in august of 1994. joseph varner, sr., joseph varner, jr., lisa roberts. they all told you they never saw virginia varner smoke another cigarette again after this diagnosis. lori cohen told you that after her mother learned that her condition was terminal and there was no cure, that she would give her mother one or two cigarettes each day in those last couple of months. but even if you accept ms. cohen's testimony on this point, all of the experts told you that this was an incredibly significant change in virginia varner's smoking behavior. to go from smoking one to two packs of cigarettes a day to no cigarettes, to one to two cigarettes per day, particularly in light of what she was dealing with, is a significant change in her smoking behavior. so there will be no question that virginia varner had the willpower when she decided to apply it to control her smoking and to quit smoking when she was motivated to do so. now, real briefly, you heard that mr. varner begins to date about a year after his wife died. you heard that he met a woman named regina brown. she moved in with him, and that relationship lasted about six months. and not long thereafter, in 1996, he meets monique varner. they start a relationship. monique moves in with mr. varner shortly thereafter. they have a daughter named brianna, who is born in 2002, a few years later, and they get married in 2007. and you heard that they continued to live together for the next seven or eight years, until late 2014 or 2015, when they apparently got separated. and that, ladies and gentlemen, is the story that we have all seen and heard in this courtroom over the last two weeks. that is the evidence. now, ladies and gentlemen, with the time i have remaining, i want to switch gears with you, which i like to do. i told you that this case was about two words: control and responsibility. and even though that is what this case is all about, you will not see those two specific words on the verdict form. so with the time i have left, i'd like to talk to you about the questions you will have to answer on the verdict form. the court: thirty minutes, counsel. mr. geraghty: thank you, your honor. so here is the very first question, the class membership question you are going to be asked to decide. was virginia varner addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine? and if so, was such addiction a legal cause of her lung cancer or her copd? and i told you in the opening statement you could break this question down into really two pieces. the first part is, was she addicted; and if so, number 2, was her claimed addiction a legal cause of her lung cancer and death or copd. if you answer "no" to this question, that is a verdict for philip morris. if you were to answer "yes" to this question, that means you have decided to award some money damages to joseph varner. keep in mind that the plaintiff bears the burden of proof on this question by the greater weight of the evidence. so the first part of the question asks: was virginia varner addicted to cigarettes? was she addicted to cigarettes? in the instructions you have been given, the court did not give you a definition of addiction or a set of criteria to use to determine whether someone is addicted. so what is the evidence you have heard? well, plaintiff brought you dr. gup first. and dr. gup is the pulmonologist, the lung doctor who saw mrs. varner 22 years ago in 1994. and because it was more than 20 years ago, he told you he does not remember anything about his care and treatment of virginia varner, but he acknowledged that when he first saw her on july the 21st, it was a very busy clinic. he was in a hurry, and he did not have the ability to spend much time with her. he told you all those things. during that first visit when he wrote down his impression "tobacco addiction," dr. gup admitted that the only thing he knew about virginia varner's smoking history was that she had smoked two packs a day for 40 years and she had cut down to about one pack per day in the month before he saw her. he told you that is all he knew about her smoking history. and from his perspective, that is all he needed to know. he said: as far as i was concerned, that meant she was addicted. he also told you that he did nothing further to confirm his impression. why is that important? well, remember what he also told you. when he suspected that she had lung cancer he ordered a follow-up test, the bronchoscopy, to confirm that she did, in fact, have lung cancer. when he suspected that she had copd, he ordered another follow-up test, the pulmonary function test. but after he wrote "tobacco addiction" in his note, he did nothing further to confirm that, even though he said it was intended to be a medical diagnosis. dr. gup did not even know that virginia varner had quit smoking about two weeks before the surgery. told you he did not know that. and finally, he told you that virginia varner was not unique among his patients. he says he writes down the impression "tobacco addiction" in literally thousands of his patient's charts. that is what he told you. simply put, saying she was addicted was not meaningful to his care and treatment. he told you: i would have treated her exactly the same whether or not i wrote down tobacco addiction. you then heard from dr. difranza. he was from the university of massachusetts. he was the very nice professorial doctor. but, ladies and gentlemen, he is just not a specialist in addiction. he is a family doctor who told you he treats whatever comes through the front door of his office, from young children to the elderly, for sinus infections, colds, the flu. he does not treat people for nicotine addiction. he has no practical experience diagnosing or treating people who are using addictive substances, including cigarettes. he is never been involved in working in a smoking cessation clinic. sometimes the lawyers actually ask questions that are as revealing as the answer the witness gives, and you may recall that dr. difranza was asked whether or not he just works in an "ivory tower." that was the term that was used. now dr. difranza tried to say, no, he does not, but the rest of the testimony demonstrates that is exactly what he does when it comes to nicotine and cigarettes. he told you that if a patient comes to his office with a real addiction problem, guess who he refers them to? a clinical psychiatrist in the psychiatry department at the university of massachusetts, a doctor just like dr. christopher ticknor. when it comes to cigarettes, dr. difranza is an academic. he told you he actually goes upstairs to his office and does research and writing on his computer about nicotine, the so-called "ivory tower." he does not have any real-world practical experience when it comes to diagnosing someone as addicted, let alone diagnosing them as addicted to the nicotine in cigarettes. and he candidly acknowledged that. he told you ms. varner was addicted, and he talked about different tests and different criteria that he used. but did you ever hear him explain the criteria that he applied to virginia varner and how she satisfied that criteria? he never explained any of that to you. and that is because, ladies and gentlemen, in every single case he is testified, he is told you the cigarette smoker is addicted. he believes all cigarette smokers are addicted. if you smoke one cigarette per day, you are addicted, according to him. in fact, he said, you smoke one cigarette a month and you are probably addicted. that is his standard. that is his criteria. think about that, ladies and gentlemen. if someone drinks a glass of wine every day or even a couple of glasses of wine on the weekend, are they an alcoholic? but that is essentially what dr. difranza told you. if you believe what he said, everyone is addicted to something, whether it is cigarettes, alcohol, shopping, you name it. he had no standard whatsoever. he determined that virginia varner was addicted based on a telephone conversation that he had with joseph varner. and he had that conversation with mr. varner and determined that she was addicted without reading any of her medical records, without reading any of the depositions that her family members had given in this case. he had reached that conclusion after the phone conversation with mr. varner even though he admitted to you that mr. varner told him: i cannot recall any instance in which my wife ever tried to quit smoking, in all the years we were married. he agreed with that twice during the course of his testimony. so ask yourselves, ladies and gentlemen, is that how we diagnose people in this country with a serious mental disorder? of course not. your common sense tells you of course not. the evidence we have presented demonstrates that virginia varner was not addicted. we brought you dr. ticknor, a medical doctor and board-certified psychiatrist. he told you he is diagnosed and treated thousands of patients with addictions to a whole variety of addictive substances, including cigarettes. he is evaluated, interviewed, diagnosed and helped thousands of cigarette smokers quit in the course of his career. unlike dr. difranza, he sees patients on a weekly basis who have substance abuse and addiction problems. he evaluates them, determines whether they are addicted, and he helps them stop using those substances. people come to him specifically for help in quitting smoking. he ran a smoking cessation clinic for eight years. he told you that addiction is, in fact, a medical diagnosis, and we just do not cavalierly label millions of people as addicts simply because they smoke a certain number of cigarettes. he applied the same criteria to virginia varner that he is used to diagnose thousands of patients as potentially addicted to a whole variety of substances: heroin, alcohol, cocaine and cigarettes. this is the same criteria he told you is used to teach medical students and young residents -- mr. schlesinger: objection. the court: what is the objection, counsel? mr. schlesinger: sidebar, judge. [#deleted sidebar#] the court: when you are ready, you may proceed. mr. geraghty: thank you, your honor. dr. ticknor applied the same criteria in his analysis of virginia varner that he told you he uses to teach medical students and young residents how to diagnose addiction and treat persons with substance abuse problems. he read all of the medical records, he reviewed all of the deposition testimony in this case before he arrived at his diagnosis about virginia varner. he provided you with medical criteria he used to determine whether mrs. varner was addicted. he explained it all to you in great detail on friday. he told you virginia varner was not addicted to cigarettes. he told you that addiction requires something called "clinically significant impairment," which simply stated means did the person lose control in an important aspect of their life because of the use of the substance? he told you there was no evidence of that, and you know that is the case. ms. varner never failed in her role as a mother or a wife. she never let smoking interfere with any of her duties or obligations. smoking did not control mrs. varner. to the contrary, she controlled her smoking when her husband quit in 1992 and when she quit cold turkey in august of 1994. so at the end of the day you have to ask yourself whether the plaintiff's evidence is sufficient or whether something more should be required like tangible, reliable evidence. based on the evidence you have heard, the answer should be clear. mrs. varner was not some hopeless addict or some tortured smoker; she was a hard-working, intelligent, and capable person who made her own decisions in life. your answer to the first question -- i'll go back here -- oops. the answer to the first question should be "no." but even, ladies and gentlemen, even if you were to answer the first part of the question "yes" and find that she is addicted, your work is just beginning because the plaintiff still has to prove the second part of the question. the plaintiff still bears the burden to prove by the greater weight of the evidence that ms. varner's claimed addiction was a legal cause of her lung cancer and death or copd. now the court gave you an instruction for legal cause, and the language of that instruction can be a little bit hard to follow. so let me give you a thought to help you explain this concept of legal cause. imagine, if you will, ladies and gentlemen, someone walks across the street and they get hit by a bus. well, the bus is the medical cause of why they were injured. but to determine legal cause, you would need to know more than that. mr. schlesinger: objection, judge. the court: overruled. mr. geraghty: you would need to know, for example, did the person cross the street when she had the right-of-way? was the light green or red when she crossed the street? was she paying attention or was she texting on her phone or listening to music? did the person cross the street knowing that that bus was going to be there every single day? those are things you would need to know in order to understand legal cause. and the question of legal cause boils down to quitting, quitting smoking and motivation to quit smoking. ask yourself, based on the evidence you have heard, was ms. varner's claimed addiction so strong, so substantial that it prevented her from quitting when she was truly motivated to do so? the truth is and the evidence has shown ms. varner was not motivated to quit smoking before she was diagnosed with lung cancer in 1994. if ms. varner did not make any effort to quit smoking until then, ask yourselves how can addiction be a legal cause of her cancer and death? what better evidence can there be that she was not motivated to quit than the fact that she made no real effort to do so until after her cancer diagnosis? other than lori cohen, no one came into this courtroom and told you that mrs. varner ever tried to stop smoking before 1994. how can the plaintiff maintain that ms. varner's so-called addiction prevented her from quitting when she never really tried before july of 1994? rather, it was ms. varner's decision to smoke cigarettes long after she knew the dangers and her decision not to make a motivated effort to quit until 1994 that was the one and only legal cause of her cancer and death in this case. only the smoker can make the decision and ultimately the effort to quit, even dr. difranza told you that. this is his testimony. and the choice to attempt to quit smoking is one hundred percent within the smoker's control, correct? dr. difranza's answer is: yes. the truth is and the evidence shows that mrs. varner enjoyed smoking cigarettes. that is what she wanted to do. and she was not really interested in quitting until 1994, when she was diagnosed with lung cancer. think about it for just a second. mr. varner and his lawyers are trying to persuade you that mrs. varner -- mr. schlesinger: objection, judge. the court: sustained. mr. schlesinger: move to strike. the court: jury disregard. mr. geraghty: the plaintiff is trying to persuade you that mrs. varner really wanted to quit. she desperately wanted to quit. but what did she tell her own husband in 1992, when he had his heart attack and he encouraged her to quit? this is what she told him, after 35 years of smoking cigarettes. to answer this first question, all you really need to do is listen to what dr. difranza told you. whether you are addicted or not, dr. difranza told you 60 million americans have quit smoking. most of those 60 million americans would be considered addicted according to his criteria. nevertheless, most of those people quit smoking cold turkey, meaning without any assistance whatsoever. just like dr. ticknor told you, the nicotine in cigarettes did not prevent these 60 million people from understanding that cigarette smoking is dangerous and from exercising their free will to stop. and during the past two weeks you have heard no evidence that virginia varner was any different. she was not some hopeless addict who lost her free will. she was hard-working, intelligent, capable. her husband told you that. the court: ten minutes, counsel. mr. geraghty: she received many warnings over the years; and she smoked in the face of those warnings, and she had every right to make that choice. but it was her informed decision to smoke for many years that was the one and only legal cause of her lung cancer and copd. so after hearing all the evidence, ladies and gentlemen, your answer to this question should be "no." your answer to this question should be "no." i'm going to zoom ahead now. okay. i do not think you are going to get this far on the verdict form, but -- mr. schlesinger: objection, your honor, personal belief of counsel, move to strike. the court: jury is to disregard the last comments, sustained. mr. geraghty: if you get past question 1, question 2 is a question that relates only to r.j. reynolds. i'm going to let mr. keehfus talk about it. i do not think -- well, let me just read question number 3. it is a little bit wordy. it says: please state as to each defendant whether virginia varner reasonably relied to her detriment on any statement made by that defendant which concealed or omitted material information not already known or available to her concerning the health effects and/or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes, and if so, whether such reliance was a legal cause of virginia varner's death. i mean, that is a mouthful, right? the fourth question is very similar except it broadens it to include other cigarette companies. so here's what you need to focus on. instruction number 10 tells you what "detrimental reliance" is. the plaintiff must prove as to each defendant that, but for virginia varner's reliance on a statement by that defendant concealing or omitting a material fact not otherwise known or available, she would have acted differently and avoided her injuries. that is the instruction you will have in the packet from the court. so what is the evidence that you heard? you know what mr. varner told you about this. we asked him these questions point-blank: your wife never told you that she had ever saw or read or heard a statement about cigarette smoking and health made by for example, philip morris? his answer was: no. he gave the same answer about r.j. reynolds. i asked him about the tobacco institute, the council for tobacco research, the tobacco industry research committee. said he had never heard of those organizations, and he never had a conversation with his wife about any statements they ever made. i even asked him point-blank: your wife never told you that she relied upon any statements made by any tobacco company? she relied on it? he asked me. i said: yeah. his answer was: no. that is his testimony under oath. now -- so what did the plaintiff tell you? you heard lori cohen tell you this story about how she and her mother were looking at a coffee can filled with cigarette butts filled with rain water, and that made them think that filtered cigarettes were somehow safe because they were taking out some of the, quote, "bad stuff." she went on to say that that is -- some of that stuff's got to be going into your lungs. and her mother said: i do not know, i guess. ladies and gentlemen, i would ask that you use your common sense when you evaluate whether that testimony and that evidence is remotely credible. does that story make sense? well, it certainly does not make any sense when you consider what lori cohen admitted on cross-examination. this is what she admitted. so the smoke from the cigarette passes through the filter, goes into your lungs, and that is what you were saying to your mother when you said: hey, this brown gook or guck, or whatever it is, is getting into your lungs? lori cohen said: yes. then we asked her: is not it true that you do not remember whether your mother agreed or disagreed with what you told her about filtered cigarettes? she did not -- she never -- she never said. and she agreed with that same question a second time. that is what lori cohen told you. but more importantly, ladies and gentlemen, just remember the sequence of events. at the time this conversation allegedly took place in the early 1980s, gertrude woodward had already been diagnosed with emphysema from smoking filtered cigarettes. virginia varner had been smoking filtered marlboro cigarettes since the 1950s, her doctors told her she had a smoker's cough and wheeze from smoking filtered cigarettes. she told lori many times: these cigarettes are killing me. meaning "these filtered cigarettes are killing me." and finally, remember, every single pack of cigarettes she and her husband smoked, these filtered cigarettes, had the surgeon general's warning right on them. "the surgeon general has determined that cigarette smoking is dangerous to your health." ask yourself whether lori cohen's story makes any sense. in light of all the evidence you have heard, it just does not add up. let me highlight one instruction real briefly. it is instruction number 16. i did not put it up on the screen. there we -- it is not on the screen, but let me just -- it is instruction number 16. the judge has already instructed you, but take a look at it. it says: as long as cigarette packs bear the federally mandated warnings, cigarette advertising after july 1, 1969, cannot be the subject -- cannot be the subject of any claim that the advertising undermined or neutralized the warnings or made them less effective. you will have the opportunity to read that instruction when you go back. when you go back and read that instruction and you consider the evidence that i've just reviewed on this so-called story about filtered cigarettes, you will see that the plaintiff simply cannot meet his burden of proof that his wife relied on any kind of statement made by any cigarette company. ladies and gentlemen, the bottom line is, virginia varner never saw, heard, or read a single statement made by philip morris, r.j. reynolds or any tobacco company. but that is what the plaintiff's burden is to prove to you. your answer to question 3 and 4 should be "no." so let me quickly move on to question number 5 and 6. again, i need to respond because mr. schlesinger talked about it. question 5 is: was there fault on the part of virginia varner which was a legal cause of her death? and then you are asked to state the percentage. so what does it mean to accept responsibility for the decisions that one makes in life? the evidence you have heard is clear that virginia varner knew smoking was dangerous and addictive for many decades. she never took any steps to quit until july or august of 1994. you heard mr. varner say that he believes his wife -- oops, i screwed that up -- let me -- okay. we may have taken that out. mr. varner told you that he believed his wife could have quit smoking if she had tried earlier than 1994. he told you that. he told you that. so when you get to this issue of responsibility, ask yourselves: if someone never makes any effort to quit at any point in time until after they have lung cancer, who is responsible for that decision? dr. difranza told you that the smoker is one hundred percent responsible for the decision and the choice to try to quit. the answer to the question ought to be simple, ladies and gentlemen. virginia varner is one hundred percent responsible. here's that testimony from her husband: do you think your wife had the ability to quit smoking or at least try to quit before she did in 1994? and he agreed. now let me move on to the damages. i do not think you will get this far on the verdict form -- mr. schlesinger: objection, your honor. the court: sustained. mr. geraghty: you heard mr. schlesinger ask you to award a total of $10 million in damages to mr. varner for the decisions that virginia varner and only virginia varner made to smoke cigarettes. that is an incredible sum of money. ask yourself how did the plaintiff come up with that number? that would be no different than if i suggested $100,000. the plaintiff has the burden of proof on damages. he has to burden to prove every single dollar in damages that mr. schlesinger asked for, and he has to burden to prove that with evidence, not argument. judge murphy has already instructed you that is the law. is there any evidence to support the plaintiff's number? of course not. that number, ladies and gentlemen, was essentially pulled out of thin air. mr. schlesinger: objection, your honor. the court: sustained. mr. schlesinger: move to strike. the court: jurors disregard the last comment. mr. geraghty: the arguments of the lawyers are not evidence. there needs to be evidence to support every single dollar in damages. so where is the evidence to justify such a huge amount based on what you heard during this trial? knowing the plaintiff has the burden of proof? you have not heard any. how do you even get to $1 million, let alone $10 million? in a case like this, that number defies common sense. we are talking about a case in which every pack of cigarettes virginia varner smoked had a government-mandated warning since 1966, that she and her husband discussed when they first came out in 1966. smoking was something that virginia and joseph varner wanted to do, that they enjoyed doing together. mr. varner never once encouraged his wife to quit smoking before 1992, yet here he is asking you to award him an incredible sum of money. mr. schlesinger: objection, your honor. the court: what is the objection? mr. schlesinger: may i approach? (the following discussion was held at sidebar:) mr. schlesinger: i'm sorry, judge, what does the warning -- the court: "incredible"? i take it that is the problem? mr. schlesinger: what does the warning have to do with damages? the warnings have to do with the damages? you talk about the damages in the case, the warnings have to -- yeah, i object to him saying it is an incredible amount of money, and i object to him saying that the warnings have something to do with the damages in the case. and i'm not looking to interrupt his time. i apologize. but i do not want to make a -- the court: wish to be heard? mr. geraghty: no, your honor. the court: the objection is overruled. this is argument. counsel, you need to start to wrap it up. mr. geraghty: mr. keehfus said i have five minutes of his time. (sidebar discussion concluded, and the following was held in open court:) the court: counsel, when you are ready, you may proceed. mr. geraghty: thank you, your honor. in 1992, you heard that for the very first time, joseph varner encouraged his wife to stop smoking. what does she say? i'm going to die anyway. that is in 1992. virginia varner never made any effort to quit smoking before she was diagnosed with cancer. should joseph varner be made a multimillionaire when the evidence shows that he and his wife lived their lives exactly the way they wanted to live it? and if you get this far on the verdict form, i would suggest that you use your life experiences and your common sense when deciding -- mr. gdanski: objection. mr. schlesinger: object. golden rule, judge. the court: overruled. mr. geraghty: i suggest you use your everyday life experiences and your common sense when deciding how much money you believe should compensate mr. varner for his loss. but i would suggest that given the evidence that you have heard in this case over the last two weeks, $100,000 is indeed far more consistent, fair and appropriate, given all the evidence you have heard in the case. now, the last question on the verdict form asks whether you find by clear and convincing evidence that punitive damages are warranted against philip morris or r.j. reynolds. if you answer "no" to that question, you never get to the issue of punitive damages and your work is done. so let me very briefly talk about what you are being asked to decide. in this phase, you are not being asked to decide the amount of punitive damages. the issue is whether, by clear and convincing evidence, mr. varner has demonstrated that he is entitled to an award of punitive damages. so do not spend one minute thinking about the amount. the question before you right now is whether he has shown that he is entitled to punitive damages. if you decide the answer to that question is "yes," there will be another phase of this trial. the plaintiff will present evidence. they suggested they may show testimony from dr. proctor -- mr. schlesinger: objection, your honor. mr. geraghty: philip morris -- mr. schlesinger: objection. what we are doing in the second phase, objection. the court: sustained, counsel. mr. schlesinger: move to strike. mr. geraghty: plaintiff will have the opportunity to present evidence. philip morris and r.j. reynolds will have the opportunity to present evidence, and there will be additional argument. now, i want to make sure that if you get to this issue, you understand what you are being asked to decide. you will see in the instructions clear and convincing evidence is defined. it is a much higher burden of proof than the greater weight of the evidence. it says specifically that the evidence must be, quote, "precise, explicit, lacking in confusion, and of such weight that it produces a firm belief or conviction without hesitation about the matter at issue." in other words, you need to be convinced, convinced that punitive damages are appropriate under that standard. one more thing. you have to decide if you get there that punitive damages are warranted based only on conduct that relates specifically to virginia varner. you may think to yourselves -- mr. schlesinger: objection, judge. the court: overruled. mr. schlesinger: objection. the court: excuse me. what is the objection, counsel? mr. schlesinger: may i approach? i'm sorry. (the following discussion was held at sidebar:) mr. schlesinger: damages to be awarded in the next phase pertain only to the conduct as it affects virginia varner. however, your honor read an instruction that says: in assessing reprehensibility and determining whether punitive damages are warranted, you may consider harm to others. and you may do it for purposes of deterring others from acting the same way. he just said the only way you get to punitive damages is, any wrongful conduct specific as to virginia varner. that is not your instruction. that is phase ii. that has to go with how much the damages will be to her, if they get there. but that is absolutely not the instruction you gave on why you admitted into evidence the harm to others. so it is a complete misstatement of law. i had to object. the court: wish to be heard? mr. geraghty: no, sir. the court: overruled. (sidebar discussion concluded, and the following was held in open court:) mr. geraghty: i'm getting close to the finish line here, ladies and gentlemen. may i proceed, your honor? the court: please. mr. geraghty: now, you may think, based on the evidence you have heard, well, the companies did bad things, and i'm sure you do not like that. but this is virginia varner's case, and under the law, you cannot award punitive damages unless -- you can only award punitive damages in this case for conduct that is specifically related to virginia varner. based on the evidence you have heard in this case, nothing that philip morris did or did not do harmed virginia varner. philip morris made and sold cigarettes. that alone cannot be the basis for liability. cigarettes are a legal product. and in the instructions, the court has already instructed you the defendants cannot be liable for manufacturing, advertising, and selling cigarettes, even though we all recognize they are inherently dangerous and addictive. now, let us talk about that last factor, deterrence. what did you hear about the philip morris of today from dr. proctor? you heard that the tobacco institute and the council for tobacco research were disbanded in 1998. since that time, there have been no cigarette ads on billboards or transit of any kind. there is no sponsorship of concerts, no advertising at sporting events. and you have also heard that even though it is legally permissible today, philip morris no longer advertises in magazines. for the last 16 years, philip morris has publicly stated cigarette smoking causes lung cancer, cigarette smoking is addictive, and there is no such thing as a safe cigarette. the fda now has regulatory authority over philip morris and cigarettes. philip morris pays large sums of money to the fda and the states, including the state of florida, to enforce the regulations and the restrictions that govern the way philip morris does business today. and what are those restrictions? the fda has the power to reduce nicotine to arbitrarily very, very low levels. it has the power to ban any flavoring it deems unsafe or harmful. philip morris and r.j. reynolds have to get approval from the fda if they want to launch a new tobacco product or make any substantial change in an existing one. the fda has the power to shut down manufacturing facilities if philip morris and r.j. reynolds are not in compliance with any of the fda's regulations. smoking rates for both adults and youth are at all-time lows in this country, and that is especially true here in the state of florida. ms. varner always had the information available to her to make an informed decision about whether she would smoke cigarettes or whether she wanted to quit. she always had the ability to quit whenever she was motivated to do so. and the evidence now shows that she simply did not make an effort to do so until, unfortunately, it was too late. given the evidence you have heard, the plaintiff has simply failed to meet his burden of proof on this question, and your answer to that last question on punitive damages should be "no." i'm going to sit down here in about 60 seconds. mr. keehfus is going to speak to you, and then mr. schlesinger, on behalf of the plaintiff, will have one more opportunity to talk to you, and that is because the plaintiff bears the burden of proof. i do not know what mr. schlesinger will say, but i can predict it is likely not going to be very favorable about philip morris and r.j. reynolds. as you listen to the things he says, just ask yourself: what does this have to do with virginia varner? mr. schlesinger: objection, your honor. that is -- the court: excuse me. it is argument, counsel. mr. schlesinger: i withdraw it, judge. i withdraw it. mr. geraghty: the truth is, ladies and gentlemen, we do enjoy a tremendous amount of freedom in this country. we have the right to make decisions and lifestyle choices that are not always in our best interests. and with that freedom comes the obligation to accept personal responsibility for the consequences of those decisions. and at the end of the day, ladies and gentlemen, that is what this case is all about. that is what this case is all about. based on the evidence you have heard in this case, your answer should be clear. based on the evidence you have heard in virginia varner's case, the evidence supports one and only one true verdict. that is a verdict in favor of philip morris and r.j. reynolds. i'm going to sit down now, and this is my last opportunity i'm going to have to speak to all of you. and i just want to end with letting you know that it is been an honor to be able to present the case to you. you have all been very, very patient with all the questions i've asked and all the time i've spent standing up talking to you, and i just want you to know that i really appreciate it very much. so thank you very much. the court: counsel, thank you. mr. keehfus: thank you, your honor. may it please the court. counsel. mr. varner. ladies and gentlemen, good afternoon. jurors: good afternoon. mr. keehfus: this case is about one smoker and one smoker only. it is about mrs. varner. and it is about mrs. varner who smoked my client's product over the course of two years 60 years ago. and she stopped smoking my client's product nearly four decades before she was diagnosed with lung cancer or copd. those are the facts of this case, of mrs. varner's case. now, plaintiff has made the claim to you that somehow mrs. varner's smoking of winston cigarettes over the course of those two years in the 1950s caused her lung cancer and copd 40 years later. there has been a complete failure of proof. plaintiffs have completely failed to meet their burden of proof to prove to you that but for mrs. varner's smoking of winston cigarettes for those two years in the 1950s, she would have avoided her lung cancer and copd. what was the evidence that you did hear with respect to r.j. reynolds? i've summarized it here on this board. these are five key facts. five key facts that you heard through this trial, and you can use each of these five key facts to answer every question on the verdict form with respect to r.j. reynolds. this can be your pocket guide as you go back into the jury room. what are those key facts? mrs. varner's smoking of reynolds' cigarettes for only two years did not cause her cancer, copd, or death. mrs. varner regularly smoked reynolds' cigarettes for only two years and stopped smoking winston cigarettes in 1956. mrs. varner never tried to quit smoking while she smoked reynolds' cigarettes. mrs. varner never relied on anything r.j. reynolds said or did. instead, she made her own smoking decisions. and despite knowing that smoking is dangerous and addictive, mrs. varner chose to smoke, because she wanted to smoke. these are the five key facts that you can use to answer each and every question on your verdict form with respect to r.j. reynolds. and during the time i have with you, i want to focus in on the issues with respect to r.j. reynolds, the specific issues with respect to my client. i, of course, join in mr. geraghty's comments to you this morning and this afternoon. and i'm going to focus in on just some of the questions on the verdict form specifically with respect to r.j. reynolds. undisputed, ladies and gentlemen, mrs. varner smoked winston cigarettes only over the course of two years, between 1954 and 1956. now, we do not know how much she was smoking of winston at that time. it was so long ago, mr. varner could not provide those details. we do not know how much she was smoking of winston. we do not know how often she was smoking. but what we do know is that she was in school at the time, all day long, and smoking was not permitted on school grounds. and then after school, we know that she went home to live with her parents. so while we do not know exactly how much mrs. varner was smoking between 1954 and 1956, we know it probably was not that much, because she just did not have an opportunity to smoke at that time. we also know that around this time, she is also smoking some marlboro cigarettes. you recall that mr. varner got a marlboro cigarette from mrs. varner around this time period. you heard this morning from plaintiff that, well, was it 1953 when she started smoking winston or was it 1954? but you heard dr. proctor tell you, winston did not even come on the market in the united states until 1954. there is absolutely no way she was smoking any winston cigarettes before 1954. and the undisputed evidence is she stopped in 1956. we also -- what else do we know about mrs. varner's smoking of winston? well, mr. varner told you, they did not like the taste of winston. it was too harsh. they did not enjoy that taste, and so they switched. they switched to a cigarette that they did enjoy and they did like the taste of, marlboro. and by the time they were dating in 1957, they were smoking marlboro cigarettes. and the undisputed testimony before you is that mrs. varner smoked marlboro cigarettes from 1957 to 1994. mr. varner told you that, lisa roberts told you that, and her daughter lori cohen told you that. no dispute about that. there is no evidence that mrs. varner smoked winston or any other cigarette manufactured by my client after 1956, 60 years ago. r.j. reynolds was out of her life in 1956, never to return. now, i told you in opening statement you probably would not hear much about winston cigarettes in this trial, and you did not. and that is because mrs. varner's use of winston cigarettes was so long ago and it was so minimal and insignificant that it did not merit much discussion, and you did not hear much about it. and in thinking of a way to illustrate mrs. varner's use of winston cigarettes in the context of all of her smoking, i tried to come up with a picture. i think this is a helpful way to demonstrate mrs. varner's use of winston cigarettes in the context of all of her smoking. it was like a couple of drops of water in an ocean. very insignificant. very minimal, her use of winston. now, plaintiff's other claim that they have made against r.j. reynolds are for concealment and agreement to conceal, questions 3 and questions 4 on your verdict form. as mr. geraghty told you, it is plaintiff's burden of proof -- not burden of speculation, not a burden of assumptions, and not a burden of inferences, but it is their burden of proof -- to bring you evidence that mrs. varner relied on a statement made by r.j. reynolds or philip morris. and but for her reliance on that statement, she would have acted differently and avoided her injuries. we will talk more about that later, but there is a complete lack of evidence with respect to r.j. reynolds on both the concealment and agreement to conceal claims. in fact, there is no evidence that mrs. varner had even heard of r.j. reynolds, mr. varner, and their three children testified. not a single one of them even said the name "r.j. reynolds" in their testimony. it is an extremely high burden of proof. the plaintiff has to prove that but for her reliance, she would have acted differently and avoided her lung cancer and copd. and they failed to meet that burden of proof. but i want to focus in on the key issue with respect to r.j. reynolds. it is going to be question 2 on your verdict form. if you get to question 2. because, again, i join in mr. geraghty's comments and ask that you return a verdict for the defendants on question 1, which would be a no. if you get to question 2, the plaintiff must prove that smoking r.j. reynolds' cigarettes was a legal cause of mrs. varner's lung cancer and copd. now, as mr. geraghty told you in opening statement, there is no dispute in this case that smoking was a legal cause of mrs. varner's lung cancer and copd. the question for you is whether it was r.j. reynolds,' whether smoking r.j. reynolds' cigarettes was a legal cause of mrs. varner's lung cancer or copd. the plaintiff has a burden to prove that against r.j. reynolds. you will see that on question 2 on your verdict form. question 2: was smoking cigarettes manufactured by r.j. reynolds tobacco company a legal cause of virginia varner's lung cancer or copd? now, this morning it was suggested to you that r.j. reynolds was a substantial cause of mrs. varner's lung cancer or copd because those two years of winston back in the 1950s initiated and sustained an addiction. those were the words that were used. ladies and gentlemen, on this question -- can i have the elmo, please? oh, boy. there we go. so it was suggested to you that r.j. reynolds' cigarettes were a substantial cause of mrs. varner's lung cancer and copd because they initiated and sustained an addiction. and we will get to that in more detail later. but you can see in question 2, addiction appears nowhere in that question. addiction has nothing to do with question 2. the question is very limited and very focused. and it boils down to: did mrs. varner smoke enough winston cigarettes to be a cause of her lung cancer or copd 40 years later? addiction has nothing to do with question 2. we talked about this concept of legal cause. i spoke to you about it briefly during opening statement. what does it mean to be a legal cause? you have your jury instruction. it is jury instruction number 9, and it is on page 11 of your packet. and, ladies and gentlemen, this legal instruction embodies the rules of law that you have to apply to the facts as you find them to render your verdict. these are the rules. and these are the rules that you apply. and what do the rules tell you? well, the rules tell you the plaintiff must prove, but for smoking -- but for smoking cigarettes manufactured by r.j. reynolds tobacco company, mrs. varner's lung cancer or copd would not have occurred. that is the plaintiff's burden. they have to prove that but for smoking cigarettes manufactured by r.j. reynolds, mrs. varner's lung cancer or copd would not have occurred. in other words, plaintiff has to prove that if you take winston out of the equation from 1954 to 1956, mrs. varner never develops lung cancer or copd in 1994, nearly 40 years later. that is the burden of proof that plaintiff has. ladies and gentlemen, the evidence was overwhelming before you. not only did plaintiff fail to meet their burden to prove to you that reynolds was a but-for cause of mrs. varner's lung cancer or copd. but i brought you the evidence on cross-examination of their own expert witnesses that conclusively established that reynolds' cigarettes were not a legal cause of mrs. varner's lung cancer or copd. the evidence was overwhelming that two pack years of smoking in the 1950s was not even close to being enough to cause lung cancer or copd. and it came from their own witnesses. dr. gup. you recall dr. gup was the gentleman that testified early last week. and he told you on cross-examination: lung cancer typically does not occur without at least 20 pack years of smoking, 20. ten times the amount of winston smoking that mrs. varner had. dr. difranza went further. he doubled that. he said in his 30 years of practicing medicine up in massachusetts, he is never seen a lung cancer patient with less than 40 pack years of smoking. forty pack years, 20 times the amount of winston smoking mrs. varner had. and dr. proctor told you it takes decades for cancer to develop. and, of course, it does. dr. gup explained that. he explained the repeated exposures that are necessary over many, many years in order for those genetic mutations to even start the process which may eventually end up being cancer. it takes many, many years for those mutations to even start. even in plaintiff's best case scenario, their own witness said it takes at least 20 years. mrs. varner had 1/10 of that. 1/10 of that for r.j. reynolds. given what plaintiff's own expert said, it was not surprising that dr. difranza gave the key admission on this issue, on the issue in question 2 on your verdict form with respect to r.j. reynolds and legal cause. dr. difranza told you that even if mrs. varner had started smoking in 1957, instead of 1954, she more likely than not still would have developed lung cancer. you may ask yourself, well, why is that important? it is important because by 1957, winston and r.j. reynolds are out of mrs. varner's life. she is a marlboro smoker. and dr. difranza told you that if you take out 1954 to 1956, remove that from the equation, mrs. varner never touches winston cigarettes and starts smoking in 1957, she still would have gotten lung cancer. remember, it is the plaintiff's burden to prove if not for winston, she never would have gotten lung cancer or copd. dr. difranza says that is not so. the same thing more likely than not would have happened. and that means r.j. reynolds is not a legal cause. the smoking of r.j. reynolds' cigarettes is not a legal cause of mrs. varner's lung cancer or copd. but we did not stop there. dr. difranza admitted for someone with a smoking history of just two or three pack years, he said that person's risk of developing lung cancer would be very, very low. very, very low. two pack years, just like mrs. varner had with respect to winston. and he said the person who had two or three pack years would have a risk so low that it would be difficult to distinguish from that of a nonsmoker. so even after two years of smoking winston, she really had no appreciable increase in lung cancer risk compared to a nonsmoker. so not only did plaintiff fail to prove legal cause, but they could not even prove that winston increased the risk that mrs. varner would get lung cancer or copd, that it would increase her chances, because dr. difranza said: even two years of smoking, no real appreciable increase in risk. and i cannot tell the difference in risk between someone who smokes for two years and a nonsmoker. ladies and gentlemen, the evidence was overwhelming and direct and it came from plaintiff's own witnesses, the witnesses they hired to come in and testify on mr. varner's behalf. and they told you, they told you about the amount of smoking that is required. multipliers more than two pack years. for dr. gup it was ten times that, and for dr. difranza it was 20 times that. it was not even close. mrs. varner did not develop cancer in 1994 because she smoked cigarettes manufactured by reynolds over the course of a couple years in the middle 1950s. but plaintiffs have also made a claim for copd. so what was the evidence on copd? well, it was even stronger than the evidence was for cancer. dr. difranza told you he does not see copd patients with less than 50 pack years of smoking, 25 times that of mrs. varner and winston smoking. the court: ten minutes, counsel. mr. keehfus: dr. difranza admitted mrs. varner would have gotten copd even if she had never touched winston cigarettes. even if she had started smoking in 1957 when she switched to marlboro and smoked to 1994, she still would have developed copd. that destroys plaintiff's claims of but-for causation. remember, plaintiff has to prove if not for the winston, she does not develop lung cancer or copd. dr. difranza said on both claims, on lung cancer and copd, even if she did not smoke from 1954 to 1956, she still more likely than not would have developed both of those diseases. that is the key admission in the case, and that is the key admission on question 2, on your verdict form, that smoking cigarettes manufactured by reynolds was not a legal cause. because dr. difranza said so. now, the claim again was made to you that her smoking of winston during that time initiated and sustained her addiction. and somehow her smoking of winston over the course of those two years made her go on and smoke cigarettes manufactured by a different company for the next 40 years? well, ladies and gentlemen, you can use your common sense to evaluate that argument and that claim. and when you do, you will see that it just does not stand up to an examination. what do we know? well, we know from that time period when she is smoking winston that she is also smoking some marlboro. so you cannot say that if it was not for the winston she would not have gone on to become a regular smoker. we know that she was smoking cigarettes manufactured by other companies at that time and cigarettes that she went on to smoke after she switched from winston. also, we know that mr. varner smoked marlboro pretty much his entire adult life. that is how they identified themselves, as marlboro smokers. and that was the man who she married and spent time with. he cannot say that she would not have gone on to become a regular smoker if it was not for winston. that is like someone who drinks red wine for a couple of years early in their life and then after a couple years says: you know what? i do not like that red wine so much anymore, i do not like the taste of it and i'm going to switch to white wine. and they go on, they drink white wine for the next 40 years until they unfortunately develop cirrhosis of the liver, and then they turn around and say: oh, but you know what? it was that red wine that i drank in an undetermined amount 40 years ago that caused all the problems. of course nobody would say that because it does not make sense. plaintiff's claim here is no different. so, ladies and gentlemen, when you get to question 2 and you see the question: was smoking cigarettes manufactured by r.j. reynolds a legal cause of mrs. varner's lung cancer or copd, the answer is a resounding "no." there is been a complete failure of proof. and, in fact, i've brought you the evidence to demonstrate conclusively that reynolds cigarettes were not a legal cause. but even if, in an alternate universe, two years of smoking was somehow enough to cause lung cancer or copd, even if that was enough, it happened so long ago that any minuscule risk that mrs. varner would have accumulated would have disappeared. that was the testimony from plaintiff's expert dr. joseph difranza. he candidly admitted that for someone with a two- or three-pack year history their risk of developing lung cancer 40 years later would be the same as someone who had never smoked. the risk would be the same as someone who had never smoked. no appreciable even increase in the risk. and after 40 years that risk would decline and be the same as a never smoker. what did dr. difranza tell you about this addiction theory that winston initiated and sustained addiction? he admitted that even if mrs. varner did not smoke winston cigarettes from 1954 to 1956, knowing what he knows about the rest of her smoking history from 1957 forward, he would still come to the conclusion that she was addicted. now, for the reasons mr. geraghty said and discussed earlier, obviously plaintiffs have failed to meet their burden of proof to prove mrs. varner was addicted to nicotine. but even if they somehow could make that case to you, dr. difranza admits that even if you -- even if she never touched winston cigarettes, in his opinion she still would have been addicted. so this theory that if not for winston she never would have been a regular smoker, it just does not have any merit. when you take it apart piece by piece, it falls flat. the court: five minutes, counsel. mr. keehfus: so when you get to question 2 on your verdict form, for all of these reasons, the overwhelming and persuasive and convincing evidence is mrs. varner's lung cancer or copd were not legally caused by her smoking a couple of years of winston cigarettes 40 years before she was diagnosed. i want to get to plaintiff's claims for reliance and concealment. it is plaintiff's burden to prove the linkage, the connection between any statements and mrs. varner. they have identified no statement made by r.j. reynolds that had any impact whatsoever on mrs. varner. again, this is a burden of proof. they have got to provide you with a statement that mrs. varner saw that impacted her smoking decisions. and there is been a total failure of proof. they have got to show a statement by each defendant that she believed it, that she made decisions based on it, and that had she not seen it, she would have acted differently and avoided her injury. what does that mean? that means that had she -- they have got to prove, had she not seen that statement, she would not have gotten lung cancer or copd. she would have thrown her cigarettes down immediately, quit smoking, and avoided any disease. that is plaintiff's burden of proof when you get to questions 3 and 4. and they have completely failed to prove that. the fact is, there is absolutely no evidence mrs. varner's smoking choices were impacted by r.j. reynolds. there is no evidence that she relied on any r.j. reynolds advertisements or ad campaigns or documents or executives or video clips. none of that. it was plaintiff's burden to tie all that to mrs. varner. dr. proctor testified for 14 hours and 43 minutes of your time. he talked about mrs. varner for less than 40 seconds. he was no help to you in determining whether mrs. varner was specifically impacted by something philip morris or r.j. reynolds did. you have -- plaintiffs have a burden against each defendant, and when you get to question 3 or 4 -- 3 and 4, i ask that you find "no" for philip morris but specifically for r.j. reynolds as well. when you get to the issue of comparative fault, plaintiffs have the burden to prove each and every percentage point. you should not get this far on the verdict form, but if you do, i want to address this with you very briefly. they have the burden to prove each and every percentage point. and it is got to be conduct that you would find to be a legal cause of mrs. varner's injuries. this is not a comparison of conduct in general. it is a very specific, focused question. you can only allocate fault for that conduct that you find to be a legal cause of mrs. varner's injury, that conduct that they tied up to mrs. varner. and especially here with respect to r.j. reynolds, the evidence establishes that her smoking of r.j. reynolds cigarettes was not a legal cause of her injury. and even her smoking of r.j. reynolds products resulted in a 0 percent increase in even her chances or her risk of developing a disease. so i ask that if you get to this question on your verdict form on the allocation of fault, that you enter a 0 percent for r.j. reynolds. r.j. reynolds was out of her life in 1956, never to return. the court: you need to wrap it up, counsel. mr. keehfus: ladies and gentlemen, on plaintiff's claim for damages, $10 million was the claim made to you. plaintiff is asking from r.j. reynolds for millions of dollars because mrs. varner took some winston cigarettes from her mother and smoked them over the course of a couple of years 60 years ago. and for that mr. varner wants to be made a millionaire. respectfully, ladies and gentlemen, the evidence does not even come close to supporting that claim especially against r.j. reynolds. on the issue of punitive damages, you will be told that -- and in your instructions you were instructed that there is mitigating evidence. you may consider mitigating evidence which demonstrates that r.j. reynolds and philip morris need not be punished. and what did you hear? you heard r.j. reynolds and philip morris tried to make a safer cigarette. specifically r.j. reynolds tried with the premier cigarette which heated, did not burn tobacco. but it failed in the marketplace because it smelled like rotten rubber and fish, as dr. proctor told you. but that does not stop them. they did not give up. reynolds went back to the drawing board and tried eclipse, redoubled their efforts, poured hundreds of millions of dollars into it. but it failed again in the marketplace. but they tried to make a safer product. you heard now about public disclosure on the companies' websites. you heard about the companies funding tobacco-free florida, the anti-youth smoking programs that are currently in place, and the fact that we have evidence that they are working. youth smoking rates are at an all-time low, especially in broward county. you heard a lot about the environment of smoking, but you heard that smoking has now been de-normalized and we are moving towards a society where nobody will smoke cigarettes. that is the environment that dr. proctor told you about today. that is the mitigating evidence, ladies and gentlemen, which you should consider on this issue of whether the plaintiff is entitled to punitive damages. and when you get to question 8, you should check "no" for both defendants, but especially for r.j. reynolds in light of the evidence that you heard in this trial. i'm going to end where i started, with these five key facts, five key facts that you heard and will help you decide every question with respect to r.j. reynolds on your verdict form. i told you my role in this case would be limited. i did not cross-examine some of the witnesses, and other witnesses i cross-examined very briefly. but i told you my role was going to be limited because of mrs. varner's limited use of my client's product. and that is exactly what the evidence showed. she smoked my client's product very minimally for an insignificant period of time 60 years ago. and the evidence showed that her smoking of r.j. reynolds cigarettes was not a legal cause of her lung cancer or copd 60 -- sorry, 40 years later and 60 years ago. ladies and gentlemen, i ask that you return a verdict in favor of the defendants in this case. i thank you very much for your time and attention.