15 mr. schlesinger: may it please the court, counsel. ladies and gentlemen of the jury, thank you. you all are folks that have sacrificed a lot to be here with us, to participate in this jury system. we cannot thank you enough. the court personnel, we cannot thank them enough. and we are just honored and proud to be able to present this case and be able to wrap it up at this juncture, and i'm just going to jump right in. my time is limited. so, the verdict form, which is what you all are going to fill out and check off questions -- and mr. keehfus mentioned that every single question on the verdict form only talks about virginia varner, and i wanted to elaborate on that a bit, because every single question on the verdict form not only talks about virginia varner, but always in terms of cigarettes. and you cannot separate out virginia varner, or so many other smokers in this country -- 45 million of them at this time -- from cigarettes and the role they play. this case is about what cigarettes do to people, the harm they cause, the addiction they cause. the mothers, brothers, aunties, uncles, children, grandparents who are left behind to grieve and suffer in what is a -- what is very much not a peaceful end to an existence. and i always think about, when they say the word "pleasure," is this the price for pleasure? you will see, there is no socially redeeming benefit to cigarettes in this country. it is a business, and that is all it is. but the questions pertain to virginia varner and the nexus of the production of the product, defective and dangerous product, that are the cigarettes, and every question is how did virginia varner inter- -- interact with cigarettes. they produced the cigarettes. this is about what cigarettes do to people. it is very important to consider. but the very last question on the jury instruction -- on the jury -- jury verdict form -- i'm sorry, you got the instructions -- on the verdict form: under the circumstances of this case, please state whether you find, by clear and convincing evidence, that punitive damages are warranted against: philip morris usa inc., r.j. reynolds tobacco company, and the check mark for "yes" or "no." so that only talks about them, a fine. they have not been fined. punishment. and one has said that punishment is justice for the unjust. they richly deserve it. we hope we proved it. we are going to talk about it. but i wanted to talk about the very last question first, and talk to you all about how you get there if, when i stitch this case together, you see this our way. and the very first thing i thought about was just some of the topics of what this business is all about. i'm going to try to do it quick. doubt is our product. you thought they manufactured cigarettes. they manufacture doubt. without nicotine, cigarette sales would collapse and we would all be out of business overnight. this is the industry's internal documents. they were not known until the late '90s and 2000. they were not known in the '50s, '60s, '70s and '80s. they were the secret of what they really meant behind the scenes. the second face. not the public face; the true internal face. the illusion of filtration: the filters will be fake, the health reassurance to get folks to keep smoking, the psychological crutch we must provide our smokers who might be worrying about health who are now going to get sick. the base of our business is the high school student. one of my favorite songs -- it is not a favorite song. i liked elton john when i was growing up in the '70s. i went to high school and i -- mr. geraghty: your honor, i object. this is a personal story. the court: overruled. this is argument, counsel. mr. schlesinger: there is a song that he has on -- i think his third album, "honky chateau." it is called -- called -- i'm a little nervous, you know? it is called "mona lisas and mad hatters," all right? and it is just got some great -- you know, great lines in there. but he talks about "i thought i knew, but now i know, that rose trees never grow in new york city." and he goes on and on and on, but it is that line where he says, "i thought i knew, but now i know." one jury at a time, in the engle progeny cases, in the decertified class, in the group of folks who are engle progeny jurors, in the group of folks who are engle progeny plaintiffs -- you are an engle progeny juror. mr. varner and his wife are engle progeny plaintiffs. what is "progeny"? the children of engle. "i thought i knew, but now i know." we all came in here, we talked to folks, and there was more folks in the jury selection process than there were here now. they were filled up -- you were in those seats, you sat on those hard benches, and we heard what folks thought about cigarettes. everybody thinks they know something about cigarettes, but now you know. so i say, now you know something about cigarettes you did not know, and why this would be a valuable and worthwhile course to take. but calling youth, calling children, calling youngsters "replacement smokers," perhaps you will agree with me that that meets the bounds -- that goes beyond the bounds of humane conduct, and gets into the recklessness, the disregard for considerations of human life and health, that justify punitive damages. that is why i started with this. and i will tell you right now, you know, we are completely coned down, completely granular, focused, 24/7, on this case, and the job that we do, it is the nature of the trial lawyer, but we are not unmindful of world events; however, they do not have any role in this courtroom right now. we cannot reflect upon them, we cannot talk about them. we are in a crucible together, where you all have been cut off from all of your electronic devices, despite the fact that this entire courtroom is bristling with electronics and bristling with technology that never existed when my 12- or 13-year-old client was smoking cigarettes in the 1950s. no such thing existed. we have to put ourselves back in that time and think about what was the world like for her. she smoked during a period of time in the world she grew up in, that she lived in, that was normal. no appreciation of the dangers, all right? so we live in a different time. now, you are going to have to ask -- answer these questions. i read them to you and we hope you will answer them "yes." and we hope that the evidence supports the concept that you will answer them "yes." it will take us to the next phase of the trial. and the next phase of the trial will take, hopefully, no more than tomorrow, if you deliberate today and come to a ver- -- a verdict; but sometimes the juries take a day, a half a day, six days. there is no -- the judge will -- mr. geraghty: objection. i would object to what other juries do, your honor. the court: sustained. mr. schlesinger: the judge -- the judge will tell you that the deliberation period of time is up to you all. you take as little or as long as you like to do it, to work through this. whenever you are done with it. we cannot -- we sometimes -- the defendants, more often than us, may present some brief evidence -- mr. geraghty: objection. mr. keehfus: objection, your honor. the court: sustained, counsel. mr. schlesinger: phase ii has evidence that is far briefer. it is about net worth than anything else, because the only thing -- mr. keehfus: objection. the court: sustained. counsel -- mr. schlesinger: i'll move on, i'll move on. i do not want to get bogged down. i'm sorry. all right. so you know what the frank statement said. it was a promise to the american people. it was the biggest advertisement in the history -- in the history of united states advertising. and it was designed to get that message out, promises it was not bad for you, basic responsibility more important than business, not injurious to health, safeguarding the public health, all those charges have been abandoned for lack of evidence, and we are going to put up an unimpeachable, integrity guy in charge of the committee. but, in reality, the real business was not that they have a paramount interest in others; it is "who ain't for more money." it was about making money, making profits. they disregarded the health of their customers to make money. similarly, they promised they would cooperate with the public health, but really they smeared and belittled them. they would say he is a -- they would attack him, so that when you saw labels that talked about the "surgeon general says" on the pack of a side of cigarettes, they worked heavily to undermine the efficacy -- mr. keehfus: objection. mr. schlesinger: -- and authority -- mr. geraghty: objection. the court: sustained. counsel, you got to slow down. mr. keehfus: move to disregard. the court: you have got to slow down. mr. geraghty: move to strike the last comment. the court: the jury is to disregard the last comment. it is stricken. mr. schlesinger: as you know, they -- they actively smeared and belittled the surgeon general. they said that he was having publicity stunts and he was intentionally misleading the american people. and that was a lie. it was not true. true. but it was a very successful campaign because they manufactured doubt. they manufactured lung cancer. what kind of business is it? we manufacture a nicotine-delivery device. we manufacture addiction, doubt, and lung cancer. and millions and millions of people, in the era in which those folks grew up in, bought it hook, line, and sinker. so, you know, all the charges have been abandoned for lack of evidence, it is not dangerous; but in their documents, going way back into the early '60s, even the claude teague documents in the '50s, indicated that the amount of evidence accumulated to indict cigarette smoke as a health hazard is overwhelming, and the evidence challenging such an indictment is scant. they knew full well, before the '50s, that what they made caused cancer. and it brings up an interesting point. when we played part of dr. figlar, reflect upon all those 18th cent- -- 1800s, 19th century articles that they trotted out in cross-examination of dr. proctor. what was the point of that? that in some dusty stack, somewhere in a library, they, through research, were able to find the word "danger" or "addiction" in some old medical article? was virginia varner, who had not been born for another 50 or a hundred years, supposed to know about that? if that was common knowledge, the common knowledge defense, then why in the world did not they know about it? why did they invent the bonsack machine and start pumping out cigarettes in the millions, and mass marketing? why did they embark upon this campaign if it was such common knowledge that cigarettes were deadly and addictive? it might have been to them. it certainly was not to virginia varner or the american people. and, as dr. proctor said, the message of the public health and those old articles were like a snowflake in a snowstorm. we will talk about that. unimpeachable integrity. clarence cook little, who they put in charge of it, was not unimpeachable integrity when he said: and you asked, have we looked for carcinogenic substance in tobacco smoke. and we have not because we do not believe they are there. so that was -- it was obfuscation, doubt, a front, a holding strategy. the whole thing was a fake, designed to keep selling cigarettes, keep people smoking. they said that their research corporations, this tirc, the ctr, all of these guys are co-conspirators, they are all -- they are all contributorily culpable. meaning, a conspirator is, we get together in a group and we conspire. and dr. proctor said, conspiracy, it is (indicating) inspiration, conspiracy. the breathing together. you know, imagine huddled together in the plaza hotel, heads -- titans of industry -- during a period of time where folks trusted industry -- titans of industry, breathing together, discussing together, whispering among themselves of what we were going to do. it is killing people. what are we going to do? we are going to keep making them, we are making fortunes of money. and what are we going to tell the american people? it is not bad for you. this is why this case calls out for and screams for a fine, punishment. that is -- that is the important part of the case to us. and you can see they had a front and a shield, and they are only interested in evidence which denies the allegations that cigarette smoking causes disease. were not trying to get to the truth, were not using -- they were using the exact opposite of folks with unimpeachable integrity and national repute. and then, in 1994, after the ceos -- the ceos, major men of major responsibility, major might, major power, got up and all raised their hand and lied to congressmen, the -- as -- as dr. proctor called it, the iron uniformity of the conspiracy, that had held together, okay, no matter what, to the "i will tell these lies to my death." more importantly, "i will tell these lies to the death of millions of americans for profits." these are the kinds of things that are not humane. and all florida citizens encompass and embraces -- and if you just take the death rates in the united states -- and proctor spit out a lot of statistics -- it has to encompass hundreds of thousands of people that were included in the class. that is why it is a big -- mr. keehfus: objection, your honor. mr. schlesinger: it is all florida citizens. mr. keehfus: objection. the court: sustained, counsel. mr. keehfus: move to strike. mr. schlesinger: it is a reasonable -- the court: excuse me. the jury is to disregard the last comment. mr. schlesinger: to hear the defendants say it, nobody would ever be in the class, and that would make no sense. mr. keehfus: objection. mr. geraghty: objection, your honor. mr. schlesinger: and -- the court: excuse me. overruled. this is argument. mr. schlesinger: here's the most -- here's the most important thing about it: that word in there, "addiction," that his honor says we are not going to give you any particular definition of it, she meets every single part of that. and it is all there. she is a class member. that is -- it is supposed to be all of those folks. all of them. and they cannot deny addiction causes disease. it makes you smoke too much and you get sick. it is compulsive. how about someone who smoked four -- who drank four million sips of cocktail high balls, right? a manhattan, with a shot of whiskey in it, ten sips in a cup, 20 of them a day, seven days a week, for 40 years. what would you call that person? an enjoyable social drinker? or would you call them an alcoholic? twenty drinks a day, ten sips in a cup, to get alcohol. what would you call that person? how about three million snorts of cocaine? how about 300,000 snorts of cocaine because it lasts ten times longer than the hit of a cigarette? mr. keehfus: objection, your honor. the court: overruled. mr. schlesinger: what would you call that person? you would call them a drug addict. that was the amazing thing about what these drugs were. they were drugs that hide in plain sight, that look like totally normal consumer products. tell -- you imagine a young boy walking up to his dad and holding up this pack of cigarettes and saying, "daddy, what is this?" and a father looking to protect his son, saying, "it is bad." and the son saying, "it does not look bad." this looks like any other normal consumer product: size, shape. it hides in plain sight. it is not supposed to look like anything abnormal. how do you protect a kid from this? how do you protect them? so -- mr. geraghty: objection, your honor -- the court: excuse me. overruled. mr. schlesinger: a camel is a kid's toy. every kid's got toys. so this is not heroin. this is not a sniffling, itching junkie, with mucus dripping out of his nose, robbing a liquor store to try to get a fix for smack. that is not what this is. nicotine does not make you that high. nicotine is socially acceptable. it is a social standard. that is the era in which she was smoking cigarettes. so, the greater weight of evidence. what is the greater weight of evidence? it is the more convincing force and effect of the evidence in the case. oops. i knew i would do that. all right. anyway, i'll do it by hand. the point is, on balance, whose case makes more sense? it is not to the exclusion of any and all reasonable doubt, it is not a criminal burden or standard; it is, on balance, whose case makes more sense? where is the greater weight of the evidence? so what is the simple truth in this case? and i told you at the very beginning of this case, it really is -- and you can make it as -- you can make it difficult. when we litigate it, we can make it difficult, but this is what it is: smoking cigarettes is drug addiction. the compulsive act of sucking 20 or 30 cigarettes down, ten puffs a cigarette, seven days a week, without fail, for 40 years, is dependence on a drug, okay? and when you take her within a couple of years -- that picture is within a couple of years before she started smoking. she is nine or ten in that picture. within a year or two, she is smoking cigarettes. could she make a long-range lifestyle choice? did she know she was going to get hooked? i do not think so. so this is why virginia varner's in the engle class. and i -- i want you to be thinking about this. this is a timeline. 1954 -- i mean, she is the engle class. she is so right on the critical dates. 1954, dos, date of smoking; 1954, doc, date of conspiracy. that is when they put out the frank statement. that is when they saw the mice painting studies were resulting in cancer. and, then, all the way through the '60s, '70s, '80s and '90s, what was going on? they were lying, denying, producing doubt, manufacturing doubt, propagating lung cancer, working with nicotine as a center of their universe. it is: i thought i knew, but now i know. now i know. now i know. one jury at a time. 1995 -- mr. geraghty: objection, your honor. the court: sustained. mr. schlesinger: -- on january 1st -- mr. geraghty: move to strike. the court: excuse me. just talk about this case, counsel. mr. schlesinger: one -- january 1st, new year's day, and she passes. and you heard how she passes in those records. and that is the way -- it was not a peaceful way to go, moaning in pain, with her family gathered around her bedside, with the food -- choking and going into her lungs from her throat from the esophageal hole. it is an ignominious end. she ended with a whimper, just like they said when they made the conspiracy in 1954, that they were in fear, that this is the way their world would end: not with a bang, but with a whimper. that is t.s. eliot, the poem "the hollow men." that is why i said her world ended with a whimper, not theirs. but they feared it would. and they did not fear for themselves and their physical health or their moral obligation to their fellow man; they feared for their money. and today you will speak to them in the only language they understand: money. mr. geraghty: objection. mr. keehfus: objection, your honor. the court: sustained. mr. geraghty: move to strike. the court: the jury is to disregard the last comment. mr. schlesinger: so that is -- that is the key points of the class. and then there is one more thing on this. there are two years here that do not matter and there are two years here that do matter. and i want to point to you the two years that do matter and the two years that do not matter, and do this real quick as i go through it, all right? so, right here, she is smoking, and she is smoking those winstons from the family. and there is a couple of years in there. is it two years? is it three years? when did she switch, '58? when was she smoking, '53? we have enough evidence, the family lore, the husband who, when he first ever met her, she was a smoker. those two years matter for mr. keehfus' client, for reynolds, because they initiate and sustain the addiction in that youthful pediatric brain, that adolescent brain, that the younger it is, the more susceptible it is to the application and exposure of nicotine. so she was the most vulnerable then. and you cannot revise history and say, if she did not smoke those winstons and it never happened in those few years, things would have automatically been the same, because maybe she would have met a boyfriend that did not smoke. you do not know what she would have done in '57 or '58 if she had never smoked. maybe she would have been more mature, she would have had a chance. but they cannot speculate it would not have made a difference. but i can tell you that those two years, according to dr. difranza, a world-renowned professor and legitimate expert, dedicating his life, heroically, to the study and scourges of addiction, told you that those years matter. even dr. gup said those years matter and every cigarette causes you harm. so those are the two years that matter. the two years that do not matter, that we heard quite a bit about as mr. geraghty put forth his side of the story, his version that is the defense he -- he wants to suggest you consider, and that is -- oops -- and that is here (indicating). this is my right hand where the laser is; this is my left hand where the clicker is. sorry. 1994, in july, she is got lung cancer from smoking, from tobacco addiction, a devastating six months to live. i mean, just -- that is -- that is -- you are now staring at the abyss. it is over. we cannot -- we cannot save you. we cannot cut it out of you. you are 53 years old. fifty-three years old. in 1992, joe had a heart attack. joe had a heart attack, and that should have served as the warning, despite their denials to the contrary, that she should have quit at that time? the two years that did not matter. you heard dr. gup. cancer was growing in her lungs in 1992. she could not smoke cigarettes, a pack to two packs a day for 38 years, and take this supposed warning -- which, by the way, the tobacco companies would publicly say joe's condition was not caused by cigarettes, if anyone said his -- mr. keehfus: objection. mr. schlesinger: -- heart attack's caused by cigarettes. the court: sustained. mr. keehfus: move to strike. the court: the jury -- mr. schlesinger: the evidence in -- the court: excuse me. it is stricken. mr. schlesinger: the evidence in the case is they denied all forms of diseases were being caused by cigarettes up through '94. the point is, '92 is the two years that do not matter, because trying to say that is when she should have quit or that she was negligent in not quitting then, does not take into account the reality of the science, okay? now, again, here it is. diagnosis, class member. what did dr. gup say? a treating physician, a legitimate guy that met her, treated her in 1994. his only interest was helping her, understanding what was wrong with her, a specialist who spends so much of his time with the diseases and scourges of this problem. and he said, in no uncertain terms, she is got a two-pack history a day for 40 years, a one pack for the last month. remember, she was coughing and coughing up blood, so she cut down smoking for a month while she is fixing to be dying of cancer. and then she is got left lung cancer, the chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, and tobacco addiction. 24 25 follows:) q. when you wrote in your very first visit with her, after assessing her, your impression of bronchogenic cancer on the left, copd, and tobacco addiction, that was all written in one place at one time. why did you write all three of those together? a. to show that the cancer is due to the tobacco addiction. (video clip concluded.) mr. schlesinger: now, this is a treating doctor. this is the hook they cannot get off of. that is class membership. was she a floridian? was she a heavy smoker? was she addicted to the nicotine in cigarettes? did that nicotine drive that compulsive smoking to result in disease? the answer from an unimpeachable, credible, caring physician, no axe to grind, no stake in the outcome, someone who is there at the time -- and what i've heard said, "documentation trumps conversation" -- he wrote it down 22 years ago -- thank you, dr. gup -- because we have that evidence here, and that is all you need, because you do not have to make a mountain out of a molehill. the threshold requirement of class membership is proven. it is -- look at all the smoking. this is -- we did not show you all the records. this is in the records you have in evidence. you can try to dig through them and see it; but all through the records, she is documented not only by dr. gup, but by everybody who saw her in july, in august, of being a long-term heavy smoker, okay? forty -- 40 years, a pack-per-day smoker, one pack per day, two packs -- two packs per day for 40 years, one pack per day her last month. did she -- did she say she quit somewhere in the record a couple of weeks ago? so, 8/18, she said she quit. that means that, for several weeks after her lung cancer diagnosis, she is smoking. and what did dr. gup see in august? that she was still smoking. and lori was sneaking her cigarettes. and what did we hear? people sneak cigarettes because they are embarrassed to do it. when you are dying of lung cancer, maybe your other family members are going to get on you about that. so lori was doing it, she was sneaking cigarettes. the other family members did not see it or did not know about it. that means it did not happen? these are the eyewitnesses to what, back then, was a mundane activity. we are asking folks to remember what happened 20, 30, 40, 50 years ago, in what was a perfectly normal -- like, tell me about brushing your teeth. tell me about, you know, how you are making -- you are making your coffee. tell me about your coffee cup. the medical records document that this woman was a long-time heavy smoker, so -- and what did -- what did her -- what did her daughter say? 18 19 follows:) q. so where did she keep the cigarette pack that she was smoking? a. wherever she was. if she was in the kitchen, she would keep them on the kitchen counter. if she was in the living room, sitting down, they would be next to her on a coffee table or side table. q. okay. a. in her bedroom, she had an ashtray right next to her bed on the nightstand. i do not recall if she smoked in the bathroom, obviously, because the door was closed, so i do not know about that, but... (video clip concluded.) mr. schlesinger: okay. so the point is, cigarettes were everywhere. and this next -- this next one, i'm not going to play it; but, basically, it talked about the fact that they were -- one of the debates was, well, you know, was she having withdrawal. you know, when she -- when she was trying to quit, after she had a lung cancer diagnosis, after they are radiating her, cutting her open like a fish, giving her morphine, and all kinds of narcotic pain medications, did you notice that she had withdrawal symptoms? right? and you did not see her having withdrawal symptoms. a lady's dying, she is in excruciating distress, the family is traumatized by the pain of it and someone's supposed to be distinguishing withdrawal symptoms? this clip, which i'll skip, talks -- and you may remember it, because i do not want to subject you to too much more than the three hours of lisa you already heard, but she says it was a combination of all the things, you could not separate out what part was -- was craving or irritability or -- or desire; but the fact that she was sneaking her cigarettes meant that, despite she was dying, she really wanted those cigarettes. so it is not realistic to try to say, hey, everything's great. you know, one of the things -- did you use smoking-cessation aids? and i listened to her, i listened to her, i listened to her say, smoking -- did she use the patch? the patch did not even come out over the counter until 1996, after she was dead. these were not available. and they blocked the introduction of the merrell dow nicotine gum, and we will talk about that. but did you use the patch, the patch that was not available until 1996? and, no, we did not use the patch. no, we used another cessation method. what was that? lung cancer. to a tobacco industry, is that what is a cessation method, lung cancer? fear of death? mr. varner, he quit smoking cigarettes in '92 because the doc said you are going to die. well, what -- if someone says you are going to -- that is what -- that is what it takes to get someone to quit? that is addiction. that is dependence on a drug. i'll skip that. now, class membership. and you will not see this in the jury instructions, or question 1 on the verdict form about class membership. you will not see the word "choice," "personal responsibility," "fun," "pleasure." "something wonderful happens." can you imagine an old tv show of a beautiful woman, julie london, singing "something wonderful happens?" what is wonderful? getting lung cancer? getting emphysema? dying? where is the truth in advertising? they do not advertise the true realities of what tobacco does to folks. and when you get to class membership, none of these things here have anything to do with class membership, especially fault. and that is important to remember that -- that there is -- you do not want to let there be a conflation, a conflating of -- of addiction/dependence driving disease that puts you in the -- in the class with a simple threshold, demonstrated by dr. gup's record, and the idea of, you enjoyed it, you should have tried harder to quit, things like that. we will talk about that. but, here, it does not matter if addiction was the only cause. whether addicts can and do quit, that goes to fault. whether they share responsibility, whether making cigarettes is legal, as dr. proctor said, it is not legal to give it to -- to children. exactly when a -- a smoker understands the dangers of smoking, the reliance on statements, whether addicts say "i like smoking," "i'm going to die, anyway," whether they enjoy the drug they are addicted to, that is not class membership and the judge is not going to instruct you that way. and then here's dr. ticknor. and i'm not going to -- i can spend a lot of time on him, but i'm not going to spend a lot of time on him because i'll tell you what they say in texas. old saying among the ranchers. it is called -- when they are -- when they are up there and they are puffing and they are -- and they are -- and they are exaggerating their credentials or -- or what they have, or braggadocious, right? very -- very well-known saying, texas way -- and he is from texas -- "big hat, no cattle." "big hat, no cattle." and dr. ticknor gave you some anecdotal story about something he did, that does not make him a true expert, we believe the evidence shows, in this condition; but it does make him an impossible mathematician, because if you find that of the most addicted smokers, as dr. difranza said, the engle class members that come -- mr. geraghty: objection, your honor. mr. schlesinger: -- and sue -- the court: what is the objection? mr. geraghty: reference to other class members. the court: sustained. mr. schlesinger: dr. difranza -- mr. geraghty: move to strike. the court: jury is to disregard. mr. schlesinger: dr. difranza was asked a question about did he find other folks addicted; and when they asked him why, he -- in the engle class, he said it was because they were the most addicted who had died of lung cancer and other diseases of smoking. that is testimony from dr. difranza. i'll find it, read it to you. but the fact is, is that he also said that 95 percent of smokers out there are addicted. the numbers creep up if you are dealing with a concentrated class of the most addicted, heaviest smokers that succumb to diseases; but according to dr. ticknor, if you do the math, right, if you do the math, to get -- if it is one in 20 out of a regular group of folks that are not dependent on nicotine in cigarettes from smoking like a pack a day, then it is one in 20 -- so that is .05 -- and if you take .05 and you multiply it -- times itself 18 times, that is .05 raised to the power of 18 -- you get that the chances -- the mathematical chances of dr. ticknor's 18 smokers who were -- none of whom were addicted is one in 260 septillion. that is the biggest number i've ever said in a courtroom. one in 260 septillion. hundreds, thousands, millions, billions, trillions, quadrillions, quintillions, sextillions, septillions, okay, which means it is impossible. it means it cannot be true. that is the number of stars in the known observable universe. so it is not realistic. if you change the number and you put it down to 75 percent or eighty percent addiction rate, if you put it down to an eighty percent -- a 75 percent addiction rate, the odds are one in 69 billion. you would be 230 times more likely to win the powerball lottery. those odds are one in 292 billion -- billion. so, even at 75 percent, even at what mr. -- what christopher ticknor said was his fifty percent rate, which dr. difranza, the true expert talked about, the folks -- he is an expert at a subject. dr. ticknor, by virtue of graduating school and going into the expert witness business, is an expert at being a witness; but the fact is, is that one in -- if it is a fifty percent addiction rate, then it is still one in a quarter-million, which is about the likelihood of being struck by lightning -- mr. keehfus: objection, your honor. mr. schlesinger: -- in the united states. the court: overruled. mr. schlesinger: so that is considered extremely improbable. so that is why i told you that you may say to yourself, well, how can his -- how can his honor, judge murphy, let this guy say what he says? mr. geraghty: objection. the court: excuse me. mr. schlesinger: how can he let them -- mr. geraghty: i would object to that and make a motion. mr. schlesinger: i -- the court: excuse me. mr. schlesinger: i will -- the court: excuse me, counsel. let me finish before you start talking -- mr. schlesinger: yes, sir. the court: -- all right? it is -- the objection's sustained, it is stricken. the jury is to disregard the last comment. mr. schlesinger: sorry, judge. i was being rhetorical. what i mean is, this jury instruction -- look, today, you all have great power in this. this is a great leveling of a playing field, great power. mr. geraghty: objection to the phrase "leveling of a playing field." the court: sustained. mr. schlesinger: and, in that regard, the power is given to you by the law. and some of the law that gives you the power includes the believability of witnesses instructions, one of which is, when someone characterizes themselves as an expert, you think about everything -- the knowledge, skill, training, experience, the bias, the money they earn, everything about that -- and then you give that testimony the weight you think it deserves; or, when it comes to experts, because they are a special class in the courtroom, you may reject it. so the reason i'm not going to spend a lot of time on chris ticknor is because we hope the evidence shows he was not worthy of belief, his testimony should be rejected. and, do not forget, when dr. proctor talked about the way in which and some of the reasons why the tobacco industry way back when, years ago -- mr. geraghty: objection, your honor. mr. keehfus: objection. the court: sustained. mr. geraghty: i would object. mr. schlesinger: dr. -- i'm talking about what -- dr. proctor conferred with you on internal documents, secret documents. this is one of the documents in evidence. mr. geraghty: i object and ask that we approach on this very briefly. mr. schlesinger: hold my time, please. (the following discussion was held at sidebar:) [#deleted sidebar#] mr. schlesinger: all right. may i get set and pick up my time, judge? the court: counsel, we have a running clock here. mr. schlesinger: yep. so -- the court: you may proceed. mr. schlesinger: the clock runs when you are in the penalty box, okay? it is like hockey. in any event, i'll keep going. dr. proctor talked about the purpose and the role that a lot of their work played -- he talked about the pillars of the conspiracy. remember he drew the eight-armed octopus and all the different elements that went into keeping this conspiracy going? one of them was a very important element of it way back in those days, because they did not want to be held responsible for the damage they were doing. so a big part of their conspiracy was to hold off and -- and defend in litigations way back then, and dr. proctor -- mr. geraghty: i would -- i would object, your honor. the court: overruled. mr. geraghty: move to strike. mr. schlesinger: the industry research effort has included special projects designed to find scientists and medical doctors who might serve as industry witnesses in legislative -- in lawsuits or in legislative forums. and, you know, he talked about the three pillars of the conspiracy: public opinion, legislation, and litigation. and it makes sense, if you know you are making a product that is killing a substantial number of your customers and you are replacing them with youth, which is a pretty incendiary thing to put in the documents, and you are doing it for profit, clear-eyed, straight ahead, you have decided to do that, you are also trying to do what you can to stave off regulation and any other ripple effects, any repercussions of what you are doing. and this is a document that shows that. addiction is the legal cause if it contributes substantially. and the question is, did the addiction play an important role? the question is, if she was not addicted to nicotine, would she have compulsively smoked cigarettes all day long, from first thing in the morning till first thing -- the last thing at night, every day for 40 years? basically, put another way, because they admit -- now they admit -- mr. keehfus: objection. mr. schlesinger: -- she got lung cancer -- the court: what is the objection? mr. keehfus: "now they admit." the court: overruled. mr. schlesinger: now they admit, in this courtroom, about this case, that our client smoked enough cigarettes to get lung cancer and emphysema and die. but if you are admitting that my client -- if you acknowledge that my client, that joe's wife, that virginia smoked enough cigarettes to get lung cancer and die, but they would have you believe that she was not dependent not one day in her life, that none of that cigarette smoking was driven by the sine qua non of their existence -- that without which there is nothing, the center of their universe, nicotine -- we would argue that that does not stand to reason, and hope you see that our way. that is why we say "a" versus "the." it is not whether it was the cause, whether it was a cause; meaning, can you be addicted and still enjoy your drugs? lots of drug addicts enjoy their drugs. the funny thing about -- the tragic thing about tobacco was, for so many years, it was a secret addiction. folks did not know why. sales were meteorically going up, the people were smoking it up like silly, and did not understand that it was a drug that was controlling them. that is what dr. koop said. we will play that. so here's a quick way of applying facts to the law: you can see addiction causes continued smoking, lung cancer and death; but look at the other things that can also contribute to cause: stress, enjoyment, pleasure, what have you. that is why it need not be the only cause. let us look at it this way: imagine the cigarettes -- because cigarettes are addictive. the engle findings says cigarettes are addictive. it does not say "they might be," "sometimes," "they could be," "maybe," "they could be once but we cannot find that guy." it is not a theoretical concept; it is the reality of the world, it is the truth of science, and it is what we know now. and the more they study it, the more they see it changes your brain permanently. but here -- here's a way of taking the concurring cause instruction, which can confuse you when you see it in paper, and making a pictograph. in order to be a legal cause of lung cancer and death, cigarettes, addictive cigarettes, addiction to cigarettes -- that is what is represented by that imagery there -- may not be the only cause. the addiction to cigarettes may be a legal cause of lung cancer even though it operates in combination with fun, pleasure, the joy of smoking, if such fun, pleasure, taste -- taste -- no taste buds in the lung, but it is delicious in the mouth. it is a delicious taste even though the lungs cannot taste, right? inhalation is what makes addiction unleash the dragon of addiction. -- if such fun occurs at the same time as the addiction to cigarettes, and that the addiction to cigarettes contributes substantially to producing lung cancer. and there is the death certificate. death from lung cancer. there is a way of looking at that. it is not all or nothing. it is not a cause -- it is not the cause, it is a cause. and what did dr. difranza say? does addiction kill? i mean, in simple terms, does addiction kill? yes, addiction kills. how about nicotine addiction? that kills more than any other addiction. the number one killer in the united states. more people are dying right now in the united states from this. we are at the peak of death in -- in this year. more people are dying than have ever died before of cigarettes, and they are dying more than all those other scourges combined. a hundred times more than heroin addicts. more than aids and automobile accidents and homicides and terrible things all combined. the number one killer in this country are cigarettes. it hides in plain sight. it is an irrational madness to have a product that kills over half of its users reliably, over a half million people in the united states. this here (indicating), this is less than a summer's supply of marlboro cigarettes. seven cartons. seven weeks. ten packs a carton, 20 cigarettes a pack, seven cartons, 1400 cigarettes. that is today's death toll. today, while we do this case, from morning to night, 1400 people -- mr. geraghty: objection, your honor. mr. schlesinger: -- will die -- the court: sustained. mr. schlesinger: -- from cigarette-related -- mr. geraghty: move to strike -- the court: sustained. mr. geraghty: -- your honor. mr. schlesinger: okay. 1400 people a day die from cigarettes. mr. geraghty: objection -- objection, your honor. the court: i sustain the objection -- mr. schlesinger: that is the evidence. the court: -- counsel. mr. schlesinger: in any event, that represents 1400 cigarettes. so, as dr. difranza said, did nicotine addiction kill virginia varner? yes. but for her being addicted to nicotine, would she be alive today with her husband, more likely than not? you bet. he says: if she had not been addicted to nicotine, she never would have gotten lung cancer. that is for sure. let us play this, please. 2 3 follows:) voice: i would say it is just as addictive as heroin or cocaine. our nation has mobilized enormous resources to wage a war on drugs, illicit drugs. we should also give priority to the one addiction, tobacco addiction, that is killing more than 300,000 americans each year. (video clip concluded.) mr. schlesinger: so, back in that period of time, it was said by the surgeon general koop at the time -- this is in the '88 period -- that tobacco addiction is killing more than 300,000 americans a year; and he goes on to say, we now understand what -- what has been robbing them of their free choice. it is a drug. what is controlling them? it is a drug. and then this here is the memo -- and this is the memo -- it is in evidence, you will have it, it is two pages -- and it is from -- it is september 9th, 1980, from kloepfer to knopick. and these are the folks -- the president and vice president of the tobacco institute, one of those lobbying arms, one of the fronts and shields in the conspiracy. and it is dated september 9th, 1980. and they say: we cannot defend continued smoking as a free choice if the person was addicted. this is what they were saying internally. this is how they described where they were internally. but what is interesting about this is, when you read this entire document, which you can -- you know, we are giving you snippets, but this will be marked. it is pt2184. it will have a folder, it will say "pt2184." if you want to read it, their concern was about a surprise story that the national institute of drug abuse wanted "addictive" added to the cigarette warning, and that cigarette smoking is a -- is a dependence process and cigarette smoking is addictive, and that it was more addictive than using heroin. and -- and they say: the tobacco institute missed a chance to attend and present information at nida meeting which was developing the addictive language. i feel badly about my own lack of intelligence-gathering in this situation, but these questions are not academic. the lawyers remind us, the entire matter of addiction is the most potent weapon a prosecuting attorney can have in a lung cancer/cigarette case. we cannot defend smoking as free choice if the person was addicted. that was in 1980. it was not even until '88 or '89 where dr. koop came out and labeled it addictive. so, for 25 years, after the 1960s, when they said our -- we are in the nicotine delivery business, it is -- the cigarette is not the product, the cigarette is the package, it is a nicotine-delivery device, the product is nicotine, nicotine is addictive, for over 25 years, the surg- -- the -- the public health authority did not come out and declare that publicly. and, by that time, the hook sets deep. folks can be very addicted by that time. so that is in evidence. all right. let me see if i can find this. okay, yeah, i know where i am. let me -- judge, we can take a break right now. i'm at about 45 minutes. we can take a break right now. the court: all right. ladies and gentlemen, we are going to take our -- a short recess. do not discuss the case, do not form any opinion about the case, do not allow anyone to discuss the case in your presence. just leave your notepads and the jury instructions on your chairs. do not do any research on the case. we will be back with you shortly. (jury exited the courtroom at 10:48 a.m.) the court: all right. let the record reflect the jury has been excused; counsel remain. now, counsel, subsequent to our discussion sidebar, where i was telling you to take a break, one of the court reporters indicated to me she did not have to change just yet. i'm -- i'm trying to figure out when we are going to make this change, so -- [#deleted recess#] proceed. mr. schlesinger: thank you, judge. all right. folks, one thing i skipped over, i must touch on with you so we -- so we are definitive and certain. despite what you heard in opening statement or any misimpressions it may have conveyed, you must know that in this case, my client, mr. varner, did not delay filing his lawsuit in any way, because the case was filed in 1994, just a month after the ceos testified in congress down here in miami. that was the class action. it worked its way through the courts, and it was -- mr. geraghty: i object, your honor. the court: sustained. mr. keehfus: make a motion. mr. schlesinger: in 2006, the florida supreme court decertified the class and permitted individual lawsuits to be filed within one year of its mandate -- that is the finality, the supreme court's final, here's my opinion, we have considered all motions -- mr. geraghty: i object to any -- mr. schlesinger: -- it is final, the mandate. mr. geraghty: i object to anything beyond the court's instruction. the court: thank you. mr. schlesinger: the mandate is the finality of the florida supreme court's opinion. and it allowed folks from january 11th of 2007, individuals from the class, from january 11th of 2007 until january 11th of 2008, 365 calendar days, one year, to file an engle class lawsuit. this is one of those engle suits filed in that proper and appropriate time frame. and for no other reason. mr. geraghty: objection, your honor, i object to counsel's -- the court: excuse me. objection is overruled. counsel, move on. mr. schlesinger: yes. so, the choice of defendants to market tobacco known to be both addictive and cancer-causing, raises the question of fault reserved for questions 5 and 6 on the verdict form. mr. geraghty: your honor, i object. that is implied preemption. the court: overruled. mr. schlesinger: evidence of what the tobacco company manufacturers knew about their deadly product and when they knew it will be important in answering that question. the choice of a youngster, like virginia varner, to use tobacco also raises the question of fault reserved for questions 5 and 6. the question of what did she know and when did she know it will have to be addressed by you at that time, but you cannot decide at question 1 how much either side should be faulted for their choices to market or use tobacco, because they have not gotten to questions 5 and 6 yet. mr. keehfus: objection, statement of law your honor. the court: overruled. mr. schlesinger: so why am i even talking about choice when you have not reached the fault question on the verdict form yet? because the tobacco companies want to suggest that virginia varner was not addicted. mr. geraghty: objection, your honor, to what we want to suggest. the court: sustained. mr. schlesinger: but if you will not buy that nonsense, there is -- mr. geraghty: excuse me, i object, your honor, motion, motion -- the court: excuse me. i sustain the objection. argue the facts, argue the law. you concern yourself with plaintiff's argument, counsel. mr. schlesinger: okay. but if you do not accept that position, there is a fall-back position. if she was addicted, it was her choice to smoke long enough to get sick; therefore, it was her choice and not her addiction that caused her copd, her lung cancer, and her death. but not one piece of evidence was presented by either side that virginia varner's addiction was her choice. nobody chooses addiction. it is often a terrible side effect of the choice to smoke. just like the addiction some people get from prescription pain relievers. no one chooses that addiction. but it frequently happens as an unintended consequence of the use of the drug. lawful, but dangerous drugs, can have awful side effects, side effects like addiction. that is why ordinary people often say about tobacco or prescription pain relievers: be careful, do not get hooked. why do people say that? because addiction is like a fish getting hooked. the fish chooses to strike the bait, and then gets caught by the hidden hook. the hook starts pulling the fish along. the fish starts fighting the hook and tries to get off. fish that are only hooked through the lip sometimes get away. but those who are hooked through the side of the mouth are goners. fishermen know all this. it is why they use bait and hooks in the first place. but no fisherman would ever tell you that the fish was caught because the fish chose to get hooked. the fish died because it did not see the hook in the first place. high speed lure, this marine -- you do not see the hook. it is a hidden hook. it is not meant to be seen. it is supposed to look like something enticing. it is not supposed to be something that is going to kill you. the 12-year-old, 13-year-old virginia varner certainly did not see the hook. she died january 1st, '95; 53 years old. the tobacco companies did not tell their customers that they thought cigarettes were addictive until five years after virginia varner died. instead, they repeatedly told everyone who could read there was a substantial scientific controversy about whether cigarettes were addictive, about whether cigarettes could get you hooked. there was no warning on a cigarette pack until 1966, which was not even a warning. it was a caution. by that time, virginia varner was 25 years old. she would been addicted to smoking for years. she was hooked. hooked badly. she tried to get away, but did not. being hooked eventually killed her. now the tobacco companies want to tell you being hooked had nothing to do with the death of virginia varner. that is a real fish story, and they know it. mr. keehfus: objection, your honor -- the court: sustained. mr. keehfus: -- motion. mr. schlesinger: virginia varner chose to smoke at a time when no one knew the real dangers of addiction disease inherent in cigarettes. she started as a youth in approximately 1954. the advertising and movies that attracted the young virginia varner never mentioned addiction. never mentioned cancer. she smoked for over 12 years before the cigarettes even said -- before the cigarette packs even said that cigarettes might -- might be dangerous to your health. may be, they may not be. perfect keeping with the doubt campaign voiced upon the american people by tobacco. over a decade. in that amount of time, the hook sets deep. very deep. virginia varner will be pulled along by that hook for more than 40 years. she tried to fight it, but she did not get off. maybe some of you think that she should have tried harder. that is fair. but that is questions 5 and 6. that is fault. right now, the defendants would suggest that virginia varner was never hooked -- mr. geraghty: objection, your honor, to what the defendants would suggest. the court: sustained. mr. schlesinger: and if you do not accept that, then they would present evidence to suggest that being hooked in no way contributed to her death. common sense tells us that is not the true, accurate evidence in this case. the reason we all worry about getting hooked is because addiction starts pulling you along, it is hard to get away. if you do not get away in time, you are dead. that is what happened to virginia varner. she did not get away in time. and at least one of the important reasons for that was her dependence to the drug nicotine in cigarettes. and that nicotine was a substantial and big factor in why she did not get away from cigarettes. they ought to know it. they are the ones that make cigarettes -- mr. keehfus: objection, your honor. the court: what is the objection? mr. keehfus: attacking defense. mr. schlesinger: so not true. the court: thank you. overruled. mr. schlesinger: they are the ones that make the cigarettes with the nicotine hook built right in. sustain addiction, initiate addiction, maintain addiction. you must have precision amounts of nicotine. now these defendants would offer evidence that that hook has no role in pulling smokers towards disease. that is not believable if you see this our way. they put nicotine in cigarettes, they keep nicotine in cigarettes, because it keeps their customers hooked. that way, they will buy more cigarettes. all the way to the end. they know that, they want that, they keep the nicotine in their products to keep doing that, getting people hooked. just like they hooked virginia varner all the way to the end. freedom of choice? what did claude teague say? and i invite you to look at all of claude teague's critical documents in this case, because he was a brilliant man, and he really captured the essence of the industry with his recognition of the essential role of nicotine, with the urgency to capture the share of the youth market and all smoking begins at youth. his recognition in the '50s when he reported to all his superiors that cigarette smoking caused cancer. but his pt numbers, the claude teague documents, some thoughts on the youth market, the crucial role of nicotine. read them. you will see brilliance in action for a nefarious purpose. but, nevertheless, brilliance in action. what did dr. teague say with specificity about whether there was really freedom of choice? this is an internal document from the '70s, when you are addicted. when you are not a free smoker. when you are a learner, when you are a confirmed smoker, freedom to choose is a negative. because they know you do not have it. easy as possible to start, hard as possible to quit. that is the business model. and all throughout, nicotine is addictive. they have to have the habituating levels of nicotine, they will liquidate their business if they reduce or eliminate nicotine. without nicotine, there would be no smoking, and very few consumers -- this is claude teague again -- very few consumers are aware of the effects of nicotine; for instance, its addictive nature. it goes on to say, and that it is a poison. remember when they were trying to come up with ways to see if nicotine was addictive internally in the research, and they said if these results come out that way and it looks like it is just as addictive as morphine, we are going to bury those results and bury that research. remember dr. proctor told you about how many documents they shredded. so for as many millions as we have and for many lifetimes of careers of scholars to read these tens and 50 or more million documents, dr. proctor also reflected on how many were destroyed. this is an industry in the united states doing this to folks. remember, they are human. they are judged by you in human terms, but they are also held to human obligations. if you want to be treated like a person, act like a person. so they controlled the nicotine, they freebase the nicotine. everything about it is to make sure it maintains precise levels of control. and this is the explanation: that different drugs that cause addiction exert their effect in different ways. dr. difranza showed this to you. the king of dependence, meaning relapse, and keeping smoking, and a lifetime of smoking for four cigarettes. remember that article that dr. difranza talked about that he used in his studies by dr. russell? the one who said that folks are no more likely -- without nicotine, folks are no more likely to smoke cigarettes than they would be to light sparklers or blow bubbles. without nicotine, that is how much people would be doing it. they would not be doing it 20 times a day, blowing bubbles and lighting sparklers. heroin gets you higher, cocaine has a different withdrawal effect. alcohol can be terrible delirium tremens. but nicotine -- you cannot judge nicotine and a disorder of nicotine about whether or not you can do housework or whether or not you are going to lose your job. right? nobody would want their pilot getting on a plane after spending an hour in the sky lounge knocking back a few white russians. they would not want him flying that plane. they would not want to be on a plane flying with a pilot who drank. but nobody would mind getting on a plane with a pilot who smoked a couple cigarettes. and you do not lose your job from smoking cigarettes in the '50s, '60s, '70s, and '80s, where you can smoke at work, in hospitals. when the doctors smoked with you in the halls. that was a normal process. so we do not have cigarettes here. but in the '80s, there would be cigarettes burning all in the ashtrays in this courtroom. the judges would be smoking, the lawyers would be smoking, the jurors would be smoking. that would be perfectly normal. it was not banned, in hospitals or anywhere. so presentism. think about the way things were. and do not substitute the addictive nature of alcohol and what it does to assert its effects, with its intoxicating effects or withdrawal effects, with nicotine, which just makes you do it over and over and over again to keep that nicotine level in your body. the evidence is overwhelming, the greater weight of the evidence, that she was dependent. so question 1 is checked off "yes." and off you move. and i've spent more time on this part than i wanted to, but off you move. and then the next one is, i told you the two years that mattered. you will notice there is no such question for philip morris, because question 1, philip morris, there is no doubt 30 years of smoking was definitely a super-important contributor of her being addicted and full of cancer and emphysema and dying. so that is already been determined as a matter of law. no dispute. however, reynolds -- and it is reasonable, right, it is reasonable, that reynolds, with only the beginning of her smoking career and only a couple years, right, 1/20 of her smoking career, that you-all should consider, was it a legal cause; meaning, did it contribute. we believe, we hope that the evidence is sufficient -- particularly from dr. difranza, even dr. gup talked about it -- to have you check that off and then they will bear their relative proportion of responsibility from there if you find that the answer to that question is yes. and under it is dr. difranza's answer. and he explained that the cigarettes establish her addiction, she is so young, a stronger addiction. and did that early role play a significant role in her ultimate disease development and death. and he said it would be a critical factor. and he is the youth smoking guy. right? and he is contributed cutting edge, niche knowledge. it is an honor to bring -- you know, we brought witnesses to you that we hoped honored this process, men of great stature in their professional communities, men of great knowledge and wisdom. and we hope to be able to do that so that we could show you what they did and how they built their career and why they deserved to be giving the kind of opinions and getting some of the kind of, you know, awards that they did. and if they say things like they were against smoking, it stands to reason. because a police officer doing his job is against crime. he is a crime fighter. so saying, well, you believe that smoking is something that should be abolished by, dr. proctor, well, it is a clear-minded, rational concept. that to him, it makes no sense that cigarettes should exist. they kill over half their users. that just makes sense. so trying to say that should undermine you or impair your credibility does not stand to reason any more than dr. difranza, who sees the scourge of the effect on children and does not want it to happen. you know, it is a legitimate, it is a lofty, it is a laudable goal to pursue. these are the instructions. you have got them. you will have them back there with you. but this is as if you found them yourself. these are undeniable findings. they cannot be denied. this is how we got here. this is the long journey to justice. this is -- mr. geraghty: objection; not in evidence, your honor. the court: excuse me. objection is noted. it is overruled. mr. schlesinger: the findings, the jury decision, the law, the facts, the supreme court mandate, and now they are yours. now we hand them to you, and we ask you to please use them for all considerations. after question 1 is answered, for all considerations, is what they did reprehensible? this helps you understand the nature -- mr. keehfus: objection, your honor, statement of the law. the court: overruled. this is argument. mr. schlesinger: they are guilty of fraud, they are guilty of conspiracy. that is been found. you all know it. dr. proctor testified about it extensively. it was extremely successful. they celebrated it. twenty years later, said it was a brilliantly conceived holding strategy, and it is helped us win many battles and many victories. and they were -- they celebrated it. so then we talk about the fraud and conspiracy and how this affects my client, as you are working your way to the punitive damages. and you will see that you have to answer these questions about whether or not the fraud and the conspiracy affected virginia varner, one of many millions, one of the folks who did exactly what they expected her to do, behaved exactly like they wanted her to do. she was the perfect smoker. she was the customer she [sic] wanted. she was a lifelong smoker. talking about other members of her family who may have become sick and succumbed to cigarettes in a multigenerational catastrophe is not a successful piece of evidence for the defendants to put on. mr. geraghty: objection, your honor. the court: no personal opinions, counsel. mr. schlesinger: it speaks to the tragedy of cigarettes. we talk about harm to others. the punitive damages instruction says you can consider harm to others. not only the 20 million who were killed nationwide since the '60s from cigarettes in assessing the degree of wrongfulness of the harm. but also just the people around that they mention, what about this one and what about this family member? that is harm to others. so it actually supports the notion of finding them and punishing them if they are telling you that other members of the family got sick from cigarettes. it is a multigenerational catastrophe, and you can consider it that way. so, this reliance, this -- i smoked filters. her actions speak louder than her words. she smoked that which was the psychological crutch, giving the illusion of filtration so you would think there was selective filtration. the marlboro ads are selectrate filter. and mr. geraghty skillfully asked my client mr. varner, saying: well, did not you know that smoke was still coming through those cigarettes when you smoked them? yeah, but the only thing that he thought was coming through was what the tobacco companies told them was coming through, and it was the fun and the taste and the pleasure and the enjoyment. and these sciencey-sounding filters, which we do not agree there was anything bad in there. if there is anything bad, we will find out what it is, we will take it out. but in the meantime, here is our 20,000 filter traps. here is our selectrate filter, which will selectively remove the bad stuff and only let the fun, the enjoyment, the pleasure, and the taste come through. so mr. varner is not supposed to know technically it is a marketing gimmick. so their behavior, their actions speak louder than words. they fell for the filter fraud, like millions like them, and they relied on this fraud, and it contributed to cause that ongoing smoking. it was the psychological crutch that kept smokers that might be worried. there was no evidence that she was really worried. she was doing what she thought was normal. like her son said, joe, jr.: we sat around, we ate dinner, we drank coffee, we watched tv, we smoked cigarettes, we laughed. that was normal. it was -- you know, sitting here today, if this room was full of smoke, it might not seem that way. and the point is, is that all the information out there, the snowflake in the snowstorm, that the overwhelming message from tobacco was out there. it was designed to reach populations, of which virginia varner was one. it does not have to be direct. it can be circuitous. as long as they meant to get it out there with the intent that she rely on it, she is entitled to be found to rely, because would it have been important to her? and we will play this. 11 12 follows:) q. and then they wanted to also reassure the public that there was no proof of the claims between smoking and lung cancer, correct? a. they -- they -- they did want that message to get out. yes, that is correct. (video clip concluded.) mr. schlesinger: so that was their intent. that is one of the findings. and guess what? it worked. it worked. every cigarette to this day -- almost every cigarette has got a fake filter on it, a marketing gimmick, a scam, a dupe, a dodge. color-changing filters by claude teague with the invention. and it is a hard illusion to break. an entire country and -- smoking this. does not do anything. it does not do a thing. that is a heck of a successful illusion, and it kept millions of folks smoking. and -- 8 9 follows:) voice: i've been reading a lot about it in the paper, but i do not know anyone actually who has gotten cancer. of course the fact that it was smoking, come out and proved in black and white. voice: they come out and really say, well, you are going to get it, i'll stop then. but when they just keep on saying some say you do, some you do not, i'll just keep on. voice: you know they say it causes cancer and heart disease. do you believe that? voice: no, i do not. not in my heart. i cannot believe it. if i look back at it, peoples that make the cigarettes, i feel like the one that make the cigarettes should know what they doing. voice: throughout your tenure with american, it was not only american's position but your position that cigarettes were not injurious to health. is that accurate? voice: through my tenure? voice: yes. voice: yes, that is so. voice: that is something american tobacco wanted the public to believe; is that correct? voice: yes. voice: it is a statement that american tobacco placed great reliance on. voice: we issued that statement, yes. we [indiscernible] believe it. voice: as far as you are concerned, a person is justified in relying on that statement. voice: yes. (video clip concluded.) mr. schlesinger: reliance goes both ways. they relied on her relying on them. like an organic chemistry equation. it is a balance in equilibrium. with an arrow going that way, an arrow going that way. they relied on her reliance and millions like her, and it worked. think about this. they made promises they would stop making it. they made promises they would stop making it, if it was ever proven to be bad. and it certainly has been proven to be bad, but they never stopped making it. mr. keehfus: objection, your honor. the court: sustained. mr. keehfus: motion. mr. geraghty: we join. mr. schlesinger: okay. so we talked about reliance. there was some testimony about it, about the water turning brown and them thinking that the stuff was coming out that was bad. you heard that testimony. and what did dr. teague say? okay? the public attaches great significance -- remember the color-changing filter trick -- to the color changes. and even though they said it would have no effect, the advantages and sales advantages are obvious. they believed that that brown stuff coming out of the back of those filters made a difference. that is reliance. that is a contribution to that. they thought they could rely on it. they thought the bad stuff was coming out. that is exactly what teague and everyone else expected. and then -- i'm going to skip this. okay? you have heard him, dr. cullman. and, again, a merchandising proposition, the public attaches great significance to the color change. that is teague. you cannot really selectively filter. we will tell people: here's a triple, quadruple or quintuple filter capable of removing whatever constituents in smoke is suspect. oh, and that document, pt036615, ends with "and incidentally, a nice jolt of nicotine." do not forget the nicotine. and, of course, the illusion of filtration is as important as the fact of filtration. that is just the truth of the industry's fraud, deception. health reassurance fraud, keep people smoking, psychological crutch, and it worked. and they admit they are liars, right here: we are making false and misleading statements to promote the sale of cigarettes. this was way back in the '60s. they knew what they were up to. they did not care. they were not trying to help people. lies cost lives. that is one of my ways of saying why things are reliance. if you lie to people, it results in death. it causes folks to die. it causes folks to count on them. the engle instruction says they made these fraudulent. they conspired. they breathed together. they put forth a fraudulent concealment campaign to keep folks from fully understanding what was going on with the idea, the intent that the public relied. and smoking rates kept going up all the way through the early to mid '80s. kept going up. so this is reliance. because if lies cost lives, virginia was one of those lives. look at all the things they hid from her: that there was never a controversy. doubt, that there is all these poisons in the cigarettes. hundreds of thousands of people are dying. teenagers are the target. nicotine is as highly addictive as cocaine and heroin. they manipulate the nicotine, adjust the ph level, add all kinds of additives to make them inhalable and keep them to be addictive and more addictive. and then filters do not make them any safer. they did not know that. okay? do i play this one or skip it? play it. 9 10 follows:) voice: if we do find any that we consider harmful, and so far we have not, we will remove these from smoke and still retain the pleasure of your favorite cigarette. voice: well, obviously a filter takes out certain tar and nicotine. i do not think the industry admits there are any bad elements. voice: to claim there is now sufficient scientific evidence to establish that cigarette smoking causes disease is, in my opinion, unjustified. voice: turning a significant health question into a publicity stunt is an insult to serious science. voice: i cannot point to anything that i would consider the cause of cancer of the lung, but the behavior of the disease does not support the idea of cigarettes being the causal agent. voice: we do not believe that cigarettes are hazardous. we do not accept that. voice: do you believe that cigarettes are safe? have they been proved to be safe, mr. cullman? voice: i believe they have not been proved to be unsafe. voice: the case is still open. the jury has not come out. voice: it may not be harmful. we are not convinced. voice: it may, or it may not be. we do not know. voice: but insofar as the correlation between lung cancer and cigarette smoking are concerned, no one knows. it may, it may not. voice: cigarette smoking does not cause cancer, yes or no? voice: it is not known whether cigarettes cause cancer. voice: all right. sir -- voice: has not been causally established. voice: there is not unanimity of opinion in the community of science on these issues. we have no business prejudging the scientific controversy. we need more information. voice: do cigarettes cause cancer? i do not know if they do or not. voice: i'm not a person to give you a does or does not answer. voice: the data that we have been able to see has all been statistical data that has not convinced me that smoking causes death. we do not know what causes cancer in general right now, so i think that we may find out what causes cancer, and we may find out some relationship which has yet to be proven. voice: i do not think any of them die of diseases caused by cigarette smoking. voice: zero? voice: if they do, i think it is an unproven case. (video clip concluded.) mr. schlesinger: dr. alexander spears, ceo of lorillard, now bought by reynolds in 1997. i do not think anybody dies of smoking, and if they do, they still do not. it is an unproven case. the absolute iron, iron uniformity of the conspiracy as late as 1997. it is a -- and then the big pivot. they are trying to claim that virginia varner should have known what they profess to have not known because of a "may be bad for you" label in 1966, or the surgeon general said it is hazardous without specificity in 1970? that does not meet with the bounds of reason. and then doubt is the product. controversy, psychological crutch. let us say controversy, contradictions unknown create doubt. and the industry shield. so we recommend when you get to this part of the -- of the verdict form you find them all to have acted in a way that caused virginia to rely such that her smoking continued and how things might have been different had they told her the truth; and that they have culpability; and that yes, their fraud and their conspiracy depended upon and succeeded in getting folks like her and virginia, in particular, to rely. and that includes reynolds every bit as much as philip morris because they are co-equal conspirators, all the acts together in furtherance of the conspiracy. and you heard testimony or statements from lots of people that were the faces of the conspiracy -- the scientists, the executives -- all those folks were doing it to get her to rely. she did. that is how you should answer those questions if you see this our way. now, this is 5 and 6. i talked to you about before, and i read you that story about hooked. was there fault on the part of virginia varner which was a legal cause of her lung cancer? remember they kept saying she did not do anything wrong. she was right to enjoy herself. she had every right to smoke and these are her personal lifestyle choices and everything else. and so for that reason, while considering whether or not she is at fault, just from what they said, we would say that you check this off "no," she did not do anything wrong. in the era in which she smoked she acted totally normally. not to trump up things like: did you ever hear -- they asked her: hey, had you ever heard of the song smoke, smoke, smoke that cigarette? and lisa said: no. and then the next question was: did you ever hear your mom sing the song smoke, smoke, smoke that cigarette? right? did you ever hear the term "coffin sticks"? no. did you ever hear your mom use the term "coffin sticks," "cancer nails," "coffin sticks." coffin nails, cancer sticks, smoke, smoke, smoke that cigarette? i do not figure they will harm me because they have not hurt me yet. jokes? jokes are what were supposed to supplant trying to help people and telling the truth about a dangerous deadly protect that is too dangerous to market. that is a defective and unreasonably -- mr. keehfus: objection, your honor, legal product. the court: excuse me. overruled. mr. schlesinger: a defective -- this is the engle finding. as if you found it yourself. undenial by the defense. a defective and unreasonably dangerous finding. when used as intended, it is dangerous. they advertise, they encourage folks: smoke as much as you can. smoke as much as you can. save the marlboro miles. save them. because -- not that it is a road to nowhere. because, do you have what it makes -- do you have what it takes to make the team? a road to nowhere. what happens to someone that saves this many pack -- proof of purchase from a pack? they are encouraging you to smoke as much as possible to win valuable prizes? mr. geraghty: your honor, there is no evidence -- motion -- the court: sustained. mr. schlesinger: this is -- the court: excuse me. you are to rely on your own recollection of the evidence. counsel, you have ten minutes. mr. schlesinger: so, if you say: hey, by 1982, 1985, okay -- this is how i break it down numerically. you have to add it to one hundred percent. if you find she is not at fault at all, you would break it down 75 percent, 25 percent, because they initiated the addiction. but these are my recommendations. you can adjust these numbers any way you want. you have to put a zero in for virginia varner if you say no. but let us look at this. let us say you say: wait a second. now, we heard a lot about her smoking. there was a caution on the pack. you know, she should have done better. well, look here, these are smoking rates. smoking rates kept going up. it was not until '82, '85, that the new warnings that actually said something specific about lung cancer got on a label, and it was not until that much information was out there that the total consumption in the united states started going down. that is the turning point. that is 30 years into her smoking. if you think that 30 years into her smoking, the first 30 years being totally the responsibility of the defendants to confuse the situation, reassure her with filters and her smoking in a normal culture, that would all be their fault. the last ten percent of her smoking career, the last ten years, if you want to say she bears some responsibility for that so that the last 25 percent of her smoking was such that with the population reducing smoking so too was she careless or negligent or at fault for not starting to or figuring out or getting over her addiction or trying to fight it harder? well, then, you can assign her some relative degree of responsibility for that period of time forward. but even in that setting, i would say you break it up so that they are more at fault. because they are doing something on purpose that is wrongful. and she was just -- maybe some human weaknesses, curtailed and constrained by addiction and dependence. she was not doing anything on purpose. they were doing stuff on purpose. so you could -- if you checked it off "yes" -- because i want to talk to you about this because the defendants will -- then i would break it up like this so that even in those last years, she gets no more than ten percent. because the last ten years, one quarter of her smoking history, that is 25 percent of it. they should still get more. they should get 15 of that last 25 percent, and she could get ten percent if you do that. it would be a great honor for mr. varner of vindication if you check off -- mr. keehfus: objection, motion. the court: sustained. mr. geraghty: objection, motion. mr. schlesinger: if the evidence supports it, it would be perfectly appropriate for you to check off "no." they said they accept a basic interest. you saw that. they boycotted the dow purchases of millions of dollars of material because they did not want people to stop smoking. they tried to block people from smoking [sic]. in one of those cullman videos you may remember at the very beginning he says: we do not do anything. we have no program set up to try to help people stop smoking. they were not trying to help people quit. they never wanted people to get. they never wanted virginia varner to quit. they were happy to have her smoke and buy those cigarettes because they could make money off her. that was their job. so i'm going to skip this. voice: stop worrying about -- mr. schlesinger: and talk about the advertising budget of a quarter trillion dollars and dr. proctor saying that the public health message was like a snowflake in a snowstorm. i'm going to skip this. voice: 19 -- mr. schlesinger: and do not forget. dr. difranza was good enough at one time -- and you will see both these brochures in evidence -- to be quoted by philip morris as being an authority who talked about raising kids who do not smoke and saying: do not be afraid to admit to your children that you might have made a different choice had you understood then what you do now. that is in 2000 when they put out a brochure supposedly to show that they are not wanting youth smoking, and they cited dr. difranza. and then subsequently in the footnote that cited his work, they removed his name. and you look at those brochures side by side and watch how he was good enough for them as an expert, and then they removed his name subsequently. you look at that. and then, again, importantly, virginia did not appreciate the dangers of smoking, not like it was demonstrated in this courtroom the modern world understands it. and if you have a caution on a pack of cigarettes, right, like in 1966, and you have a kid, a 12-year-old, and he is standing out on the board of a pool and he is getting ready to jump in the pool and you see a no diving sign there, are reasonable people going to say, if the child is getting ready to run off the end of that diving board into an empty pool: go ahead, go ahead? or are they going to say: stop. do not go there. this is dangerous. a lifetime consequence will occur? so what constitutes the truth and helping people and saying "we did something wrong" and doing something about it makes a big difference. look at 12 years after she started smoking; 16 years after she started smoking; 1985, 31 years after she started smoking. heavily addicted. nonrotating -- the rotating warnings on the side. and then dr. proctor talked about what is confusing about this. it takes years for these poisons to accumulate one puff at a time and kill you. unlike if you saw a rattle snake on the side of the road and you know right away that thing could kill you right now with poison. that is a clear and present threat. cigarettes, it is seductionism. lowering the level of the threat of harm to below what folks would normally appreciate as being immediately dangerous. that is part of the miracle of its profitability and the scourge of its deadliness to our society. i'll skip this. the court: five minutes, counsel. mr. schlesinger: yeah. i'll skip that. so negligence and fault. i thought we did this. okay? talk about damages a little bit. and i always run out of time on this. we spend so much time. but, you know, you heard what they said. i mean one of the more -- you saw him break down with emotion, and the -- i -- there are two things -- there are things that matter and things that do not matter with regard to damages, okay? there are things that matter and two things that do not matter with regard to damages. when you do compensation for the pain and suffering, mental anguish of joe varner -- who lost his wife now for over 20-something years and into the future for the next eight or ten years they would have together, if she had not died, they had stayed together. the way in which you assess this intangible element of damages is you say you consider -- you consider this evidence. you measure the magnitude of the harm. and we ask you to say to joe varner through your verdict: we place great value on your loss. okay? and i suggest that that is a $10 million number, for pain and suffering, for mental anguish, for losing his wife of 22 years at 53, who would otherwise be alive. you saw him on the stand. you judge his demeanor. you judge the tears down his face. you know he is still hurting from losing her. you know he is going to be buried next to her because he wants to spend life in heaven with her. you know he wears her cross around his heart. however, there is something that you take away and something you do not take away, because there are two things that matter. the first is this. it is relevant and you must consider it. and i want to share it with you. infidelity is a horrible thing. there is no sugarcoating it. if the betrayed leaves, it is justifiable and it is understandable. if they stay and are able to rebuild in earnest, that is something truly remarkable. the decision is, do we value the relationship by what happened in that horrible moment, or by the years before and, more importantly, by the years afterwards? the easy answer is to make the ugliness into a be-all/end-all and continue the punishment. but is it the right thing under these special circumstances? if she could forgive him, who are we to hold it against him. what would she tell you to do? mr. keehfus: objection. the -- mr. geraghty: golden rule, your honor. mr. keehfus: motion. the court: sustained. mr. schlesinger: i suggest you measure the true value of the relationship as she did. something so treasured it was worth fighting for and hurting for and, in the end, resurrecting to a special place of atonement and fulfillment. that is surely the way he experienced it. the luckiest man alive. someone who was given a second chance and treated her as his most precious gift for the rest of their lives together. you heard him testify about it. and if you want to subtract from the amount of money i suggest -- which, by the way, you can give less, you can give more. you can think it is too much. you can think it is not enough. you can give substantially more. you can give substantially less. but it is relevant because in a betrayal, in an affair, even if you get back together one hundred percent, it leaves a mark, it leaves a scar. it does not -- it never -- it does not ever really one hundred percent heal. so he hurt her, but he atoned. he offered repentance. he lived the rest of his life honorably, and he lived the rest of his life to try to show to her that he could be faithful to her. and so it is relevant because it is his pain and mental suffering and anguish. but this was an impairment during their marriage. but they got back together and but for her death, they would be together today. what is not to be mitigated from the damages, what is irrelevant subtraction -- and we spent very little time on it because it does not bear on anything other than you should know the truth. he had a child a decade later. he got married 12 years later. he is separated now. you need to know the truth. but the law does not provide, the instructions do not provide -- mr. geraghty: your honor, i object. mr. schlesinger: -- for any mitigation -- the court: excuse me. mr. geraghty: i object. the court: what is the objection? mr. geraghty: it is inconsistent with the court's instructions. the court: overruled. mr. schlesinger: for any mitigation of the law whatsoever. and that is why i did not get sucked into it. did not get into a debate. because there was nothing to hide. now you know, yes, there was a subsequent relationship. he explained it. but so you understand for damages, there would not have been a subsequent relationship but for her death because of negligence and intentional misconduct. he would have stayed with her. so the thing that does not matter and should not result in we are going to take money away from what we believe is a proper award for pain and suffering and mental anguish and the loss of his beloved wife -- who i heard called the first wife at least eight times during this trial -- mr. geraghty: i object, your honor, to the -- mr. schlesinger: that is in the record. mr. geraghty: -- attacking the way the case has been -- mr. schlesinger: i'm not attacking -- the court: counsel, you need to wrap it up. mr. schlesinger: okay. and in any event, so yes, you can consider the affair in the context of it -- it is in the marriage and it leaves a mark. so -- but that is -- that is our recommendation. ultimately this is up to you. it is an intangible, and we trust the good considerations in all of you. the harm to others as to punitive damages, the death toll matters and deterrence matters because it is not only to punish this company, but to deter others who would act the same way and disregard human life. numbers numb. and it is hard to imagine that -- the entire state of florida has 20 million people in it. 20 million deaths would be an empty state of florida. the defendants keep the exit gates locked and they say right here that they would all lose their jobs and consulting fees and the cigarette market would collapse. 20 million people collapsed. millions more are sick. the people collapsed, but they did not want the business and the roaring river of cash of profit to collapse. and that is inhumane. they knew they would go out of business if they lost nicotine and addiction, and they do not want that. that is why i say the numbers numb. and we talked about you could consider the harm to others. that is why it was relevant that so many of the people get sick and die. and that is why you heard those big numbers. even though they are hard to imagine. but they are truly tragic numbers. and then i think we played this already, did not we? no, skip this. skip it. okay? and that is why, when assessing reprehensibility, atrocious misconduct, you say: okay. you are here as a company. we judge you as being human. they are humans. here is their logos. they are human. but were they humane? did they help people? did they try to block addiction. and i say -- i'm going to wrap up now very quickly here. i say what humane companies, people, corporations should do, is to protect children, not addict them. what i say is, men of science and brilliant men who come up with the ingenious ways and novel ways of making this perfect nicotine delivery device should be working to cure cancer, not cause cancer. mr. geraghty: your honor -- the court: sustained. mr. geraghty: move to strike; motion. the court: jury, disregard. stricken. mr. schlesinger: and i think the evidence showed in this case that it is all about the youth; the critical factor is kids; and that that is something that is very reprehensible, very unacceptable among human decency. and they even describe them as a crop, and a crop to be harvested. after the 1964 report wore out and sales were skyrocketing again, and the most number one consumer package product in the history of civilization is this, more of these have been sold in the world than anything else ever. and they refer to the youth who they are looking to pick up after the surgeon general's reports come out, the backlog of youth. they call them a "crop." and what do you do with a crop? van gogh's famous painting, the reaper. a crop is to be harvested. and that is how they refer to their customers, as rats in a cage, as a crop. this is claude teague. we read this, it is in evidence. and -- to this day, they have not mitigated. they have not changed. they are still advertising in ways that reach the message to youth. dr. proctor talked about thousands of youth all the time. still smoking. this magazine is in evidence. it is chock full of advertisings that are very seductive and sultry. the money they say they paid under the master settlement agreement had nothing to do with anything other than reimbursing medicaid and was a fraction of a fraction of the hundreds of billions of dollars in medical care that dr. proctor told you are generated by cigarette diseases and deaths in this country during any given year. they do not advertise truthfully about what really goes wrong with cigarettes. and the jury instructions are what they are. but you will decide if it was reckless disregard if they were consciously indifferent to the consequences, if they intentionally violated the rights of humans, and if they disregarded the safety and welfare of the public. the fda. they talked about the fda, and dr. proctor explained that they have done nothing, and anything meaningful in public health benefits. and so some folks are disappointed with government agencies, regulatory bodies, and what the efficacy of government is. but -- and i could call it the fail to do anything association, as far as cigarettes -- mr. geraghty: your honor, i object. the court: sustained. mr. keehfus: motion. mr. geraghty: move to strike and motion. the court: jurors, disregard the last comments. stricken. mr. schlesinger: thomas jefferson said that you as a jury, the jurors are the best of all safeguards for the person and property of every individual. i'd like to say they chose profits over people. they promised to stop making it, but their fingers were crossed behind their back. mr. keehfus: objection, your honor. mr. schlesinger: and what would have happened if they had told the truth? what would have happened if they changed their behavior? the world would be a very different place, because the death rate would have changed substantially, and we would not be here because virginia varner would. this is the last thing i'll play. 9 10 follows:) voice: do you swear that the testimony you are about to give is the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth? voices: i do. voice: please consider yourself to be under oath. voice: let me begin my question on the matter of whether or not nicotine was addictive. let me ask you first -- and i would like to just go down the row -- whether each of you believes that nicotine is not addictive. i heard virtually all of you touch on it. just yes or no. do you believe nicotine is not addictive? voice: i believe nicotine is not addictive, yes. voice: mr. johnson? voice: congressman, cigarettes and nicotine clearly do not meet the classic definitions of addiction. there is no intoxication -- voice: we will take that as a no. again, time is short. if you could just -- i think each of you believe nicotine is not addictive. we just would like to have this for the record. voice: i do not believe that nicotine or our products are addictive. voice: i believe nicotine is not addictive. voice: i believe that nicotine is not addictive. voice: i believe that nicotine is not addictive. voice: and i, too, believe that nicotine is not addictive. (video clip concluded.) mr. schlesinger: last thing, and i'm sitting down. george orwell wrote a book called 1984. it was published in the '40s, famous writer, and -- mr. geraghty: your honor, i object. this is not proper argument. the court: overruled. mr. schlesinger: and he -- it was made into a movie with richard hurt and -- richard burton and john hurt. and richard burton represented big brother, the all-powerful force. and john hurt represented the free-thinking man, trying to see things as they are, which is what we ask you to do in this case. to see things as they are. and richard burton was -- or was it john hurt -- was torturing john hurt, and he said to him, this. he said: and above all, we do not allow -- mr. keehfus: objection, your honor, this is not -- the court: excuse me. overruled. this is argument, counsel. mr. schlesinger: and he said: and above all, we do not allow the dead to rise up against us. you must stop imagining that posterity will vindicate you, winston. posterity will never hear of you. you will be lifted clean out from the stream of history. we shall turn you into a gas and pour you into the stratosphere. nothing will remain of you. not a name in a register, not a memory in a living brain. you will have been annihilated in the past, as well as in the future. you will have never -- you will never have existed. ladies and gentlemen of the jury, virginia varner existed. she is 22 years dead, and we have recreated her story as best we can before you over these last couple weeks. we thank you for your attention thus far, and we wish you great, good fortune in arriving at a just and proper decision in this most significant and important case. thank you. the court: can i see counsel sidebar, please? (the following discussion was held at sidebar:) the court: counsel, are you ready to proceed, or do you need a break? mr. geraghty: i just need like two or three minutes to get started. i do not know if your honor -- does your honor want me to go 45 minutes and then we will take the lunch break? the court: it is your closing argument. i want to give you the opportunity to make a decision how you want to handle it. mr. geraghty: i appreciate that. can your honor tell me when i'm at about 30 or 35 minutes, and maybe i'll take a break at that point? i know they do not like to wait too long for their lunch. the court: all right. we will plan on going somewhere around 12:30, around that time. i will wait -- mr. schlesinger, you went ten minutes over, so we are taking that out of your rebuttal. ten minutes. mr. schlesinger: i thought -- the court: we are not talking about it. you went ten minutes over. thanks. mr. gdanski: thank you, judge. may it please the court. good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen. jurors: good afternoon. mr. gdanski: last minutes you get to hear are precious, so i'm going to jump superfast right into it. we have been here for a couple of weeks, and it is pretty clear that some things are in dispute. some things are not in dispute. one thing that nobody disputes is that the tobacco industry purposefully, intentionally controls the level of nicotine in cigarettes in order to maintain levels of addiction. you heard nothing else about it. so forget everything else for one second. ask this question: why are they designing a product continuing to do so until today in such a way that they know has just the right amount of nicotine, just that super, super sweet spot to keep smokers addicted, maintain their addiction, keep them along the path such that they will get sick and die? that is not how you are supposed to design products. that is not giving people the free choice to quit smoking. that is not helping people quit smoking. that is not trying to help save lives. that is not trying to help prevent disease. that is not trying to help prevent youth smoking. that is promoting all of those things. they have created an epidemic in this country heretofore unknown in the history of society. there is no two ways about it. there was no other version of that story. it was just kind of ignored by those who manufactured it. how can we sit on the sidelines and watch them massively create death and destruction and sort of just pretend it hides in plain sight and does not exist? and dr. proctor talked about -- and mr. schlesinger said it, scott said it -- he said that conspiracy means to breathe together. and what exactly does that mean? so they breathe an epidemic together, they breathe a conspiracy together. the smokers inhale the conspiracy. as they are doing that, one side is profiting, one side is growing, one side is getting stronger and stronger, and one side is slowly losing their breath, dying slowly to the tune of thousands, hundreds of thousands, millions. and it goes on. it goes on just like that. and then something happens. those folks who are dying, those folks who are smoking, they die. and so what does the industry do? i need help, buddy. what does the industry do? they put in place a mechanism to create replacement smokers. so they know they are going to die. what are we going to do? we cannot have them die because if younger adults turn away from smoking, the industry must decline. now that is not an acceptable proposition. that is not something that can be entertained. that is not something that can be appreciated. it must be avoided at all costs. it must be avoided to the cost of just as a population which does not give birth will eventually dwindle. so replacement smokers are their children, but they keep on killing them. virginia varner, a replacement smoker. her mother -- we have heard more in this case about her mother's emphysema from mr. geraghty than we have heard about her lung cancer, virginia's lung cancer, and her emphysema that we heard from mr. geraghty. mr. geraghty: i would object. the court: sustained. mr. geraghty: move to strike. the court: jurors disregard. mr. gdanski: virginia varner is a replacement smoker. you heard testimony her kids smoke. they will be replacement smokers. but they go on. they do not just replace the use. they do not just replace those who die. they profit from them. they monetize them. they study them. not to the tunes of millions of dollars, not to the tunes of thousands of dollars, billions and billions of dollars. they say here that if we have an aggressive plan, it will call for $442 million profit during the plan period. however, if we hold these -- remember the code words that were used, yas, young adult smokers -- for the market average of seven years, they would be worth over $2.1 billion in aggregate incremental profits. these are their words discussing the profitability, the monetization of children. that is reprehensible. that is abhorrent. it is unacceptable, and it should not be tolerated even the tiniest little bit. you know, we talked about mitigation. so in 1950, you had elizabeth taylor on the cover, and in 2008 or '12, you have rose from the transformers with one direction. this is not mitigation. they could not have more tobacco advertisements in this magazine than they do. it is advertised in this magazine to a greater degree than any other product. so how far have we come? how far have they let society come? not very far at all. because a powerful industry, a powerful industry -- mr. geraghty: objection, your honor. the court: sustained. mr. geraghty: move to strike. the court: jurors disregard the last comment. mr. gdanski: this industry depends on the perpetuation of this epidemic. they cannot see it go down. they will keep it going because nicotine, young adult smokers -- mr. geraghty: your honor, there is no evidence of any of this. i will object. the court: overruled. ladies and gentlemen, you rely on your own recollection of the evidence. mr. gdanski: nicotine and children are their lifeblood. they are their sine qua non. without children, without replacement smokers, without nicotine, they would have no business, the exit gates would open, it would be the end of days for them, and they do not let it come. dr. proctor talked about the current state of affairs. every single day in this country 3,800 children start smoking. 1,000 of them become regular daily smokers. 500,000 deaths per year right now. 1,400 people die from smoking every single day. how many more? there is a song that has a refrain, how many more, by neil young. mr. geraghty: your honor, i would object. the court: overruled. mr. gdanski: how many more, how many more will there be? dr. proctor said in 100 years smoking will be gone. maybe, maybe not. but we are not there; we are now. 500,000 1,400, 3,800 -- massive, mind-staggering statistics that you need to take a step back. because if you do not take a step back and sort of get the big picture, the numbers start to just become: ah, a lot of people die from cigarette smoking. that is not how it is. parents are dying. sisters are dying. brothers are dying. aunts, uncles, grandparents, loved ones. they leave widows; they leave orphans. we do not exist in a perfect world, but they leave real people behind to suffer real sorrow with real tears and real emotions. there was one episode in this trial that portrayed a moment of just sort of reality of mr. varner where he said: i go to my wife's grave. and he is there by himself, and in a moment of silence and solitude, he cleans the weeds from her graveside. that is real. that is not pretend. it is not fake. it is real care. it is real emotion. his son said he saw him do it. it is someone who cherished his wife, cherishes her still to this day, and it is a snapshot of the mind frame and the caring nature that a husband has for their longtime wife, their true love, their soul mate, the person they met as a kid and intended on living the rest of their life with. he gets down on his hands and his knees -- he is not a young fellow. gets down on his hands and his knees and cleans her graveside. that is admirable. it is admirable. so this is dr. gup's note from 8/22/1994. and let us just give a little bit of context. dr. gup here has confirmed the diagnosis of lung cancer, he is confirmed the diagnosis of copd, he is confirmed the diagnosis of tobacco addiction, and he carries all of those over to this date. and he documents virginia varner as of 8/22, so august 22nd, 1994, as a smoker. this is her still smoking. mr. geraghty: objection, that is inconsistent with the evidence, your honor. the court: thank you. ladies and gentlemen, you are to rely on your own recollection of the evidence. this is counsel's opportunity to go through the evidence as he recalls it. go ahead, counsel. mr. gdanski: this is the organic medical record created at the time. still smoking a pack a day. and before this, when dr. gup first met virginia varner, he never noted a history of lung problems, he never noted a history of significant medical problems, he never noted any of those things. this is his history taken from the person who no one in this room ever got to speak to, except for her husband. this is taken from virginia varner. this is what she told him, not courtroom deposition testimony with impeachment, but this is real testimony. and we know there is a proverb that says: the palest ink is far brighter than the best memory. this is ink. this is pen to paper in a medical record, broward county hospital, that actually demonstrates what took place. there is no reference to history of wheezing. there is no reference to history of significant medical problems. but take one step back for a second. they want to claim that virginia varner had this wheeze going back to the mid '80s. let us just assume she did for a second. they also want to claim that she smoked despite that for a second. is not that a sign of addiction? did they ever explain that, though? if you have a person who suffers from a wheeze that is associated with a product and they continue to use the addictive product which caused the wheeze, do you think that is probably evidence of the person probably being addicted? which is the burden of proof that is relevant in this case, what is most likely? what is probable? is it probable that if a person uses an addictive drug for 40 years, they get sick as a consequence of using that addictive drug, that they were probably addicted to that drug? does that stand to reason? does that make logical sense? we submit to you that it does, and that is dispositive of multiple issues in this case. dr. difranza. dr. difranza is a no-joke expert. there is no real two ways about that. whether or not you want to say he is treating the most patients or some patients or whatever you want to say about dr. difranza, dr. difranza is a serious expert. and he came in here and he told you that addiction was "a cause" of virginia varner's lung cancer, copd, and death. "a cause." remember that because it is important. when you get back with the jury instructions -- and they are superdense. the jury instructions are complicated. they take up time to understand. there is a very big difference between something being "a cause" and "the cause." but dr. difranza told you in no uncertain terms, addiction was a contributing cause of her disease. now, before these lawsuits, dr. difranza was philip morris's expert. they paraded him around when they wanted to try to put out brochures -- mr. geraghty: your honor, that is inconsistent with the evidence. the court: thank you. ladies and gentlemen, again, you are to rely on your own recollection of the evidence. mr. gdanski: it is right here. this is: raising kids who do not smoke. it is pt425 from 2004. we all heard that the engle progeny cases developed in 2006. your honor -- i think the court read that instruction. that is when the florida supreme court came out with its opinion. the mandate, one year later. so in 2004, before this evolution of litigation against the industry, philip morris was proudly, publicly citing dr. difranza -- mr. geraghty: objection. the court: sustained. mr. geraghty: move to strike, your honor. the court: thank you. ladies and gentlemen, again, you are to rely on your own recollection of the evidence. i sustained the objection. it is stricken. mr. gdanski: philip morris cited dr. difranza as their expert in raising kids who do not smoke in 2004. the citation was number 6, discussing symptoms of addiction. so on the question of symptoms of addiction, they cite him for the proposition that teens and preteens can have symptoms within weeks or only days after they become occasional smokers. it makes sense they would cite him on that for two reasons. number one is, he is an expert on addiction. number 2 is, he is a specialist in youth smoking. that is what he is devoted his life to. so they cite him right there, number 6 in evidence. and then a couple of years later, the second version of this comes out, and they take him right off. now, we know that the industry internally had documents where they discussed what would happen if there were methods to stop smoking? what would happen if there were methods to help people cessate from smoking? and they say here in pt1154: it is my strong feeling that with the progress that has been claimed, we are in the progress [sic] of digging our own grave. they were not comfortable continuing research that led to them digging their own grave. instead, they were very comfortable, very comfortable letting the graves be dug for thousands and hundreds of thousands -- mr. geraghty: objection, your honor. move to strike. i have a motion. the court: thank you. jurors, disregard the last comment. stricken. mr. gdanski: i asked dr. proctor about anthropomorphizing, which means keeping the company alive and the smoker something else. and they did that here: we do not want to die. they say this while thousands of americans are dying. dr. proctor. dr. proctor is a scholar on the subject of the tobacco industry. they never one time took out his book and said to him: well, you know, you wrote something different in this book. that is different than what your scholarly research shows. no, there is no two sides to it. but this is a mousetrap. there is a proverb that says: build a better mousetrap, and the world will beat a path to your door. build a better mousetrap. he built a better mousetrap. he became -- he went to harvard and stanford and teaching and studying and studying and reading and researching and publishing. he became a major significant expert. the surgeon general cites him over 30 times. he is at the white house for the introduction. the fda brings him to washington, d.c. he distinguished himself as an expert in the subject. we need to find someone to teach jurors about that subject. who are we going to go to? we are going to go to the person who built the better mousetrap, because he has paved a path to his door. we come to him for his expertise. and to suggest anything otherwise is disingenuous. he is a top scholar -- mr. keehfus: objection. the court: sustained. mr. keehfus: motion. mr. gdanski: dr. proctor is the top scholar on this subject in this country. he knows more about it than almost anybody else. we heard about reader's digest. the tobacco industry hated reader's digest. they could not stand when they were putting out articles. and what did they do? they successfully refuted reader's digest. we put it into evidence, 2027, successfully refute reader's digest. because they could not appreciate, they could not stand for the message reader's digest was putting out. why? because the industry did not want people to stop smoking. same thing when dow, nicorette tried to help people for the first time have a medical mechanism to stop. they said: no way. filtered cigarettes, there is this concept being brought up by counsel -- defense counsel over and over again that the varners always smoked filters. and so if you always smoked filters, then they saw bad stuff in filters. i'm not sure i understood it, but here's where -- mr. geraghty: i would object, your honor, to the commentary about the arguments. the court: overruled. mr. gdanski: here is what dr. proctor explained about filters. he explained that the surgeon general, the public health community for decades recommended smokers smoke filters. and then he said in 2001, they switched that recommendation because of the revelation of the internal documents. and he talked about the fact that the public health community, the surgeon general, the american cancer society were misled by -- mr. keehfus: objection. mr. geraghty: your honor, this is not in evidence. hearsay. the court: thank you. counsel. sustained. mr. geraghty: move to strike, your honor. the court: jurors, disregard the last comments. mr. geraghty: and i have a motion. the court: ladies and gentlemen, you are to rely on your own recollection of the evidence. mr. gdanski: dr. proctor said: and exactly as you said, the surgeon general recommended filters. they would all say it is best not to smoke at all. but if you must smoke, smoke filters, believing they were safer. so it was not an uncommon -- uncommon for -- even among leading public health officials for decades to make the mistake that filters were safer. then he discussed in 2000, after the revelation of the documents, the consensus turning around. and if the surgeon general and the public health community got it wrong and the tobacco industry knew internally, what chance did virginia varner have? what chance did she have? the surgeon general could not get it right. took him 30 years to get it right. what chance did she have? mr. geraghty said that joe varner, jr. hemmed and he hawed. he did not hem and haw. can you play it? this is the question from -- one of you asked this question. this is it. let us take a look. we need some volume. do it again. try it one more time. then i'm going to move. if we get it, we will come back to it. okay. mr. geraghty said in opening statement and again today: we are not going to dispute that some of our employees said stupid or inappropriate things over time. and that is too little, too late. mr. geraghty: your honor, i would object to the comment. the court: sustained. mr. gdanski: it is not about -- mr. geraghty: move to strike. the court: jurors, disregard the last comment. mr. gdanski: it is not about what is said now in 2016. it is about what was said and what was done while virginia varner was alive. that is what it is about. and we know that they -- i'll get back to it. okay. we will do it now. 8 9 follows:) the court: i will read the question out loud. and if i correctly stated the question, then i'm going to ask you to answer it. all right? the question reads as follows: did mrs. varner first -- or, excuse me -- when did ms. varner first tell you she wanted to quit smoking? did i correctly state your question? voice: yes. the court: can you answer that, please? the witness: i'm not sure exactly, a date or anything like that. but i've heard her say it quite a few times, you know -- as i was growing up or whatever, even before -- probably even before i was smoking. but, honestly, i do not know, you know, how old i was or how old she was. i do not remember. the court: does that complete your answer, mr. varner? the witness: yes, sir. (video clip concluded.) mr. gdanski: that is candid. he said she tried to quit probably before he was even smoking. no hemming, no hawing. strictly upfront. answered the question. he told his answer as best as he possibly could. now, it is not about what is said in court today from tobacco company attorneys. it is about what they did. but the documents also reveal something else. they do not just reveal what they did. they reveal why they did it, what they were scared of, what they were terrified of. and we know at least two things were really in their mind that they were afraid of: lawyers and lawsuits. lawyers and lawsuits. the court: five minutes, counsel. mr. geraghty: i object and move to strike, your honor. mr. gdanski: we have here -- the court: excuse me. there is an objection pending. sustained. mr. gdanski: we have here 1963 from a law firm representing tobacco companies. they said then: as we frequently discussed with the passing of time, the defenses of assumption of risk -- dr. proctor explained that means it is all their fault -- defenses of assumption of risk and contributory negligence will loom increasingly more important. so they knew it was going to loom as a defense. yet the validity -- the validity of these defenses is being whittled down by tobacco company utterances, to the effect that there is no risk or that it is remote. they knew in 1963 that what they said publicly made a difference to what people were doing. they knew that. 24 25 follows:) voice: it is equally ridiculous in your judgment for the surgeon general and the u.s. public health service and the centers for disease control, it is equally ridiculous and preposterous for them to say that 450,000 americans die every year as a result of cigarette smoke. voice: i think it is totally unsupportable. (video clip concluded.) mr. gdanski: the history of the documents reveal why this was maintained as the ultimate denial. lest some lawyer be looking over our shoulder, i do not conceive that even one person dies of a chronic disease that is caused by smoking cigarettes. sauce for the goose is sauce for the gander. that is all i'm saying. we know that this is the real truth. this is the secret reason, the real reason. in this case, there is no dispute -- everyone should understand this, there is no dispute that smoking cigarettes caused virginia varner's death. none. we know, though, that internally, in 1978, there are documents that an admission by the industry that excessive cigarette smoking is bad for you is tantamount to an admission of guilt with regard to the lung cancer problem. this -- and when they say "this," they are referring to this idea that smoking actually hurts people -- this could open the door to legal suits in which the industry would have no defenses. so we know from a document mr. schlesinger talked about, lawyers remind us we cannot defend continued smoking as free choice if the person was addicted. here, this could open the door to legal suits in which the industry would have no defense. one of the things that was discussed was ms. varner, virginia varner, saying: i'm going to get sick in 1992. she was prescient. she had a sense. in 1992, it was too late. had she stopped, she is still doomed. however, now, it is not too late. think about this. when they knew -- mr. geraghty: objection, your honor. the court: overruled. mr. gdanski: when they knew smokers were going to die. so she says: i know -- she says that it is -- i'm going to die anyway. well, flip it on its head. they knew smoking was dangerous, and what did they do. they said: we are going to kill them anyway. mr. keehfus: objection. mr. geraghty: objection. the court: sustained. mr. geraghty: motion, your honor. the court: jurors, disregard. counsel, you need to wrap it up. mr. gdanski: yes, sir. there is a quote from a famous author named saul bellow, which says: a great deal of intelligence -- and the folks who worked for tobacco companies were smart -- a great deal of intelligence can be invested in ignorance when the need for illusion is deep. they had a deep need to create illusion. they did it by the manufacturing of ignorance. and virginia varner unquestionably paid the price. she paid the ultimate price. the eternal price. she paid the forever price. what price have they paid? mr. keehfus: objection, your honor. mr. geraghty: objection, your honor. the court: thank you. overruled. mr. gdanski: thanks very much, ladies and gentlemen. thank you.