opening statement mr. ratzan: thank you. good morning. good morning, ladies and gentlemen. when i was here about a week ago talking to you about the case, i told you -- and in jury selection, too -- that this is your case. his honor mentioned just the other day that, "i want to give you the case," he said. i do not know if you remember. he said, "i want to give you the case." in some respect, the case has been yours since the second you got sworn in. but today, unlike at the end of all of our talking, and we are going to talk for about an hour and five minutes each. but when we are done talking, then it is completely one hundred percent your case. we shut up and it is yours, and you speak through your verdict. you do the talking from that point on. in our democracy, justice is achieved through a verdict rendered by people just like yourself. not by the judge, not by any of us, but by you. that is how it goes. and it is powerful. how does it work? what are you going to do? there is something called a verdict form and you are going to get it on a piece of paper, and this is what this case is about. it is what it is been about from the very beginning. the verdict form is basically from the law, and it is the questions that you are supposed to ask as you weigh the evidence in this case. if you remember, about a week ago, i said, you know, we are going back in history and doing all this stuff, but at the end of the day, we are going to come right back to two questions: was mr. vasko addicted to_ cigarettes containing nicotine? and if so, was the addiction a legal cause of his chronic obstructive pulmonary disease? meaning, did it play a substantial role? did it play a substantial part in his getting chronic obstructive pulmonary disease? now, the other question is: did john vasko know or should he have known on or before may 5, 1990, in the exercise of reasonable care, that he had copd and that there was a reasonable possibility that his copd was caused by cigarette smoking? that is it. there is a piece of paper that is going to go back into the jury room with you, and you are going to answer both questions, sign it after electing somebody to be a foreperson, and send it back. i want to talk to you about that. this is the plaintiff's case. his honor said we have the burden of proof and we do on our case. this is our case. this is the defendant's case. i use these greek symbols for plaintiff and defendant. number two is their burden of proof. number one is our burden of proof. and that is in the jury instructions and that is the law. i want to go over with you a couple of things about questions. here we bring evidence to prove this. they are supposed to bring evidence to prove this, and the jury instructions talk about the greater weight of the evidence, meaning what convinced you more, what was more convincing on these questions, and did the respective plaintiff and defendant bring you the evidence and the proof to get you there. so on question 1, focus on that for now: "was john vasko addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine?" here in the middle of trial, that was basically conceived. mr. geise brought that out with dr. cummings, mr. geise's expert, dr. abramson conceded it. it is not an issue. how could it be? smoking cigarettes first thing in the morning, smoking more cigarettes in the morning than at night. waking up in the middle of the night smoking cigarettes and so on. that is cigarette addiction. addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine. so this is a two-part question. this part is yes. now, the next part, "if so, was such addiction a legal cause of his chronic obstructive pulmonary disease?" in other words, did the addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine play a substantial role in the outcome of this case, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease? from the very beginning, a cigarette was designed to be inhaled. that is the purpose of the cigarette. it was not designed -- a cigar, a pipe, chewing tobacco, they had the ability to give people the taste of the tobacco in their mouth. the cigarette was designed -- remember the curing of the tobacco, it was designed to allow people to inhale the smoke. there is nothing about inhaling smoke. there is lots of reasons people might smoke cigarettes. it is cool. it taste one way or the other. but at the end of the day, we inhale cigarette smoke, not because we like the feeling of smoke in the lungs, not because there is some magic to it, but because the transfer. it is like the freebasing idea, the transfer of the nicotine into the lung receptors, into the brain, that in second shock is the value and the benefit of smoking a cigarette and inhaling -- remember those ads, do you inhale? remember all that stuff that we showed you, do you inhale. the whole point was to inhale it and get the nicotine. and the problem is, nicotine is an addictive - chemically addictive drug. and the problem with inhaling too much cigarette smoke and nicotine is that you get more addicted, and the more addicted one gets to that method of using tobacco, inhaling it, freebasing it basically, the more one smokes. and the more one smokes, the more exposure to the dangers of cigarette smoke and the more likely you get copd. and it is heavy smoking, pack years, i think dr. kreitzer said. 20 years of a pack a day or more. heavy smoking causes copd. and so was john vasko addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine? of course. was such addiction a legal cause of his chronic obstructive pulmonary disease? of course. you heard me ask dr. abramson, if you took nicotine addiction out of the equation, would the outcome have been the same? if there is no nicotine addiction, there is no reason for mr. vasko to keep inhaling smoke in his lungs. if it is just for the taste or just because it looked cool, whatever, or to hold it like this, he can do that. but there would be no reason to inhale it in the lungs so much all the time. it is the addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine that causes that much inhalation and it is the inhalation of smoke, the 60 carcinogens and all of the bad things, that causes disease of the lungs, and this is a case about disease of the lung. so on the question of whether it was a legal cause, addiction was a legal cause, that answer is yes, too. and the answer here is yes, plain and simple. why else -- in the defense of this case, you heard the thing about choice, and so what they did not want to tell you is, dr. abramson, nah, it is not addiction, it is choice. he chose to stay smoking cigarettes, he chose this, he could have quit. he could have tried harder to quit and he should have and, therefore, the answer to this question is no. that is essentially what they are saying. they would like to have a third question on the verdict form, maybe a fourth, maybe a fifth. the third would be, did he try hard enough? or did he choose, and things like that. but those questions are not on the verdict form. there is a time and a place. there will be a time and a place to measure whether he tried hard enough and whether, and to what extent, it is his responsibility against theirs. that is not this part of the case. this part of the case is right here and justice means following the law. and so in our law, we actually have a definition for you of legal cause. so when it says, was john vasko addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine, we know that without a doubt. and if so, was his addiction a legal cause of his chronic obstructive pulmonary disease? if you took addiction to nicotine cigarettes out of the equation, the outcome, more likely than not, would have been completely different here. that is what we are talking about. and it does not matter that there is-- if he has a genetic predisposition or he tried harder and so forth, because the law says, "addiction is a legal cause if it directly in a natural" -- there is a lot of legal words -- "if it directly and in a natural continuous sequence produces or contributes substantially to producing such injury." so they can reasonably say, but for the addiction, the injury would not have occurred. if there is no addiction, there is nothing to overcome. if there is no addiction, there is no injury. there is not 52 years of continued inhalation of smoke. sure, he could have tried harder. of course he could have, tried harder to overcome his addiction. and at the end of the day, but for the addiction, the injury would not have occurred. and then it says, "in order to be regarded as a legal cause of injury, addiction need not be the only problem. addiction may be a legal cause of injury, even though it operates in combination with some natural cause or some other cause, if the addiction contributes substantially to producing such injury." "contributes substantially", and how can anyone really argue with a straight face that the addiction to cigarettes - that nicotine addiction, which is a disease -- the united states department of health and human services and the world health organization -- how can anyone argue with a straight face that an addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine does not contribute to produce the destruction of lives, injury and illness, and it did so in this case. these are good-- mr. vasko, these are reasonable people and across the united states, reasonable people trying to overcome their addiction only accomplish it at an annual rate of 3 percent a year, and they are trying with a drug called chantix. you heard the evidence. a drug that has big side effects, at times. it is the most powerful drug. it was not around when mr. vasko was alive. but that drug, over the long term, when administered with deep psychological counseling and motivation and all that it takes to stop smoking cigarettes and overcome the addiction, that drug achieves, at best, about a thirty percent quit rate. the probabilities are that even with the very best of interventions and medications, that heavily addicted smokers, pack, pack-and-a-half a day or more do not overcome the addiction. the statistics are grim. it does not mean that you cannot. it just means it is a tough thing to overcome. and therefore, if it did not exist, if addiction, an addictive drug, nicotine and cigarettes did not exist, ending that habit, which is at that point all it would be, would be like that. and so it plays a substantial role. and on the issue of choice. we went through it in great detail, the history of the united states. in 2010, we asked you to go backwards and see what happened, what did they do and here, on the issue of choice, mr. vasko was an addicted person smoking cigarettes that contained nicotine and he was receiving messages, and there is no doubt that in the united states of america, there were two messages in delivery. one message, that it was bad for you and, by 1954, the cigarette companies had their hands full and they issued a frank statement. you have seen this before. i'll show it again. frank statement from the american people. the point of this is that a culture -a culture receives a message of doubt and for the next 40 something years, almost 50 years, this would be the repeated response of the tobacco industry, and while all of the science was coalescing and the american people were receiving newspaper articles and so forth, the tobacco industry continued to deny this, not with the idea -- and no one is giving you the idea that the american people were brainwashed into believing everything here. only by the seed of doubt was being sought. and with doubt, at the same time was the general social acceptance of cigarette smoking with advertising dollars, 365 to one against the public service announcement. more money spent in a day by the tobacco industry than the government's public service campaign would spend in a year. executives from the tobacco institute, which was created in 1953 in response to the science that was coalescing, the tobacco industry met and created a public relations campaign that they continued for 50 years. do not let me - do not hear me say that they brainwashed the american people, but what they did was create doubt, so that by 1981, 85 percent of smokers and 65 percent of the country could not say that smoking was one of the major causes of disease. it was a cause. they were aware of it. it is like being aware of ufos in some respects. everyone is aware that there is ufos. i do not mean to belittle the message, because people understood that maybe someone else will get sick or maybe it is one of the causes or maybe if all these things line up, it can cause disease in somebody. but when 65 percent of the people and 85 percent of smokers in 1981 are saying that they do not even think that cigarette smoking is a major cause, a major cause of disease, there is doubt in the minds of the american people. and in 1984 -- this is the message from r.j. reynolds. this was the one that went on nightline, 1984. and again, do not hear me say that this magazine article and nightline or new york times article and the nightline television show brainwashed the american people, but it created doubt, especially in the minds of smokers. because for the smoker, who is inhaling nicotine every day, so many times a day. doubt is the fertilizer on the seed of addiction. that is what doubt does and that is why i asked dr. cummings, would you counsel your patients, any of them? if you are seeking to motivate people to stop smoking, would you counsel your patients that there is doubt, that the science is not really there, even though it is? is that how you convince people to do things? let us win this game. we really want to win this game, because if we do, we are going to go to the playoffs. but we are not really sure we are going to go to the playoffs and we are really not even sure this is the team we need to beat and so on and so forth. is that how you motivate people? you should stop smoking cigarettes because it is good for you to stop and we think it is bad for your health, but we are not really sure and it is going to be really hard to do and only 3 percent of the people who try a year do it, and it is going to be really, really hard. you are going to have to do all these things yourself, but do not worry because we are not really sure, science is not there. it has not been proven. the surgeon general is misleading the american people and so on and so forth. that is not how you do it. and there is a reason why -- there is a reason why the american people were given this message and this message provides doubt. the point is this. mr. vasko - mr. vasko, whatever decisions they would want to be on this verdict form -- and, again, you are going to have your chance to weigh -- you will have your chance to weigh what did he do wrong, what did they do wrong. but in this context, it is not about that. it is a simple question, was he addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine, and did that addiction play a substantial role in the outcome of this case? and the answer to question 1, we have met our burden of proof on this. when i asked their addiction expert who came in here, paid $41,000 to testify in this case, since march, his job was to tell you it was not his addiction, it was his choice that caused this. and at the end of his testimony, i asked him, dr. abramson, are you telling this jury that if you take addiction to nicotine out of the case, that the outcome for mr. vasko would have been the same? that is what he was supposed to say. he said, i cannot answer that, i do not know. he might have kept smoking. and i backed up. i said, okay, are you telling this jury, dr. abramson, that if you take addiction to the nicotine out of the equation, that mr. vasko would have kept smoking the same amount of cigarettes? the common sense answer, the common sense answer, and you are supposed to use your common sense, by the way. the common sense answer to that question is, no, if you took addiction out of the equation, he probably would not have smoked one, one-and-a-half to two packs a day from 1960 to 1980 and beyond. it probably would not have happened, because there is no benefit to anybody. there is no testimony in this case, and there never would be, that if feels good to have smoke in your lungs if there is no nicotine there. there is no testimony it feels good to have smoke in the lungs any way. when i asked him that question, he said, i cannot answer it, i do not know. because the real answer, the common sense answer is, no, i do not know think the outcome would have been the same. and that is question 1. now we get to question 2. and this is the case for the defense: did john vasko know or should have known on or before may 5, 1990, in the exercise of reasonable care, that he had copd, and there was a reasonable possibility that his copd was caused by cigarette smoke? it is a lot of words. again, it is a couple of questions. question 1, did john vasko know. and this part, that is one part, no. and the other part, should he have known in exercise reasonable care. this date applies to both. okay? so i'm going to take the second part first, should he have known in the exercise of reasonable care, before may 5, 1990, that he had copd. that is the question. and they know and we know and you know now, because you heard from dr. kreitzer, that the answer to this part, this part two of it, is no, because dr. kreitzer -- i asked him about this very question. did they act reasonably and he said yes. and why? what happened here? mr. vasko had copd developing inside him, which is a disease that is subclinical, meaning you cannot tell. you do not know it is there. and dr. kreitzer admitted that he thought he had no symptoms. he probably had none going back to the 1970s. that is what dr. kreitzer admitted on the witness stand. most people who are diagnosed with copd, are diagnosed in the severe stages, not the early to moderate stage that mr. vasko was diagnosed. only twenty percent of heavy smokers develop copd because of some genetic variation, and that is what doctors know. here the question is whether mr. vasko should have been walking around wondering whether he was having copd. there is no evidence of a productive cough. there is nothing but a dry cough until 1988. mr. vasko and his wife had a family doctor named dr. dhanani. mr. vasko had a cold, it would last for a while, it would go away, and he would feel better. he would get a cold, it would last for a while, go away, and he would feel better. this is all the 1988 and '90 time frame. they have a family doctor. and they are conscientious. and in 1990 -- you know, if you think back to 20 years ago, it is hard to know exactly where you were. but if there are key events in life that are occurring, you can pinpoint it. and mrs. vasko remembers purchasing the home in west virginia, him not being able to get there, and seeing dr. dhanani. and it is the first time that they receive a diagnosis of emphysema, a form of copd. and the parties, by the way, in this case, the parties agree -- this is a stipulation and this is an instruction: by or before 1994, john vasko had emphysema, a form of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, and it was caused by cigarette smoking. we agree on all that. that is a lot to agree on. and we agree that mr. vasko had copd developing inside him, probably before 1990 when he was diagnosed. the question is, did he know it and should he have known it, or did he act reasonably. their own expert told you that he acted reasonably, and it is because he did what a reasonable person does. when he got sick, he saw the doctor. and the doctor acted reasonably. in 1990, dr. dhanani told him that he had emphysema. and that is right, and there is no criticism. dr. kreitzer is a board-certified pulmonary doctor who told us that he works for the florida board of medicine, and he determines when people are below the standard of care when doctors do not act reasonably. part of that job is to determine whether patient are acting reasonably, too. dr. kreitzer told you, pointblank, told you pointblank, that this was reasonable. he has no criticisms, he said, of anything that the_ family did or that dr. dhanani did in responding to whatever symptoms there were. in fact, dr. kreitzer could not even tell you that any of these really were symptoms of copd. but he thinks everyone acted reasonably. so on the question of whether -- by the way, mr. vasko, in 1960, '62, remember he was in the army and he had the workup there, and he had some coughing and some shortness of breath? and dr. kreitzer says he had asthma and the doctor never diagnosed him with asthma. and that was reasonable, too. and it was. and so there is mr. vasko, 1960, thinks he is in the best health of his life. best of health he said. this is the one from 1961. i'm in good health. he comes back two years later. i am in the best of health, to my knowledge. you know, having a cough, a dry cough associated with smoking cigarettes is pretty much expected. you saw the advertising for it. i mean, it is toasted; it minimizes cough and irritation. people knew cigarettes and coughing were related. that there was copd? dr. kreitzer knows that mr. vasko had a cough going back to 1960, and he testified under oath, right there in this courtroom, that that is not copd. and that his signs and symptoms before 1997, were probably due to asthma. but that he probably had underlying copd there to be diagnosed, if he got lucky enough, if he got to a doctor, and he did. and so dr. kreitzer, the question is, were they reasonable, did they act reasonably? and he said, yes, because he knows. the statistics are against a diagnosis at any time sooner than when mr. vasko got diagnosed. and that mr. vasko went through life believing that he was in good health, and he was. and so then, in 1990, mrs. vasko and he decided to go back to dr. dhanani. and dr. dhanani does what a reasonably careful doctor should do, and he gives him the information. and that is in the fall of 1990, well after may 5, 1990. whether mr. vasko should have known with reasonable care that he was walking around with copd, their expert answered that question. and if you remember, it was the only thing he did not really fight me on. did they act reasonably? and he said, yes. two or three times he said yes. there is no issue, no meaningful issue -and it is their burden of proof. if they are going to carry the day here, they need to come in here and show you that there is clear -there is evidence, the greater weight of the evidence is that mr. vasko had serious lung disease, symptoms that would make a regular person think that they were suffering from copd before may 5, 1990. and there is no evidence of that anywhere in this record. the best they can do is allude to a deposition of a guy named pat natalizio who says that he had a cough at work, and it was hurting him, and i cannot tell you whether it was in 1980s or 1990s. it is their job, their job to come in here and give you this proof. mr. geise told you in his opening statement, as sure as i'm standing here, he said, demand proof. demand proof, he said. do not just go with speculation. well, i'm calling him to it. this is his proof. he is asking you to speculate that it really was not 1990. i gave you a deed. i do not know how much better than that. i'm trying to carry a burden that is not even mine. may 5, 1990, is he going to give you any evidence that mr. vasko was walking around -was he coughing up blood? was he suffering? was he feeling like he needed to get a diagnosis of copd? did he even know what copd was? no. did he know what emphysema was? no. is there a single witness that took this witness stand that they called to tell you that mr. vasko had some kind of sign or symptom of copd that would have led mr. vasko to believe that he had copd, or that a doctor told him that he had? are they asking you to speculate? are they asking you to go pie in the sky and to disbelieve the evidence and everything that was here in front of you? because he told you, as sure as i'm standing here, demand proof. and he said, do not do speculation, demand proof, demand proof, demand proof. we have given you proof on question 1, all the way. has he given you proof on question 2? or is it speculation and innuendo? and we are guessing pat natalizio, who never testified, really thought it was 1988 or 1994 when he noticed a cough. and even if it was 1988, we agree in 1988 mr. vasko started developing these colds. now, everybody gets colds. and everybody with cigarettes gets cold. and if they last too long, you should pay attention. but if they go away, hey, i got a cold, it lasted a long time, i'm going to pay attention. it comes back, i'm going to pay attention, and after awhile, i will go to the doctor. and dr. kreitzer knows that and that is why dr. kreitzer said it was reasonable. their own expert. so that leaves them with nothing left except for part one of question 1, which is did he know. so you have got, should he have known and did he know. actually knowledge versus we are going to criticize him for not knowing sooner. but we cannot criticize him for not knowing sooner, because our own expert, dr. kreitzer, says there is nothing to criticize there, for all the reasons i just went through with you. look, you cannot kick someone out of court, and that is what basically this one does, says she is time barred, kicked out of court. kick someone out of court for going to their doctor? i mean, that is what reasonable people do. and that is what they know, and that is what dr. kreitzer said, who is a board of medicine guy who tells people when people act reasonably. so that leaves this, did he know. so what do we have on that? well, here is this whole thing. this is what this was all about. because if this says 1980, then they are trying to tell you that he knew. but it does not say 1980 and we know that. but what do they do? they tell you there is this thing about 1980. and they do not tell you, and they do not show you that we have a dictated record, from the same day, from the very doctor who wrote it, that says 1990. not only did they not tell you that when they cross examined dr. cummings about it, but they put dr. kreitzer on the witness stand, folks. dr. kreitzer got on the witness stand and said to you, i'm relying on this 1980 document. i'm interpreting the handwriting as 1980. and i asked him, dr. kreitzer, before you tell the jury that mr. vasko had a diagnosis of copd in 1980, do not you think you ought to be certain about that, because it would be misleading to the jury? and you know what he said? because i said to him, there is this dictation, he said, i was not provided that record. so here is an expert that we all know is of the opinion on part two here that mr. vasko acted reasonably, right? we all know that. and we know it now on cross examination. so what he needs to deliver is that mr. vasko knew, this kicks her out of court, this question. and they have no proof about the symptoms and the display of blood or any kind of other serious problem, because it is not there, so they cannot criticize mr. vasko, not really with a straight face, because their expert knows better, and is going to say that he acted reasonably. so now they got this. so what are they going to do? they do not send him, according to the expert, they do not send him the one record in the case that would completely debunk his theory. instead, he is on the witness stand telling you, i did not get that record, this one, and want you to believe that he was diagnosed in 1980 so we are going to kick her out of court. either dr. kreitzer really did not get the record, or dr. kreitzer did not want to get the record. but, however you look at it, on direct examination, when dr. kreitzer was here to tell you about question 2, basically that he was a question 2 doctor. and when he was here to tell you about question 2, he wanted you to believe this, and this is not true as of 1980. it is 1990. and we know that -- i do not think we needed to bring dr. han in, because it is right here. but with a phone call and a subpoena, dr. han shows up, free of charge. now, there were a lot of depositions taken in this case, folks. all you had to do is a phone call and a subpoena to find out from dr. han that not only did he dictate this -no, i'm sorry. he actually said he did not even dictate this, he typed it himself. and this is his handwriting, and he showed you the original, and it is 1990. now, what is going on? why? why would you not be sure and put your witness up there on the witness stand and, if it is true, not send him the one record in the case that would cinch the deal, the typewritten report that dr. han typed himself, or with a phone call and a subpoena find out from dr. han? dr. han, what did you write, because we do not want to go to the jury any other way than with the full story. not doubt, not speculation, but proof. they have not met their burden of proof on this question. and, by the way, we have and we do not have to. they have to. and not only did they fail to meet their burden of proof, but what they did here was to manufacture, at least dr. kreitzer, manufactured an opinion without all of the information, and he admitted that to you. and that is no way to go about it. the answer to this question is no, because there is no proof, and the proof is the opposite. so that leads me back to an overall discussion. i had a couple of more jury instructions i wanted to show you. let me show you this. here is how the instructions go. and the judge is going to give this to you. this is the law. if the greater weight of the evidence does not support the plaintiff on loretta vasko's claim, your verdict should be for the defendant, r.j. reynolds company, on that claim. that is question 1. our claim is question 1. greater weight of the evidence means the more convincing force and effect of the entire evidence in the case, meaning what convinced you more. this says if, however, the greater weight supports the plaintiff, loretta vasko's claim, that is question 1, then you shall consider the defense raised by the defendant, r.j. reynolds tobacco company. that is question 2. on the defense, the issue for you to decide is did john vasko know or should he have known, on or before may 5, 1990, in the exercise of reasonable care, that he had copd, and that there was a reasonable possibility that his copd was caused by cigarette smoking? by the way, in the facts of this case, he was told by dr. dhanani, in the fall of 1990, that cigarette smoking was the cause. so in the fall of 1990, after may 5, there is, for him, a diagnosis, and obviously the reasonable -- whether he accepts it or not, there is the reasonable possibility that it is caused by cigarette smoking. no doubt about it. but we do not even get here to this second half of the question, if you do not get to the no or should have known. this is their defense. if the greater weight of the evidence supports the defendant -- so now they have to support it, this issue -- the plaintiff's claim is time barred and your verdict is for the defendant. however, if the greater weight of the evidence does not support the defendant's defense, on this issue, your verdict should being for the plaintiff, loretta vasko. that is the law. it is their burden of proof on question 2. it is our burden of proof on question 1. then there is this. the witnesses. who were the witnesses in the case and how do you measure them? we brought you dr. cummings, mike cummings, who helped write and review the surgeon general's report. who is seen and treated over 10,000 people addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine; who is evaluated all the evidence in the case; who understands the cigarette device better than anyone. they brought you dr. abramson for $41,000 who disagrees with everything that the american psychiatric association has to say just about, does not apply the fagerstrom test, and on and on. and who has never published a single thing or researched a single thing in the field, compared to several hundred pieces by dr. cummings. you also use your own experience and common sense to evaluate what happened here. you do not throw that out. dr. kreitzer -dr. martin paid over a million dollars by this company for these cases, to tell you that no one knew. that everyone thought only one thing. no one knew or considered or cared and interpreted only the way he wanted to. that is what you have been fed in this case. and you are allowed to look at it. and not only are you allowed to look at it, you are supposed to use this common sense and this instruction to measure what you heard in the case. at the end of the day, you are going to be diverted now off of the question, the simple question of addiction to nicotine, and whether an addiction to nicotine, in the form of inhaled tobacco smoke, where the amount of nicotine is just enough that someone who is going to tend to end up smoking if they are addicted over a pack of cigarettes a day, not to pay attention to that, and make this about mr. vasko chose this for himself and his life. like i said, mr. vasko on his death bed basically apologized to his wife for not overcoming his addiction. he has responsibility. and no one ever could or should tell you otherwise. but this is not the phase for that. and that question is not on the verdict form. not yet. we will get to that. for now, it is this. and mr. vasko started smoking cigarettes at the tender age of 12 years old. it is not likely the society he was living in, he believed that there is a scientific issue for him. he lived in a society where cigarette smoking was attractive and glamorous and beautiful. james bond. they showed you this cool clip of james bond. there could not be a better example to a young american of a manhood than james bond. all the ladies loved him. he was adventurous. he killed all the bad guys. and he smoked cigarettes. and they joke about it in the movies about whether it is going to cause him harm. that was the culture. and that is when mr. vasko got hooked. and so at the end of the day, it is really a medical question: was he addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine, and does the addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine play a substantial role in heavy smoking in his life. and that is what this part of the case is about, and we brought you the proof. they have not. not only have they not. all of the evidence in this case points to "no" on question 2, and "yes" on question 1. thank you so much. you have been through so much and you have been overloaded with information in this trial. we tried our best to give you the evidence that you need to make the just and right decision. i'm going to sit down now. mr. geise is going to get up. he is going to make his arguments. give him the same attention and courtesy that you gave to me. and i'll come back on rebuttal and address what is left. thank you. rebuttal mr. ratzan: thank you, your honor. well, at least he finally admitted it, that he has the burden of proof on question 2. but brought to you by the same people that in 1990 were denying that cigarette smoking causes copd, that in 1990 cigarette smoking was cancer. the same people have now come here to tell you that they have proven that mr. vasko knew he had copd before 1990 or that he should have, because he had a cough that he had his whole life and in 1960 and in '62, two doctors, he comes back and he thinks he is in perfect health. come on, guys. a cough, a dry cough, which is the only evidence in this case before 1988, is not copd and it is not evidence of copd. and how do i know that. it is not what mr. geise says, and he is a fine lawyer. but how do i know that and how should you? because his expert in pulmonary care, it is true, the only expert to testify to you knew everything about this case. remember we went through the whole thing, do we have the depo, do we do not have the depo and he had the deposition and he got on that witness stand and he knows everything, everything. the dry cough, he knows exactly when it was. he extrapolated back. he is telling you, it is his best guess, but he knows exactly when the copd was inside the body. he knows every single deposition, pat natalizio, everybody. what does the expert in pulmonary care say? dr. kreitzer says, regarding all of this, going to doctors, going to doctors for a heavy cough is the right thing to do. a person, a human being who is not got any medical education, who is gone his whole life in a world where people smoke and from time to time they had a cough. he is not there diagnosing himself as copd. i'm sorry. and if he is going to doctors, like he was, he is acting reasonably. and a doctor who is trying his best to take care of him is acting reasonably, too. and dr. kreitzer told you that. and when dr. dhanani gave the diagnosis in the fall of 1990 -- and we know it is true -dr. dhanani acted reasonably. where -- can any of you say to each other when you go back in there, yeah, i have the proof that mr. vasko had medical training. i have proof that mr. vasko knew or should have known that he had copd before 19 -- chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, how many have you ever heard of that before you got here? and the verdict form, the verdict form says it. it does not say cough. the verdict form and the law and the jury instructions says that he had copd. mr. vasko -- who here can say that you have been delivered by those men over there the proof that mr. vasko knew what that was or that he had knowledge that -- first of all, if he had a dry cough, which he did, you would be agreeing with dr. kreitzer that that is not a symptom of copd. and who here has proof that dr. kreitzer is wrong or that mr. vasko should have known differently from dr. kreitzer? has that been delivered to you? what is going on here? has it been delivered? because their job was to do so. they are asking you to speculate that mrs. vasko thinks this or pat natalizio -- we asked dr. cummings that pat natalizio said that he had a cough in the 1980s. he did have a cough in the 1980s, number one. but number two, i had to get back on redirect with dr. cummings and point out that pat natalizio cannot even remember what year that was. have they given you proof of a single witness to say a single thing that would make a reasonable person diagnosing himself copd or that would make a reasonable doctor diagnose in this patient, this man copd? are we going to kick him out of court because we are guessing, because we have very effective lawyers over here and we are going to go along with it and guess. demand proof is what he said. and now he is admitted finally that he has the burden and he has not met it. and which of you can say that he did? this is about evidence, guys. this is not a philosophical debate on the merits of smoking cigarettes. that is not what this case is. this case right here right now before you to do justice is to follow the law and apply the evidence in this case to question 1 and question 2 and both parts of it. and the job of these lawyers was supposed to be to bring evidence to you so you can make a just verdict, not a verdict about he is a bad guy because he smoked and he did not quit or they are bad people because they are tobacco. that is not what we are doing here. we are looking at evidence and we are measuring decisions based on evidence, and here is the evidence. from the only person that they brought to you to testify on question 2 who knew every symptom, who not only knew every symptom but he calculated things back and he had all these equations and he put up the graph and he had finally read all the depositions, and i asked him: "doctor, for mrs. vasko to respond to colds that her husband started getting at the very end of the '80s, '89 time frame, 1990, for her and her husband to respond by going to dr. dhanani was a reasonable thing to do? do you agree with that?" "answer: it was a reasonable thing to do." now, if you remember dr. kreitzer, he had a lot to say about a lot of things and that was his chance. and i did not stop him. i remember even looking at him and saying, you can say anything you want. he could have said it was not reasonable. they waited too long. it did not stop there. you do not criticize dr. dhanani for anything that dr. dhanani did. so now i'm going broad here. not just mr. vasko acting reasonably. what about dr. dhanani. he says, i have no records of his. i have no criticism. well, whose job is it to make the criticism? not mine. it is mr. geise's job with his expert on the stand, and his expert does not have that criticism and it does not stop there. "question: you have no criticism of the vaskos for going to see dr. dhanani the way they did, do you?" "answer: i have no criticism." "question, they acted reasonably, correct?" "answer, yes." "and if dr. dhanani evaluated mr. vasko and told him he thought he had concerns or signs of emphysema, that would have been accurate?" "yes, yes, it would have." "so that would have been reasonable on dr. dhanani part, correct?" "answer, yes." do you have any evidence other than that and do you have any evidence that dr. dhanani diagnosed mr. vasko and gave him the information for the first time at any time other than the fall of 1990, do you? have they given that to you, because they are supposed to, and if you are going to enter a verdict against mrs. vasko, you have to have that. you do not. and this is a courtroom and this is about justice, and i'm not standing here working hard on this case so that you, folks, are going to do anything other than justice and you swore to do it. demand proof is right and there is more proof. "they are certainly not reporting dr. dhanani to the board of health for anything, correct?" "answer: that is ridiculous." "question: and now, over the next several years, as the colds got worse and mr. vasko seeks out a pulmonary specialist, that is a reasonable thing to do, right?" "answer, yes it is." and then i went global again: "you have no criticism of anything that they did with respect to responding to signs and symptoms, correct?" and this man, who is their only expert, their only witness, their only piece of evidence on this question says: "i have no criticisms of that. i do not have any records of that because i would have liked to see the spirometry and the description by the doctors of what the symptoms were." now, this is a man that can give a lot of opinions without records. he gave them to you. he went back to 1979. if there was a problem with what mr. and mrs. vasko did, you would have heard it from dr. kreitzer, and you did not. you heard just the opposite, and it did not end there. because at the very end of my questioning of dr. kreitzer, because i wanted to be crystal clear. i wanted to be sure of it. i asked him: "and we can agree that mr. vasko had copd probably even before 1990?" the question, by the way, so it is crystal clear. it is not did he have copd before 1990. it is did he know or should he have known. not did he have it, because he had it. it is a creeping disease. it takes years to get to the advanced stages where it gets diagnosed. so, of course, we would agree to that. and i asked him that: "can we agree that mr. vasko had copd probably even before 1990?" he says: "we know that." and the question really is, i asked him, the question really is: "did they act reasonably, right?" and he says: "did who act reasonably?" so we are crystal clear who we are taking about. "as far as how the family and the doctors responded, they acted reasonably, correct?" and the very last question and the very last answer, and he could have said anything he wanted and, finally, dr. kreitzer responded with one word: "they acted reasonably, correct?" his answer was, "yes." there is no question 2 for part two and then -- look, he is a good lawyer, but he gets up here and he says, it was nice of dr. han to come here. nice? he is subpoenaed to come to court to testify. when you have a doctor who is written a record and you want to sell to a jury that the record really says 1980 and it is your burden of proof, why am i calling that guy? why am i put to that? why? i'll tell you why. because dr. kreitzer testified that mr. geise never gave him the dictation. do not take my word for it. this is the trial testimony i just read you of dr. kreitzer. this is what he said here in front of you and i just read you all of those things. i asked dr. kreitzer: "and so before rendering your conclusion or opinion or suggesting to a jury that a diagnosis was made in 1980, do you agree that it would be best, it would be best to be accurate about your interpretation, doctor?" he says, "yes, it is." "so if your interpretation of dr. han's handwriting is wrong, that would be misleading to suggest to the jury that he had a diagnosis in his record of 1980, correct?" "answer: my interpretation of the handwriting is wrong and it is not 1980, then it would suggest that the copd was not 1980, it was another year." "question: right. and the here it might be would be the one that dr. han dictated in his report, correct?" "answer: i'm not aware of a dictation." now, i do not know if you remember this but that answer came when i had the board up there for the first time and he sees it. and i asked him, "oh, that was not provided to you?" and he said, "no." and right before your eyes, ladies and_ gentlemen, dr. kreitzer saw for the first time a record. now, it is not right to come in and say that was nice of dr. han to show up when you know that your own witness - you did not provide your own witness or your own witness says he was not provided a key record in the case. there is no 1980 diagnosis here and everybody knows it. what there is is an attempt to convince you of something that is simply not true. this is brought to you by the people, who in 1994 and 1990, were telling the country that there was no link between copd and smoking cigarettes. when are we going to have a different approach? let me tell you what else. you have got now a question, because question 2, they have not met their burden of proof, unless one of you can show me proof. and what you have on the other hand is the complete opposite and what you have in between it all is an effort not to bring you the whole information, and that is there. that answer is, no. and therefore, you are back to question 1. and there is no dispute that he was addicted to cigarettes, but that is a little bit off, too. dr. cummings was not told that and all that. because dr. abramson, their addiction expert, testified in the middle of trial that he had a new opinion and now the addiction was not just 1990, it was 1980s to 1970s, and he was not sure or did not know about the 1960s, that was his testimony. so it is a little bit off to say that they have been agreeing with us on this the whole time. but it does not matter now, because we know that he was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine. and was such addiction a legal cause of his copd? did it play a substantial role? and then he gets into the highway that his son drew for him. the court: three minutes. mr. ratzan: i can tell you what my daughter would say, daddy, who built the car? so when you think about the highway, who built the highways and how were the exits constructed, who built them? because imagine that the car is the sexiest car in the world and everybody wants it and it is built by them. and, yeah, you can get off any exit you want, except that -- let us call him joe driver -- joe driver is driving that car and the steering wheel for turning off exits is not built very well. it makes it really tough. and the exits themselves are constructed in a way that when you get off, if you do not just quite make the right turn, you get right back on the highway. so now on the highway, all these other people are on that road and everybody wants this car and joe driver finds that there is something coming out of air in the air conditioner that makes him feel real good, and the more he is in that car, the better he feels with that air conditioning, so he wants to be in that car longer. and every time he tries to get off, because they built the car this way, the steering is tough, but he can do it and every now and then, people get off the highway. but there is millions of people going up the highway and there is billboards on the highway and there are pictures of the car and the car is beautiful and the people in the car are beautiful and they are celebrities and sports casters and models and more and more people are on the highway and they are all driving their cars up the road and some of them are trying to get off and they are getting right back on, and others do not want to get off at all because the billboards are great and it makes it look wonderful. on the other side of the road, every now and then, there is a billboard that says "you are going to crash in virginia because there is a cliff," and joe driver is going to ride off the cliff and never get to maine, but virginia is a long way away. and then a few more miles down the road, there is a billboard by the car maker and the billboard says, "there is no cliff in virginia, it is not true." joe driver drives down the road some more. there is billboards all over the right side of the road about how cool it is to be driving this car and more and more people every day are getting on the highway in the same car. and he is finding that the more he drives, he is got to drive 20 hours a day, because he wants that air conditioning that is coming in and he feels goods and along the road are constructed all kinds of places to get new cars, because, every now and then, the cars break down and they want to sell you new cars. and so joe driver gets a new car. they keep buying new cars, and up and down the highway are billboards every few miles telling them, "you are going to crash in virginia", and then every few miles after that, there is dozens and dozens of pictures of beautiful cars and beautiful people driving them and, a mile later, there is a billboard from the manufacturer of the car, there is no cliff in virginia, it is not there. it is not been proven scientifically that when cars drive off cliffs, they crash. this car, because this is a really special car. keep on driving and virginia is a long way away. he is on his way to maine. now, he gets to virginia and as he is driving off the cliff, there is a billboard, we do not know if he sees it or not, but the billboard is by the car maker and the billboard says, "that cliff is not really there and it does not really cause cars to blow up and you will be fine." and millions and millions of people keep driving up from miami trying to get to maine in these beautiful cars. and a bunch of them are getting off the highway, no doubt about it, about 3 percent a year are able to get off, and they are all reasonable people and they are all good people, and they have people that love them that want them to get of the highway, but they keep driving in a car built by them on the highway built by them with billboards with all kinds of information on there. much of it, much of those billboards, if not 365 to one of those billboards are theirs. that is what this case is about. addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine is a disease and the man in the middle has a disease. it is not a man between a disease and a choice. it is in this case, not everybody gets this disease, but this man had it. this man had it and it contributed. it contributed substantially to the outcome of this case. there is no other reason to put that much smoke in his lungs. he wanted off the highway. never did. the answer to question 1, ladies and gentlemen should be yes, we met our burden of proof, and you know our thoughts on question 2. thank you. give your best effort to this, but apply evidence, apply evidence to the questions, not a philosophical debate and not speculation, evidence based -- evidence based answer and that is justice. thank you.