mr. mccarter: thank you. so judge gave us the option. i thought i'd start a little bit, and then we go to lunch at noon. that way i do not have to talk to people on empty stomachs. instead, i will get full stomachs. i think mr. kaiser's closing argument was the first time this courtroom has actually felt warm or hot in here. i'm not going to try to turn up the heat with emotions because you know emotion's not supposed to be part of the decision you are making. we all may feel sympathy towards mr. vila, but sympathy is not part of it at this time either. let me start off by, i want to thank you again for your time being here. the last time i stood up here was about two weeks ago. we had gone through jury selection together. and now we have gone through the entire case together. everybody has been on time every day, paying attention closely, and respecting us and the witnesses as well. i appreciate that. now, what i want to do is i want to start off with what -- i would submit to you are the five most important facts in this case. the five most important facts of the evidence showed. first, is that mr. vila smoked because that is what he wanted to do. now, mr. vila all along has denied he enjoyed smoking. but you have seen pictures of him enjoying smoking. you have heard from his family members who said he enjoyed smoking. you have heard from other witnesses who talked to mr. vila. they said he enjoyed the taste of a cigarette. he enjoyed the way it made him feel. he thought it helped his concentration. it helped him with anxiety. it helped his mood. did mr. vila enjoy smoking or not? i submit to you that actions speak louder than words. if you do not enjoy smoking, what do you do? you stop. well, they say he was too addicted to stop. well then, you at least try to stop, right? if you are doing something you do not enjoy, you at least try to stop. what we know from the evidence in this case is that mr. vila never tried to quit smoking, never tried to stop smoking, never tried to cut back on his smoking until 1994 when his doctor told him he had cancer. so mr. vila smoked for 25 years. he says he did not enjoy it, but he never tried to stop. he enjoyed it. that is why he did not try to stop. because that is what he wanted to do. third, when mr. vila was motivated to quit smoking he was able to quit with ease and for good. mr. kaiser asked mr. vila when he was on the stand, "when was it that you first became motivated to quit smoking?" he said, "it was in 1996 when i quit." now, mr. vila says that he stopped smoking for 50 days when he was being -- in his radiation treatments. and you heard from dr. seely that after 50 days of not smoking all the nicotine is gone from his system and all -- or virtually all of the withdrawal effects from quitting are gone. now, you know in the medical records they suggest mr. vila quit for good in 1994. mr. vila says he went back to smoking, but he went back to smoking at a time when he did not have any withdrawal effects and there was no nicotine in the system. he made a voluntary decision to go back to smoking after his radiation because he enjoyed it. if he did go back to smoking. and then he decided in early 1996, finally, "i do want to quit." when he decided he wanted to quit, for the first time he was motivated to quit, what happened? he quit. he was somebody who could quit smoking -- did quit smoking and it was relatively easy for him. fourth, you know from opening statements and the jury instructions the heart of this case is: did philip morris do anything or say anything that had any impact on mr. vila? they showed you with dr. proctor on that video, statements that philip morris made over the years regarding the health risks of smoking and addiction. but then you heard on cross-examination, i asked dr. proctor, "did -- were any of those statements made -- they were all made in the united states? " yes. "were any of them made in cuba or published in cuba when mr. vila was there? "no. "how about spain when mr. vila was there? "no. "how about the dominican republic while mr. vila was there? "no." nothing philip morris said about the health risks of smoking had any impact on mr. vila, and nothing philip morris did had any impact on mr. vila. finally, mr. vila is responsible for the choices he made in his life. i want to be clear i am not intending to criticize mr. vila in any way for the choices he made. we all make different choices in our lives. but with the right to choose how to live your life comes what? comes the personal responsibility of the consequences of those decisions. mr. vila made choices. he made choices to smoke. he made a choice to smoke for 25 years without ever trying to quit. he made the choice to quit. and i'm going to talk about this more later. but he made the choice not to go back to his doctor after the radiation treatments. this is a huge issue in the case and i think you will see, the evidence is pretty clear, that points he did not go back to his doctor. everything that happened after that was on him for not going back to his doctor. everything that happened before that was on him for making the choice to smoke and not trying to quit. now, i want -- now i want to turn to where i started in my opening. i want to show some of the timelines here that i used because i want to show you what the evidence did show. it is exactly what we talked about showing. i want to start here with the u.s. remember, things that were going on in the u.s., that is on the bottom here. you heard all this testimony about what philip morris was saying about the risks of smoking from dr. proctor. but then on cross-examination you heard that people were referring to cigarettes as "coffin nails" and being addictive back in the early 1900s, more than a hundred years ago. it was not a secret. there were articles in the u.s. published over the decades on the dangers of smoking. by 1954, ninety percent of americans had heard that smoking may be a cause of lung cancer. we move on to the 1960s. you have the 1964 surgeon general's report. you have the warning on the pack in 1966, which changes in 1970. no ads on television and radio after that. between the -- 15 years between 1964 and 1979, 30 million smokers quit. i want to show you the warnings because this is very important to all of the claims. starting in 1966 -- so 49 years ago. for 49 years there have been warnings on every package of philip morris cigarettes sold in the u.s., starting in 1966. "caution: cigarette smoking may be hazardous to your health." their expert, dr. proctor, was not aware of a single instance where philip morris failed to include this on its package when it was supposed to do so. 1970, the language of the warning changes. this is on there for the next 15 years. remember, this is the warning that is on the pack when mr. vila comes here on vacation in 1978. and he said he recalled seeing the warning. now, he did not say that at trial. he said he did not recall seeing it. i had to use his deposition to show you what he said, that he did recall seeing this warning. "warning: the surgeon general has determined that cigarette smoking is dangerous to your health." now, if we continue on, here in the u.s. you have -- we have additional warnings going on the package in 1985. that is where we have the four rotating warnings. this is the story of what was happening in the united states on these timelines, but it had nothing to do with mr. vila. because mr. vila did not come here except for a vacation in 1978 where he saw that warning. he did not come here until 1989. i asked mr. vila, "when you were living abroad in cuba, dominican republic or spain, did you have any access to u.s. media? did you see statements by the american tobacco companies?" and he said no. so these are -- up until 1989, mr. vila and philip morris are two ships passing in the night. what happens in 1989? what does mr. vila hear from philip morris? what are the messages philip morris gives him about the dangers of smoking when he comes here and hears something from philip morris for the very first time? philip morris tells him four things right on the side of his pack. one of these four things was on every package of cigarettes he bought here in the u.s. "cigarette smoking contains carbon monoxide." "quitting smoking now greatly reduces serious risk to your health." "smoking causes lung cancer, heart disease, emphysema, and may complicate pregnancy." and then one on low birth rate, which was not relevant to him. now, remember what mr. vila said. "i did not hear anything about the dangers of smoking until i came here in 1989." they want you to believe that if only he had known earlier that smoking could be bad for his health he would not have smoked. he would not have started or he would have quit. what did mr. vila do in 1989 when he saw this warning and he says it was new information? did he try to quit? did he try to cut down? did he stop smoking? no. he did what he was doing before because it was not new information to him. it did not matter to him. he was willing to take the risk. remember he told his friends when they talked to him about his smoking, "if i get sick from smoking, bury me in a marlboro truck." he knew what he was doing, and he was willing to take the risk. now, let me go back to the timeline because plaintiff put in all this evidence of what was being said in the united states during a 35-year time period when mr. vila was not here. we had to put in evidence for you of what was happening in the places where mr. vila actually lived. this is before he was in cuba. in cuba, in the early 1900s, you heard when i crossed dr. proctor, there was literature describing tobacco as harmful to your health. there was an antismoking movement in cuba in the early 1900s, just like there was here. in the 1950s there are articles on the dangers of smoking in cuba where mr. vila lived, same as there was in the u.s. "selecciones" is just a preprint of the "reader's digest" here in the u.s., in spanish. and mr. vila said he was exposed to that. we have mr. vila's uncle dying of lung cancer in the 1950s. he was a cigarette smoker. that is how we started our cross of mr. vila. and you remember, he denied knowing that his uncle died of lung cancer. we had to show him his deposition. he denied his uncle was a smoker. we had to show him his deposition. mr. vila's cousin, carmen vila, testified in her deposition that she never smoked because as a little kid growing up in cuba she saw antismoking advertisements in the newspaper or television. she had the same proclivity as mr. vila for saying something different at trial than at her deposition. you saw what she said in her deposition. you have articles on smoking and health in places where mr. vila is living, and there in magazines he was reading. and you have harmful effects of smoking on mr. vila's relatives. let us move up in time here. mr. vila moves to spain in 1969. this is where he says he started smoking marlboro cigarettes. i want to talk about that a little later. but you know from dr. proctor's testimony that marlboros were the least popular cigarette in spain at the time and were way more expensive than any other brand. mr. vila moves to the dominican republic. and throughout this entire time he does not try to quit smoking, not one single time. i'm going to talk about this more later. mr. kaiser suggested there is some evidence that philip morris was making the cigarettes in the dominican republic. he criticized us for not calling somebody from philip morris to tell you they were not making the cigarettes in the dominican republic. why on earth would i need to do that when his own expert, dr. proctor, testified on cross-examination that philip morris did not make the cigarettes in the dominican republic. that e. leon jimenes company did. that was his own expert. why would i need to call somebody to repeat what his own expert said? there are warnings of dangers of smoking on television in the dominican republic, according to carmen vila, mr. vila's cousin, who was living in the dr with him -- next to him at the same time he was there. finally, if we move forward, when we get to later points in time, of course, we have mr. vila moving to miami where his uncle tells him about his heart attack. "you cannot smoke around me." that is actually his godfather. "i had a heart attack from smoking." mr. vila understands. you have the quit attempts mr. vila describes. you have his throat surgery. he is cured of cancer and traveling around the caribbean and europe. and i'm going to talk about that later because that is relevant to this claim that mr. vila is so severely depressed that he cannot function in life. he is so disabled he cannot work. i'm going to talk about that in a little bit. so what the story of philip morris and mr. vila show is that there just is no connection between the two. there is no intersection. he moves here in 1989. the only thing mr. vila sees are the warnings. that is going to be relevant to a lot of the questions on the verdict form. that is what i'm going to start to talk about right now. let me show you this before i do because i showed you the warnings. and there seems -- there has been some suggestion throughout the trial that philip morris should have been putting warnings on its cigarettes in spain when mr. vila was living there, or in the dominican republic. now, keep in mind -- remember that cigarettes in spain were sold by the spanish government. they had a 300-year monopoly on the sales of tobacco. and they controlled all aspects of the sales of tobacco. there is no evidence that philip morris was required to put warnings on the packs in spain or that the spanish government monopoly would have allowed it to happen. dr. proctor, their witness, testified that the government controlled all aspects of cigarette sales in spain. but here is the important part: this is important because mr. vila starts smoking in 1969, right? this applies to the entirety of his smoking. it says, "the warning labels placed on cigarette packs and advertisements by philip morris usa complied with federal law, and philip morris usa had no obligation to place any additional warnings on its cigarette pack and advertisements after july 1, 1969, in the united states." but look at the next part of this. "jose vila does not claim that philip morris usa, inc. should have given additional or different warnings on its cigarette packs and advertisements after july 1, 1969." so this business about philip morris -- supposed to put warnings on their packs in spain is not part of this lawsuit. there is no claim about that. in the dominican republic philip morris was not even making those cigarettes. they licensed the trademark. judge, this may be a good time to break. the court: then we will break. mr. mccarter: i'll talk about the verdict form when we get back. [#deleted recess#] mr. mccarter: thank you, your honor. so i want to jump right in to the verdict form right now, because these are the questions that you are going to be asked to answer at the end of the case. this is the first one on here that mr. kaiser showed you, and there is really a few issues that are wrapped up into this one question. this is where the hpv issue comes in, and i will go through the evidence on that. if you believe that they have not proven that smoking was the cause of his cancer, and that hpv caused it, you check "no" to this question. addiction is also part of this question. if you believe that they have not proven that he was addicted, you check "no" to this question as well. 2811 and there is also a third element to this, which i will talk about, and that is that the addiction has to be a legal cause of mr. vila's cancer, and what that means is that without the addiction he would not have gotten cancer. and what you will see is if he would have smoked anyway because he wanted to smoke, then his choice to smoke is the legal cause of his cancer, not any addiction. there are three reasons why the answer to this question should be "no" on the verdict form, and if you check it "no," you are done. the first is that they did not meet their burden of proving that mr. vila's cancer was caused by cigarette smoking; the second is that they did not meet their burden of proving that mr. vila was addicted to nicotine; and the third is that the legal cause, even if mr. vila was addicted, the legal cause of his cancer was the choices that he made in life to smoke, if you believe his cancer was caused by smoking and not hpv. i want to go through one by one, and i want to go through the hpv issue step by step as we try to do with the witnesses in the case. 2812 in retrospect, i wish i had put these as questions, because you are the ones that are going to answer them, not me. so the first question i pose is whether hpv can infect the larynx? what is the evidence on whether hpv can infect the larynx. because if it cannot infect the larynx, then it cannot cause cancer there, right? so the first thing you have to figure out is, can it infect the larynx? and on this issue all the evidence is yes, from all the witnesses on both sides. everybody agrees that hpv, the virus, can infect the larynx. it happens if hpv gets in the mouth, through oral sex or open-mouth kissing, hpv can travel in the saliva, get into the base of the tongue, and also can go down past the epiglottis into the larynx and into the vocal cords. every person who testified on that issue in this case agreed on that. and the reason is -- and there is some common sense to this, one is the epiglottis is the only potential physical barrier to hpv getting in the larynx and the vocal cords, but the epiglottis is open almost all the time. when you are breathing it is open, so it is not a physical barrier. and as dr. 2813 felix testified, saliva runs down into the larynx all the time. and you know from your own common sense, and we talked to dr. goodwin about this, that viruses -- hpv is a virus -- viruses get into the larynx and the vocal cords all the time. that is why if you have a cold, you can get a sore throat. the virus has made its way into the larynx. that is why if you have laryngitis, laryngitis is an infection or irritation of the larynx. so viruses all the time travel in the mouth in the saliva into the larynx. everyone's agreed on that. that is the first step. the second point, and i'm going to phrase it as a question rather than the answer to the question, is can hpv, when it infects the larynx, can it cause cancer there? and there is really two lines of evidence on that in this case. the first is: what kind of tissue is in the larynx and the vocal cords? it is squamous epithelial tissue. and you heard from everybody that the kind of tissue hpv causes cancer in is squamous epithelial tissue. dr. felix explained how that happens, it is because the hpv virus gets into the tissue. and our 2814 tissue has these cancer prevention genes in it. one of them was the p53 gene. and dr. felix explains how the virus gets into the tissue and hpv turns off the cancer protection gene. so it turns off the cancer protection gene, which allows hpv to cause cancer in the larynx. so it is the same tissue that is in the cervix and in the mouth and elsewhere, and cancer can be caused by hpv there and also in the larynx. that is one line of evidence. there is a second line of evidence, and that is the research that is been done. here's the evidence in terms of, well, it is the same tissue that hpv causes cancer in, in the larynx, does it actually do it? this is the evidence in the case. on the yes side, yes, hpv causes cancer in the larynx. you have dr. felix. dr. felix has studied this issue. they have even admitted he is a world renowned expert in hpv research, and he told you that based on his research and his studies hpv does, in fact, cause cancer in the larynx. when dr. goodwin was here and dr. gomez, you heard about what researchers from the national cancer institute, the international 2815 agency for research on cancer and the henry ford hospital research center, that they also have concluded that hpv causes cancer in the larynx. in fact, they report that 25 percent of laryngeal cancers are associated with hpv. that is independent published research not by a paid expert in this case that says, yes, hpv can cause cancer in the larynx and it is fairly common. and dr. gomez told us, those institutions, national cancer institute, is the premier research institute on cancer in the united states. and the iarc there is the same function for the world health organization internationally. dr. gomez yesterday admitted, yes, hpv can cause cancer in the larynx. she admitted that and she had studied hpv. the only one on the "no" side is dr. goodwin. he came in initially saying, no, it could never happen or it can only happen with those warts in the throat. but you remember on cross-examination he saw those articles i showed him, from these esteemed research organizations, and he admitted he was not really up to speed on the 2816 issue. dr. goodwin, who is the only person in the "no" column, has never published any research on hpv or hpv-caused cancer. so i'd submit to you the evidence, from people who know what they are talking about, including one of their own experts, lines up in the "yes" column here: "hpv can and does cause cancer in the larynx and the vocal cords." the next -- i'm going to do it as a question again. what about mr. vila and his cancer? does he fit the profile? i'm not going to talk about the slides yet, the pathology, but does mr. vila fit the profile, does his cancer fit the profile of an hpv-caused cancer? you remember i asked dr. goodwin about that, we even made a flip chart here -- turn this around -- and dr. goodwin told us that when hpv causes cancer there are a few distinguishing features about it. we talked about who is at higher risk. people of european descent are at higher risk than african-americans for hpv-caused cancer. men are at higher risk than women. the 2817 hpv-caused cancer tends to appear at a younger age, in the 30s and 40s. there is a higher survival rate with hpv-caused cancer. it is less invasive than smoking-caused cancer, and multiple sex partners creates a high risk of getting hpv and a higher risk of hpv-caused cancer. this was -- mr. williams was the other case dr. goodwin testified, and we do not need to look at that. but you remember dr. goodwin admitted that in terms of every one of these risk factors mr. vila fit. mr. vila is of european, not african-american descent. he is a man. he got his cancer when he was 39 years old. you have heard from multiple experts smoking-caused cancer does not tend to occur until you are much older in the 50s and 60s. he survived his cancer. his cancer was less invasive and did not go into the lymph nodes. you heard mr. vila's testimony about a history of 30 to 40 sexual partners before his cancer, which created a very high risk of contracting hpv. and one of the last questions i asked dr. goodwin was: on all of these risk factors, 2818 all of these profiles that you have identified as being related to hpv-caused cancer, mr. vila fits every single one of them. all of them point to hpv for mr. vila; and dr. goodwin said "yes." now, he is not the only one who agreed with that, because we talked to dr. gomez about the same issue yesterday. remember dr. gomez, like dr. goodwin, like dr. felix said: hpv cancers are more prevalent in younger populations. "younger" meaning people in their 30s or 40s. how old was mr. vila? 39. fits right in. men and women in their 30s and 40s are typically not the population you would think about for head and neck cancer caused by cigarette smoking. she agreed with that. that does not tend to happen until people are in their 50s or 60s. mr. vila's age of 39 fits in with hpv, does not fit in with smoking. what about the presentation of the cancer? this is where we get into the poorly differentiated and the well-differentiated thing and the keratin thing. this was during direct examination: "when 2819 you see laryngeal cancer, and it is the result of smoking, is there a particular appearance you consistently see?" "yes." she said the smoking cancers tend to be well-differentiated cancers and keratinizing. and then she said, with respect to hpv, they tend to be non-keratinizing and poorly differentiated. why is that so important? it is so important because the 1994 pathology described mr. vila's cancer as poorly to moderately differentiated, which fits hpv not smoking, and that there was no mention of it being keratinizing, which fits hpv and not smoking. so, again, from their own expert, mr. vila fits the profile of hpv-caused cancer. now the tumor in 1996 looked different. and at first dr. gomez was saying, well, maybe it is a second, a brand-new cancer that happened to pop up in the same spot. but you remember when she heard about mr. vila not going back to the doctor for treatment. she admitted she could not say whether it was a new cancer or a recurrence. the only evidence in this case is that the 1996 2820 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 tumor was a recurrence, was a -- the same tumor in 1994 grew back, but it had the same cause. why did it look different? the only explanation you got was from dr. felix, who testified that the radiation caused the cancer to change the way it looked. mr. kaiser: objection. the court: overruled. (thereupon, the following proceedings were held at side bar:) mr. mccarter: i know what the objection is, but as your honor observed at the time there was one question and answer on this issue that was not objected to and it was not in evidence. it was the second question and subsequent ones that mr. kaiser objected to. but the first one is in evidence. the court: but you are not to go that route. mr. kaiser: well, i do not remember him ever saying radiation is the explanation for the change in the cancer. mr. mccarter: he did and it was not objected to. the court: it was one question that he 2821 1 2 3 4 5 answered. mr. mccarter: that is all i'm going to say. the court: overrule the objection. (thereupon, the sidebar was concluded and the 6 following proceedings were held in open court:) 7 8 9 mr. mccarter: so far the profile of the cancer and the profile of mr. vila's risk all point to hpv, not smoking. let us talk about the pathology, because that was a big deal the last couple of days we were here. does the pathology establish that mr. vila's cancer was caused by hpv and not smoking? and that is where dr. felix's testimony comes in and dr. goodwin's. dr. felix talked to you about koilocytes in the pathology. remember the koilocyte has the raisinoid nucleus, multiple nucleus -- multiple nuclei and that distinctive halo around the nuclei. and he said to you, these are koilocytes. here's an example, there is three nuclei there, they are raisinoid, they are shriveled, then they are surrounded by the white halo. the white halo happens because the virus blocks the cell from producing the material 2822 that makes the cytoplasm. so it is just empty. dr. felix showed you multiple pictures of koilocytes, here's another one and another one. the point of dr. gomez's testimony was to rebut dr. felix. dr. felix said, based on his vision and seeing koilocytes, he is one hundred percent certain that this cancer was caused by hpv. dr. goodwin was supposed to come in and rebut it. and at first dr. goodwin said, well i do not see it -- not dr. goodwin -- dr. gomez said, i do not see any koilocytes in there. but on cross-examination she did say, if you see koilocytes in the epithelial tissue, that means, by definition, it has been infected by hpv. so she now agrees with dr. felix, if there is koilocytes, there is hpv. she said she did not see koilocytes, but on cross-examination she admitted -- she admitted -- that she cannot tell whether or not they are koilocytes, and because she cannot say whether or not they are koilocytes, she cannot say whether or not hpv caused the cancer. i've put the title on here about dr. gomez admitting that plaintiff has not met his burden of proof because plaintiff has the burden of 2823 proof on this issue. they have the burden of proving that smoking caused the cancer, not hpv. and their own expert says she cannot tell. if their own expert, who is supposed to seal the case for them, cannot tell, that means they have not met their burden of proof. you have dr. felix saying he is one hundred percent certain, she is saying she cannot tell. they have not met their burden of proving that it was smoking and not hpv as the cause. and dr. gomez admitted that as much in her testimony yesterday. and the fact is, looking at the description of the 1994 pathology, she cannot rule out hpv as a cause of the cancer. they have to prove it to you and they have not done it. now, one more thing about dr. gomez is, you heard at the end of her cross-examination, she has seen approximately 3,000 cases of laryngeal cancer in her career. she admits that at least 2 percent of those are caused by hpv. and we figured out that is about -- that should be about 60. and she admits that she did not -- that she missed the diagnosis in all 2824 60 of those cases that came across her desk, because she says she is never seen a case. and if you believe dr. felix that it is ten percent of cancers, of laryngeal cancers are caused by hpv, that means she is 0 for 300, zero for 300 in diagnosing hpv-caused cancer. and you heard from dr. felix that when he has diagnosed hpv-caused cancer based on koilocytes, he has never been proven wrong, not by testing, not by anything. but i think you can use your own common sense on this one. and i have a board of it. remember i showed this -- i put it on the screen with dr. gomez yesterday. she said: these are either koilocytes or glycogen-filled cells, which would not be koilocytes. and i put them on the screen right next to each other, and i said, "dr. gomez, do you think these look the same?" and she said, "yes." but you can tell they do not look the same. they are very different. they are different colors. here you have the multiple nuclei, which describes koilocyte, you have different structures, you have the halo here, and you 2825 have them all over the place here. this is what dr. felix said was a koilocyte, this is what dr. felix said was glycogen. and dr. gomez agreed this is glycogen. if it you think these pictures look different, then it means hpv caused the cancer. but either way, because dr. gomez could not tell the difference between the two and they have the burden of proof, they have not met their burden of proof. now, that is it on the hpv issue. let me move on to the question of addiction. the second reason the answer to question number one is "no" is because plaintiff did not meet their burden of proving that mr. vila was addicted to nicotine. now when we had jury selection you were asked a lot of questions about whether you thought relatives were addicted to nicotine, whether all smokers were addicted, and you know you have to set your own personal views aside and decide the case based on the evidence. the only evidence in this case is that addiction has to be diagnosed using the dsm-5 psychiatric manual. that is what both of the experts did in this case and 2826 so that is what i want to talk about. i submit to you, even just looking at the facts of this case, you know mr. vila was not addicted because he never tried to quit smoking or failed to quit smoking before he got cancer. when he was motivated to do so, which he said first happened in 1996, he quit, and it was easy for him. none of his doctors ever diagnosed him as addicted or nicotine-dependent or with tobacco use disorder, none of his doctors in all of those medical records. none of mr. vila's medical records say he was addicted. his cousin, carmen vila, who came here to testify for him said he is not addicted, he was not addicted. dr. ticknor came in yesterday and talked about clinically significant impairment. there is no evidence that mr. vila was unable to function or had any impairment due to nicotine addiction. and in terms of the dsm criteria, at most mr. vila had only 3 of 11 during any 12-month period. and dr. ticknor told you mr. vila does not fit the diagnostic criteria for addiction and that he could have quit smoking at any time. 2827 now, that is my expert. i want to talk about their expert, because their expert is the only evidence they have offered on that. their expert is dr. seely. dr. seely told us: "anyone can quit smoking. 50 million americans have quit." remember dr. seely in his practice diagnosed 50 to sixty percent of his patients as addicted. what does he do when he comes into court to testify? he says they are all addicted. anybody who is suing the tobacco companies is addicted. he is never published on nicotine or addiction, he does not treat patients for smoking cessation. remember he did his interview of mr. vila and it was interrupted by the lawyers. he was asking mr. vila a question, and the lawyers told him to leave the room. so his interview was not a pure interview where he got honest information from mr. vila; it was interrupted by mr. vila's lawyers. and even dr. seely says a diagnosis of addiction requires at least four criteria during a 12-month period; not two, not what you heard this morning, but four. he said two to three is the beginnings of addiction, but it 2828 takes four to be diagnosed as addicted in a 12-month period. so i am going to go through this fairly quickly because you saw it yesterday. "tobacco is often taken in larger amounts over a longer period than was intended." mr. vila never said what his intention was or that he did not intend to smoke as much as he did. so there is no evidence that he used the tobacco more than he intended to. "persistent desire or unsuccessful efforts to cut down." he never tried until 1994; and when he tried to quit, he did quit. when he tried to cut down, he cut down. there were no persistent, unsuccessful efforts. he did not spend a great deal of time in activities necessary to obtain or use tobacco. he would multi-task while smoking. both dr. seely and ticknor gave him the craving, the craving one. "recurrent tobacco use resulting in a failure to fulfill major role obligations at work, school or home." the only evidence they put on was he was reprimanded once, but they showed you his pay records where he was getting 2829 raises every year, and he was never fired from his job. now, if you fail to fulfill major responsibilities at work, that does not happen. "continued use despite having recurrent social or interpersonal problems." even dr. seely admitted that one was not satisfied. "important social, occupational or recreational activities are given up." dr. seely said that mr. vila stopped going to church because of his smoking. you may have in your notes when mr. vila testified, he said he never stopped going to church because of his smoking. dr. seely said mr. vila stopped going to the movies because of his smoking. you heard mr. vila testified in his deposition, he stopped going to movies because they got too expensive. and he is not smoking today and he is not going to the movies because they are too expensive. "recurrent tobacco use when it is physically hazardous." dr. seely says it is enough to smoke in bed. but there is no evidence that it was ever dangerous for mr. vila to smoke in bed, because he was doing 2830 it in the morning or when he was wide awake at night. "tobacco use is continued despite knowledge of having a persistent or recurrent physical problem." this is the one where it depends on when he quit. if he quit in 1994, it is a no. if he quit in '96, it is a yes. i will leave it a yes for now, and i will explain something about that in a minute. so both gave him tolerance and withdrawal, both dr. seely and dr. ticknor. so there is four up there. dr. seely would say that is enough for addiction if they are within a 12-month period. but they are not within a 12-month period; because when mr. vila supposedly was using tobacco after 1994, that was during 1994 to 1996, that is a different period of time when he was building his tolerance or having withdrawal symptoms. so the most he has in any 12-month period is three. under their own expert's rule, which our expert disagrees with, but take their rule, he needs four in a 12-month period, he has three. he does not meet the criteria for nicotine addiction under the dsm-5. 2831 what is the evidence as to whether mr. vila was addicted to nicotine? the only person who says yes is dr. seely, who, when he is being hired to testify, always says yes. that is their only evidence. mr. kaiser has been talking about these factors are subjective. maybe they are subjective. maybe you should just throw them out because they are subjective, but if you throw them out, you have to throw out dr. seely's analysis, too. and they have no evidence. they cannot have it both ways. if these things are unreliable because they are subjective, they have no evidence, no diagnosis of addiction; and if they are not subjective, if you should credit them, then they say, under even their own expert's rule, mr. vila did not meet the criteria. so you only have dr. seely saying he is addicted on the "no" column, you have dr. ticknor, our expert, you have his cousin, who knew him very well, carmen vila said he was not addicted, and you have no diagnoses of addiction in the medical records or by his doctors. 4,000 pages on his medical records and not a peep about addiction, nicotine 2832 dependence or tobacco use disorder. nothing. and i submit to you, the weight of the evidence here is on the "no" column and not the "yes" column. the third reason why the answer to question 1 is no is because even if mr. vila was addicted, even if smoking caused his cancer, it was not the addiction that caused the cancer, it was his choice and decision to smoke. and let me pause right here, because i meant to say this earlier. to answer this question "yes," all of you have to agree that i am wrong on all three of these points, to answer it yes, because he has to prove that smoking caused the disease, that he was addicted and that addiction caused the disease. everybody has to -- all of you have to agree unanimously that i am wrong on all three points. to answer the question "no," you actually do not have to agree on the reasons. half of you can think: they did not prove smoking caused the disease. half of you can think: they did not prove he was addicted. and that is 2833 enough, as long as all of you have a reason, it does not have to be the same reason, why they did not meet their burden of proof, you answer the question "no." to answer it "yes," i have to be wrong, we have to be wrong on all of these points, and you-all have to agree on that. the question -- the last point here is that the legal cause of mr. vila's cancer was not any addiction, it was the choices he made in life. the fact is, addicted or not, mr. vila could have quit smoking at any point in his life. any time he had wanted to quit, was motivated to quit, he could have quit. if his cancer was caused by smoking, which we disagree with, but if it was, the cause of that was not any addiction, it was his choice to smoke and the decisions he made in his life. so for those reasons the answer to question 1 should be "no." question 2 asks whether smoking cigarettes made by philip morris was a cause of his laryngeal cancer. you know that mr. vila smoked cigarettes in spain, the dominican republic and the united states. and let us talk 2834 about that, because it relates directly to this question. remember when mr. vila testified about his smoking in spain, he said he smoked marlboro cigarettes in spain. and then on cross-examination he said, "oh, yeah, i also smoked camel cigarettes." and when dr. seely was here, dr. seely said, "well, mr. vila told me he also smoked l & m cigarettes." camel and l & m cigarettes are not made by philip morris, only marlboro. then mr. vila said he started smoking marlboro in spain when he was a teenager, he had no job. what you learned when we cross-examined dr. proctor is marlboro cigarettes were five times more expensive in spain than other cigarettes, because they were imported and the sale was by the spanish monopoly; they were giving lower prices for their own cigarettes, the spanish cigarettes. so mr. vila is claiming as a teenager without any money to be smoking the most expensive cigarette or one of the most expensive cigarettes in spain. you also learned from dr. proctor that 2835 marlboro was the least popular cigarette in spain at the time, with a market share of below 1 percent. i think dr. proctor said the market share of marlboro in spain at the time was like misty brand cigarettes today, which probably many people have not heard of, but if you heard of it, it is not a popular brand among teenagers, because as dr. proctor said, teenagers tend to smoke brands that are popular, not unpopular, and they do not smoke the expensive brands. so even their own expert, dr. proctor, said marlboro was a highly unlikely brand for a teenager to be smoking in spain when mr. vila was there. mr. kaiser talked about corroborating evidence. there is no one who corroborates that mr. vila was smoking marlboro cigarettes in spain, because his cousin, carmen, was not living in spain at the time, she did not catch up with him until the dominican republic. so it is all mr. vila's word. and i would suggest to you, you have a lot of reason to doubt his testimony, because you have heard a lot of inconsistencies in what 2836 he is told you and what he said to other people. about how he got his first cigarette. in his deposition he said, from friends at school. here in court he said, from family at home. about how much he smoked. about his quitting history, whether it was 1994 or 1996. he claimed to you as the nicotine patch over the counter at a time when the nicotine patch was not available over the counter. we have the smokeless tobacco issue. when we asked him in his deposition about his travel after his surgery, he said he hardly traveled at all. you know that is not true. on his disability application, he was dishonest and said he had no income from his family and no income generally. you have heard about other sources of depression that have nothing to do with his cancer. he changed his testimony, or tried to change it, about whether philip morris withheld information from him. and he said in his deposition that his uncle died from lung cancer and his uncle was a smoker. and he said at trial, "oh, i do not know if he died from lung cancer, i do not even know if he smoked." 2837 he denied his mother told him not to smoke, and he denied that he had seen the warnings on the pack when he was here on vacation in 1978, and then you saw he remembered seeing the warnings from his deposition. so there are plenty of reasons, not just what dr. proctor says about how unpopular marlboros were or how expensive, but all these reasons to doubt his testimony. now, even if you do not discard that testimony, it is not much smoking in spain, and it is not really going to change the answer to the question, but i suggest you have a lot of reasons to be skeptical of it. let us talk about the dominican republic. those cigarettes -- remember, this question asked whether cigarettes made by philip morris were a cause of his cancer. cigarettes in the dominican republic, marlboro cigarettes then were not made by philip morris. check your notes if you want, but when i started cross-examining dr. proctor at the beginning of cross-examination. this is one of the issues i covered with him. he testified: "those 2838 cigarettes were not made by philip morris, they were made by the e. leon jimenes company in the dominican republic by a licensing agreement where philip morris allowed them to use 'marlboro.'" now there are documents in evidence that they put in evidence that you have not seen that do say philip morris owned a stake in the company, but this question does not ask whether cigarettes made by a company that philip morris had a stake in caused his cancer. the question is: did cigarettes manufactured by philip morris cause his cancer? philip morris did not manufacture those cigarettes, their own expert admitted it. the reason why that is important is because that is the single largest chunk of mr. vila's smoking. that is 15 years out of 25 years of his smoking were in the dominican republic. so the majority of his smoking was of cigarettes not manufactured by philip morris. so when you look at the evidence, and if you have any doubt in your mind about this, because they were suggesting earlier that somehow philip morris made those cigarettes. 2839 if you took notes during the proctor cross-examination, look at toward the beginning of the cross, and you will see it, it is in there, i mentioned it in my opening, so i think you guys were paying attention to it at the time, because i told you in my opening, philip morris did not make those cigarettes, and that is what the evidence is. so we can cross that off. so what do we have here of philip morris-made cigarettes that mr. vila smoked? well, he had the symptoms of his cancer in july of 1993, he came here to the states in december 1989. three and a half years of philip morris-made cigarettes before he got his cancer. that is it. that is it, three and a half years. where is the evidence that three and a half years of smoking is enough to cause laryngeal cancer? where is the evidence? they have the burden of proof. who testified to that? nobody. all -- the only person who addressed it was dr. goodwin, and he said that mr. vila smoked enough cigarettes in his entire life to cause the laryngeal cancer. that is not the issue here. because the dominican 2840 cigarettes do not count, and if he was not smoking marlboros in spain, that does not count either. and even if it was, it was not that much. nobody testified -- they have the burden of proof -- they offered no evidence, no evidence, nobody came here and said, he smoked enough philip morris-made cigarettes to cause lung cancer -- or laryngeal cancer. they have the burden of proof. they offered zero evidence. i asked dr. goodwin about it. because i did not want it just to be there is no evidence, i wanted something affirmative. dr. goodwin admitted that in his practice, and he has been doing it a long time, he has never seen a single case of laryngeal cancer caused by three and a half years of smoking. that is what this issue is. so the answer to this question is "no," not only because they offered no evidence, but because their own expert said that is not enough smoking to cause laryngeal cancer. the fact is cigarettes manufactured by philip morris were not -- are not a legal cause of his cancer. even if you find that smoking was a cause of 2841 his cancer. because it was such a minority of his smoking history. these next questions are similar, so i put them together, and these asked whether mr. vila has proven that he relied to his detriment on a statement made by philip morris, and then it is a little broader below. and i want to focus on that word "statement," because he has to prove that he relied on the statement. what is the evidence on that? well, let me first show you the jury instructions, because they say the same thing. reasonable reliance on a statement. again, i have highlighted or underlined "statement" where it appears because that is important, it is part of the requirement. what reliance means is that mr. vila heard a statement by philip morris and did something that he otherwise would not have done. that he heard a statement and the statement caused him to do something he would not have otherwise done, which in this case means that he would not have smoked. that he heard a statement that caused him to smoke and he otherwise would not have smoked. that is what is at the heart of this issue. 2842 but the evidence is that mr. vila, other than the four warnings that i showed you earlier, he never heard any statements from philip morris. all the statements they showed you that philip morris made in that dr. proctor video were made here in the us. and i asked dr. proctor, "have you seen any evidence that any of those statements made their way to cuba, or spain or the dominican republic?" and he said, "no." every time i asked the question, he said "no." i asked the flip side of it to mr. vila. "when you were living abroad, did you hear any statements by the american tobacco companies, including philip morris?" he said, "no." i said, "well, were you even exposed to american media when you were in spain and cuba and the dominican republic?" he said, "no. yeah, i had tv, but i only got local channels." remember that? "i only got local channels, i did not have cable, i had absolutely no exposure to any statement by any tobacco company." if he has not heard a statement by a 2843 tobacco company, he cannot have relied on a statement by a tobacco company. so what does plaintiff talk about? well, they talk about these ads, these marlboro ads in spain. what are the ads, right? not pictures, not statements. they have to prove statements. pictures. pictures of cowboys, cows, horses and mountains. no statements. no statements. in any event, the judge has instructed you that philip morris has a right to advertise its products, and you may not find liability based on the mere fact that philip morris advertised its products. you are being instructed by the judge that the fact that philip morris advertised marlboro, whether it is here in the us or spain, is not a basis for finding or imposing liability or responsibility on philip morris. so what about the ads? -- and i got ahead of myself. if you are in a car accident and a cop comes up to you and says, "i need a witness statement from you." a witness statement is something you say in words or write in words. 2844 you do not draw pictures. pictures are not statements. pictures of cows and cowboys, and horses and mountains, those are not statements, but those are the only things mr. vila says he saw. he did not see any statements. without seeing statements, he could not have relied on statements. there is absolutely no evidence of any statement by philip morris or another tobacco company that mr. vila heard, much less influenced him. and the advertising is not statements. we asked mr. vila this in his deposition; this is where he tried to change his testimony at trial: "do you believe that any tobacco company withheld information from you that would have affected your smoking decisions?" his answer was: "no, sir." this gets at the reliance point of it. if he did hear a statement, he still has to prove that because he heard the statement, he did something that he would not have done, or that the statement concealed information to him that would have made a difference. and he testified straight up: "they never withheld any information that would have made any difference 2845 to me." actions, again, speak louder than words. so ask yourself this: when mr. vila says he got the information that they are saying would have made a difference and caused him not to smoke, what happened in the real world? you do not need to speculate about what he would have done if he had heard some statements that he never heard, just ask what he did in the real world when he did get the information. because if this information made some difference to him, he would have at least tried to quit smoking, right? but you saw this. you heard this. whenever it was he learned about his uncle's lung cancer, that happened in the 1950s, whenever it was he learned about it, he did not try to quit smoking. so that information, obviously, was not important to him and was not going to cause him to do anything he did not want to do. his mother told him not to smoke so much. he does not say when it was; the only time he is living with his mother is in spain. but, again, he does not try to quit smoking when his 2846 mother says, "do not smoke so much, you might get sick." his friends talked to him about his smoking. what does he do? does he say, "oh my gosh, smoking is bad for me? i'm not going to do it anymore, i'm going to try to quit"? no, he keeps on smoking, he does not try to quit. he saw the warnings on the pack, on his trip here in 1978, he did not try to quit smoking. he saw the warnings in 1989 when he moved to the us. he did not try to quit smoking. he was told about his godfather's heart attack when he came to the us. he did not try to quit smoking. that is all conclusive proof that the information they say was withheld from mr. vila would not have made one lick of difference to him, because when he acknowledges he got the information, he did not do anything different. it did not matter to him then either, and it would not have mattered to him at any time. mr. vila's attitude is best summed up by what he said is a joke, which is: "if i get sick from smoking, just bury me in a marlboro truck." that is what he would tell his friends and 2847 family when they would tell him not to smoke so much. that indicates he knew smoking caused disease that could kill him, and that he was willing to take the risk, because he wanted to smoke. and that he was not feeling like he was a victim or an addict or somebody who was doing something he did not want to do. somebody who feels like that does not joke about being in a marlboro truck. you joke about being buried in a marlboro truck if you are comfortable with what you are doing, you know the risks and you are willing to make the tradeoff. and that is who mr. vila was. so on both of these questions, number 3 and 4, i submit to you these are the easiest questions to decide in the case because there is absolutely no evidence that any statement by a tobacco company ever reached mr. vila, much less that it caused him to do something that he otherwise would not have done. these are both nos here. now i want to turn to the percentage of fault. and you have seen these already, but let me talk about some of the issues here. our position is that mr. vila is one hundred percent 2848 responsible for the choices and decisions he made in life and also one hundred percent responsible for the consequences of those decisions. the fact is, is that philip morris did not influence or control in any way mr. vila's smoking; mr. vila was in charge of that. he made the decision to start smoking, and he smoked all those years without trying to quit. that was his decision and his choice. one of the biggest issues here, factual issues for you, i submit, on this responsibility question and also on the next question relating to damages, is the fact that after mr. vila had those radiation treatments, he never went back to his doctor to see whether they got all the cancer. he never followed up on that. and i'm going to go through all the evidence on that in a minute. the overall point is mr. vila is responsible not only for his smoking, but he is also responsible for not going back to the doctor when the doctor said to come back. now, you have heard a lot on this. this is the medical record when mr. vila's done with his radiation. this is the record from 2849 june 22nd, 1994. mr. kaiser called this a follow-up visit. it was not a follow-up visit. this was the end of the radiation. we know it is not a follow-up visit because at the bottom, it says: "the patient has tolerated the treatment and we have given him a return appointment for one month." it is hard to read from there. so his cancer doctor says come back in a month. that is going to be a follow-up. and he also says: "go see dr. de cardenas before returning here." dr. de cardenas is mr. vila's ent, the ear, nose and throat doctor. so his cancer doctor tells him right at the end of the radiation, "come back in a month and also see your ent." now, we know, not only from the medical records but mr. vila's testimony, that he did not follow up. this was on one of those supposed half truth boards, i guess they were claiming, i was telling you, a half truth about this, that mr. vila never followed up. and on their board, the way they -- the part i supposedly left out is i did not talk about the two blood tests he had later in the year. 2850 there is no evidence that those blood tests had anything to do with his cancer. in fact, the follow-up, what you have heard from the doctors is, the follow-up would have involved putting a scope down his neck, not blood tests, put a scope down his neck to look if the lesion was gone. they put up the blood test because they are the only medical records they could find after this period of time, and they are claiming that is the follow-up. there is no evidence that is the follow-up. in fact, i asked their expert, dr. goodwin, i said: "you have looked at the medical records and you did not see any medical records suggesting he went back to his doctor." and dr. goodwin agreed with that. so whatever these blood tests are, dr. goodwin did not think it was a follow-up either. so let us look at the key record here that you have seen any number of times. we have typed it up there so you do not have to read the handwriting. and it says: "44-year-old found to have vocal cord squamous cell cancer, 1993." 2851 now, i want to pause there because mr. kaiser, ever since i put this document up, he has gone to great lengths to suggest there is something incorrect about it, right? he points to 1993 and tries to browbeat mr. vila yelling at him into saying, "no, my cancer was in 1994, not 1993." this is mr. vila relating this to the doctor when he was applying for disability. mr. vila says 1993 because that is when his cancer first arose. that is when he had the hoarseness, 1993. then it says surgery in 1994. that is when he had the biopsy. and mr. vila says, yes, that is what he considered to be the surgery, 1994. then it says: "noncompliant with follow-up care." then in 1996, he developed a recurrence and had a laryngectomy. now, this morning mr. kaiser suggested to you that this was a doctor evaluating him for disability, and those doctors do not want anybody to get disability, so he is going to write anything down. 2852 the question is: did the doctor just make this up, or is this what mr. vila told his doctor? did he tell that doctor: "i did not go back after my radiation; i did not follow up and then the cancer came back worse and i had to have all the surgery on my throat"? you do not have to guess about that because i actually asked mr. vila that question. and i do not know why there is a suggestion somehow that this medical record is wrong and mr. vila went to follow up when mr. vila admits that he is the one who told his doctor, this doctor in 1994, that he had not complied with the doctor's order to follow up. this is what i asked in cross-examination: "did you tell him" -- referring to that doctor who wrote the report we were just looking at -- "did you tell him that you had not complied with the doctor's orders to follow up after your radiation in 1994?" answer: "yes, sir." this idea that mr. vila somehow followed up and the doctor got it wrong. mr. vila said -- he admitted he did not go back to his doctor in 1994. whose responsibility was it 2853 for mr. vila to go back to his doctor when his doctor said, "we have given you radiation, we are not sure if we have the cancer, come back to make sure we got it all or else something worse can happen"? was it his doctor's fault that he did not go back? no. was it philip morris' fault that mr. vila did not go back to his doctor? no. we all have a responsibility to look after our own health. mr. vila did not go back. at first mr. vila said: "well, i did not have the money." then you heard, "well, he was not fired from his job, he quit his job." and he got this inheritance from his father, and he could have asked his family for money. and i pointed out all of this dominican republic travel to him and said: "could not you have just not gone on one or two of those trips and used the money to go back to the doctor?" and then he said something different, it was no longer i did not have the money, he admitted what the truth is, and this is what he said: "i did not want to go back to the doctor." we all get to make those choices in our 2854 life. if you do not want to go back to the doctor because you are worried what the doctor is going to say, that is your prerogative. but if you do not go back to the doctor, when the doctor says, "i do not know if i've gotten all the cancer, we need to follow-up," if you do not go back to the doctor then, it is your responsibility. and the consequences of not going back to the doctor are your responsibility. what would have happened if he had gone back to the doctor? if he had gone back to the doctor, there is no way to know for sure what would have happened, because he did not do it. but you remember dr. goodwin testified that in 1994 when he had the radiation, the alternative treatment would have been to remove, through surgery, just remove that lesion. and if they had done that, mr. vila would have been a little hoarse, because he would have been missing part of a vocal cord, he still would have had the left one, he would have still been able to breathe through his nose and throat and taste everything, and he would not have the stoma. 2855 the evidence in this case from the medical doctors is after the radiation, the tumor was smaller. so if it is smaller and they had detected it, they could have done that same surgery if mr. vila had followed up. if he had gone back to the doctor, like the doctor said, and the doctor had seen the tumor there, they could have removed it surgically, and mr. vila would not have any of the problems he has today. those problems come not from philip morris, not from his doctors, but from mr. vila not going back to his doctor; and that is mr. vila's responsibility. and i asked mr. vila -- this was at the end of the afternoon when i was cross-examining him -- one of the first days we were getting into live witnesses. and i asked him: "do you accept any responsibility either for not going back at all, or if you went back once, for not going back after that? do you accept any responsibility for that?" he admitted: "yes, sir." he has all the responsibility for that. that is one hundred percent his responsibility. and i 2856 also asked him about his feelings of depression and sadness. and, essentially, i asked him: is not this why you are really depressed, because you realize, you realize that if you had gone back -- if you had just followed your doctor's orders, you think none of this, meaning the throat surgery, the removal of the vocal cords, not being able to breathe through his mouth and nose, none of that would have happened if only you had gone back, is that why you feel the way you feel? i think this was the last question and answer that day and it was: "i calculate, yes." so mr. vila -- they are denying he has substantial responsibility in this case -- mr. vila, himself, admits that he feels responsible for what has happened to him. and the fact is, he is responsible for it. he should have gone back to the doctor. he did not go back. he did not want to go. i'm not faulting him for that, that was his prerogative and his choice, and he has had to live with the consequences of it, but he is responsible for it. and he is the only one who is responsible 2857 for it. and because mr. vila is responsible for his smoking, not quitting sooner, smoking as much as he did for how long he did, and also because he just did not want to go back to the doctor, everything that they are claiming damages for is his responsibility, one hundred percent responsibility on mr. vila if you get that far on the verdict form. now, i want to talk about damages. and i think the number they picked, maybe one of the middle numbers they want you to award mr. vila, $20 million, $20 million for making the choice to smoke, not ever trying to quit, not going back to the doctor, you get $20 million for that? $20 million if the average family of four in florida makes an annual salary of $50,000, you would have to work 400 years to get $20 million. 400 years. that is what they are asking for. that is an absurd amount of money, particularly in light of the facts of this case, when mr. vila is the cause of all of his injuries. and they have talked in this case about mr. vila's depression. and i submit to you 2858 that most of mr. vila's mental health issues have nothing to do with his cancer. this is a long list, but this is the list i went through with dr. seely. the list of reasons why mr. vila has gotten counseling. they are all in defense exhibit rrr -- i know it is hard to see, but if you wanted to look, you would see he is gotten counseling -- these are all things that have nothing to do with his cancer. he is had counseling for a falling out with his sister, he had counseling because he believes his sister cheated him out of his inheritance, his mother's inheritance, his mother's death, he got counseling for that. and i think if you look at mr. vila's demeanor, you can see that the single most thing that has gotten him choked up during trial is a discussion of his relationship with his sister and his mother's death. and i submit to you those are the major causes of his sadness and his depression. he is felt isolated from his family. the list goes on and on and on. but one of the counseling sessions was when hurricane wilma came through and his power went out, and he got counseling for that. you 2859 may be asking yourself, why is mr. vila getting all of this counseling? one of those reasons is because he is on disability for depression. and you heard testimony that you have to be examined by doctors and mental health professionals to get disability for depression. if mr. vila does not go to counseling and does not see psychiatrists, he does not get the money for depression. and so mr. vila, to get the money for depression, has to go to these counselors. and if the thing that is on his mind is the power went out after hurricane wilma, then that is what he is going to talk about. but you can scour those mental health records that are in evidence, and what you will see is he has a lot of reasons he is getting this mental health treatment, and they have nothing to do with his cancer. really, i think, the most compelling testimony on this comes from his cousin, right? they brought his cousin in to be the before-and-after witness on his mental health situation. she is talked and spent a lot of time with mr. vila, she is his closest relative here in the us, his confidant, they spend hours 2860 talking, they have had many late nights together. and what did she say when she testified? she is in the best position, right? "in all the times that you have spent with mr. vila, you have not actually observed him being depressed, have you?" "depressed? no, i have not. i have seen him very sad." "in fact, mr. vila has never told you that he was depressed, has he?" "no, ma'am." so this claim about mr. vila and his depression, i do not doubt there is evidence that he is getting counseling, that he is sad over many things; but i would suggest to you that the claim of his depression has been greatly exaggerated, and that is why we have gone to great lengths to talk about his travel. i do not fault mr. vila in any way for traveling. if it makes him feel better or he enjoys vacations, he enjoys going to other countries, good for him. but why travel is so important is because their dr. seely came in, and dr. seely said he has severe depression. and notice during their 2861 direct examination, they did not ask dr. seely, "well, what does that actually mean in terms of his life to have severe depression?" they did not ask that, but i asked him that. and dr. seely said: "well, mr. vila's severe depression means he has difficulty going outdoors, he has difficulty being seen by others, being in a community setting, socializing with friends and strangers, and he really is not able to go out and about or function." what did dr. seely never see? what had he never seen before he offered that testimony? mr. vila's passport. they did not give it to him. so this man comes in here and says, this guy, mr. vila cannot get out of the house, he cannot function, he cannot go outside, he cannot be in a community setting; all these times traveling around the caribbean and spain, he is done exactly that. he is done exactly that. dr. seely's image, what he was describing mr. vila as is not mr. vila. we know this is mr. vila's real life because you only get these stamps when you leave the country and come back in. so what has mr. vila's real life been 2862 like? it is not the life dr. seely described. it is a life of flying back and forth to the dominican republic, costa rica, and spain in the back, more trips to the dominican republic, back to costa rica, to cancun, to the bahamas, a bunch of times to the bahamas, back to the dr and to the cayman islands, to spain, to the dominican republic, to the bahamas again, dominican republic, dominican republic, spain, and so on. that is not the picture of somebody who cannot function in life, who is severely depressed. now you heard earlier that: "well, mr. vila travels to the dominican republic so often because it is therapeutic for him, he gets to be with his family." what about the bahamas? we have not heard about any family members living in the bahamas. is he going there to be with family or is he going to the beach? what about cancun? we have not heard about any relatives living in cancun that give him therapy when he is there. is he going to see family members or is it vacation? i'd asked 2863 the same question about the cayman islands. so the idea that he is traveling therapeutically, because of his depression, just does not fly. this man is able to go out and about and do things, he is been able to be here for three weeks, 9 to 6 p.m -- your honor? [#deleted recess#] mr. mccarter: thank you, your honor. just a couple more points on the travel, and i hope i have not spent too much time on it. but i showed you these boards during my opening statement. i will just put them right here. remember i said in my opening statement, you can use his passports as physical evidence like you are a detective to see, well, did the depression really stop him from doing the things that he wanted to do in life. and what you will see when you do that is there are two interruptions in his travel. he is gone on 49 different trips since his throat surgery, 49 different international trips to five or six or seven different countries. what you will see is there is a break in his travel right here, july 8, 1997. that is the first one. there is another one around 2003. so the question is: did his depression, did that stop him from traveling just as he was 2865 traveling before? the answer to that question is no. you may remember i asked mr. vila about his disability, when he applied for disability. and the reason he stopped traveling between july 8th, 1997, and march 14th, 1999, the reason he stopped traveling during that period of time is he was applying for disability benefits. he submitted his application in august of 1997, so as soon as he got back from costa rica he applied for disability, he had to get examined by doctors, interviewed with people at the social security office, filled out a bunch of paperwork, and they denied him disability initially because they said, "you can work. you might not have your full voice, but you can talk so you can work at a job that does not require you to talk." then he reapplied after the denial and he added depression to his application. and then he got analyzed and had to spend another year or so applying for disability. this time he got evaluated by mental health professionals, saw other doctors, interviewed with people, filled out paperwork. he eventually was given 2866 disability for depression. and as soon as he was cleared for disability and started getting the payments, what did he do? he started traveling internationally again. so the break you see, the first break in the travel you see has nothing to do with him being too depressed to travel and has everything to do with having to fill out paperwork and see doctors and meet with people to try to get disability. as soon as he was cleared for disability, he went right back to the same lifestyle from before, and went traveling around the caribbean, the bahamas, dominican republic, cayman islands and so on. the second break in his travel happens around 2003, and then he does not travel as much after that. and you remember that that is when his mother dies, in 2003, and he did not inherit the money that he thought he was going to inherit. and his mother had been funding his lifestyle and his travel before 2003, when she passed away. and he did not get any of the inheritance; he did not have any money to travel anymore. not -- he was not too depressed to 2867 travel, it was just he did not have the source of money he had before. so even with the condition that he is in, with the throat surgery and the stoma and not being able to breathe through his mouth and nose, not being able to taste, which i submit to you is one hundred percent his responsibility because he did not go back to the doctor, even with that condition, he has still been able to live much of the same lifestyle that he did before. and that goes directly to this issue of damages, because what they are claiming damages for, really, was the surgery in '96, which was a consequence of his failing to go back to the doctor; and this, what they called the severe depression that dr. seely says makes this guy not be able to go outside the house or function, even though he is been here every day for three weeks. so on this question of damages, if you get that far on the verdict form, if you do not answer the earlier questions no, like i've talked about, if you do not assign him 100 percent at fault, that is the answer on the 2868 question for damages. this is not a case in which any money should be awarded to mr. vila at all. the last question on this case asks whether you find by clear and convincing evidence that punitive damages are warranted against philip morris. mr. kaiser talked about this. what they want you to do is come back next week for more testimony by witnesses so they can get more money. that is what they are asking for here, more money, not this time for compensation but to punish philip morris. and there is absolutely no reason, no reason at all, why you should do that. this has a higher standard of proof: clear and convincing evidence. so they have the burden of proof on everything. on the other issues it is the greater weight of the evidence. here it is clear and convincing evidence. what they have to prove, by clear and convincing evidence, they have to prove that there should be punishment, and the evidence of that has to be precise, explicit, lacking in 2869 confusion, and of such weight that produces a firm belief or conviction without hesitation about the matter at issue. i submit to you they have not offered any evidence that would warrant punitive damages or any compensation or any liability in this case, much less clear and convincing evidence of it. and this is in evidence here, you know from the evidence that the dangers of smoking have been widely publicized for decades; that philip morris has included warnings on every pack of cigarettes it has sold in the united states for 49 years. and every pack of cigarettes mr. vila smoked had a warning on it. the world is different today in 2015 than it was in 1950s and 1960s and 1970s, which is where the bulk of the evidence that dr. proctor talked about occurred. there is no longer -- there has not been television advertising for cigarettes in 44 years. there has not -- philip morris stopped -- they voluntarily stopped advertising in magazines. there are no celebrities in ads or athletes in ads, there is no sponsorship in sports. it is a different world today than the world that dr. proctor 2870 talked about decades ago, and there is simply no justification in this case for awarding mr. vila more money -- this would be more money on top of the $20 million they want you to award. there is no justification for awarding him any money, much less more money for punitive damages. you get this far in the verdict form, the answer ought to be no. now, i want to talk about one last thing, and i've mentioned this, but this is the instruction on burden of proof. and why this is so important, it is so important because they have the burden of proof. they have to prove to you all of the things that what they need to prove to get money. they have to prove to you that his smoking -- that his cancer was caused by smoking, not hpv. they have to prove to you that he was addicted to cigarettes. they have to prove to you that his addiction, not his voluntary choice to smoke, was the legal cause of his cancer. they have to prove to you that that three and a half years of smoking philip morris-made cigarettes was enough to cause laryngeal cancer. they have to prove that 2871 mr. vila heard a statement by philip morris or another tobacco company and relied upon it. that is their burden of proof. we have to prove nothing. we have to prove nothing. they have to prove their case and they have not done it. it is their burden and they have not met it. they did not prove that his cancer was caused by smoking. dr. gomez told you that yesterday, she cannot tell. she was brought in for the expressed purpose of rebutting dr. felix to prove to you that smoking was the cause and not hpv, and she said she cannot tell. dr. felix told you he was one hundred percent certain it was caused by hpv. they have not proved that mr. vila was addicted to nicotine. even under dr. seely's test where you need four and only four factors during a 12-month period, they do not even meet that, because they only have three during a 12-month period. and you heard from dr. ticknor that dr. seely's test is not the real test anyway, and there is been no evidence, no proof that mr. vila was addicted. they did not prove he smoked enough philip 2872 morris-made cigarettes, the three and a half years here in the us, to cause laryngeal cancer. they did not prove that he heard or relied on a statement by philip morris or another tobacco company. the evidence is clear, he heard no statements, he is admitted as much. and, finally, really what this case is about, is about responsibility, and mr. vila is one hundred percent responsible for the choices and decisions he made. he made the choice to start smoking, to smoke for as long as he did, to not quit sooner, to not quit until he was already diagnosed with cancer. and he made that important choice which has led to everything that has followed in his life. that important choice not to go back to the doctor when the doctor said come back within a month. he made that choice not to look out for his health, his cancer came back, he had to have throat surgery, which did not have to happen if only he had come back like his doctor said. so when you -- i'm about done talking. mr. kaiser gets to go next for a few minutes for rebuttal. he has the last word because he 2873 has the burden of proof. i will not have an opportunity to get up and respond to whatever it is he says. i do not know what it is going to be and i will not have a chance to respond, but i hope you have seen during this trial that when you have heard things from one side and you have heard things from the plaintiff's side, there has always been a response, and that has taken the response for you to see the whole story. i do not get the opportunity to do that this time, but i would ask you to consider what the response might -- mr. kaiser: objection. the court: overruled. mr. mccarter: to consider what the responses might be to his -- what you hear from him. be." mr. kaiser: objection as to "what might the court: overruled. mr. mccarter: i appreciate your time. i am about done talking. you are the ones who get to talk last, through your verdict form. and when you go in that room to deliberate, i'd ask you to look at the evidence and your final word 2874 to be a verdict for my client, philip morris. so on behalf of myself and ms. soto over there and juan who has been helping us out the whole time, i really appreciate your attention. we have kept you here much longer than we probably should have, but you have been a great jury. thank you very much.