mr. kaiser: may it please the court, counsel, ladies and gentlemen of the jury, good morning. the jury: good morning. mr. kaiser: what i'm going to do in my summation is to summarize the evidence that you have heard, the testimony that you have heard, and i'm going to address each of the questions on the verdict form. before i get to that i want to address another issue, and that is the need to please consider all of the evidence and all of the testimony. and i ask you that for one reason. because during this trial, there were certain half truths that came to light. what do i mean by that? let me show you by way of examples. these are really nonissues. when jose vila was testifying, you heard testimony and you heard questions that were asked: when did jose quit. there was an issue. was it 1994? was it 1996? you know what, it really does not matter. because even if jose vila was smoking today, he could still be addicted to the nicotine in the cigarettes according to the criteria for tobacco-use disorder. but be that as it may, the defense pressed hard. they even showed jose a record from the hospital where it said he quit smoking in 1994. then they showed you a deposition where it says "stopped smoking in 1994." but what they did not show you were the several medical records that said he stopped smoking in 1996. what they did not show you was the supplemental interrogatory response that they received where it said he stopped smoking in 1996. what jose vila testified to adamantly was that he stopped smoking in 1996. how does he know? he might not be that clear about dates, but he is clear about the fact that it was several months before his surgery that resulted in his larynx being taken out. now, do not you think he might know how soon before surgery where he had his larynx taken out that he quit smoking? that is what i mean by half truths. you did not get it all. we had to show you these documents that showed he quit in 1996. we also showed you documents, medical records, that showed that there are mistakes that are made in medical records. you know darn well that jose vila did not say to a doctor on one visit that he was 58 and 56. medical records make mistakes. another nonissue, whether jose vila used smokeless tobacco. that is a complete nonissue in this case. yet, the defense when they questioned jose vila asked him, "did you ever use smokeless tobacco?" and jose vila had no idea even what it was. they showed in the medical records, "it says here you used smokeless tobacco, and you quit using it in december of 1984." what they did not show was a record that we had to show, and it said he never used smokeless tobacco. that is another half truth. so you have to consider the entirety of the testimony and the entirety of the evidence. another example. another nonissue. why is it a nonissue? did jose drink two to three beers daily? there was one medical record where they showed mr. vila where a doctor said he drank two to three beers daily and he smoked a half a pack of cigarettes a day. even the defense's own doctor said alcohol was not a risk factor. it just does not play into it. no one really mentioned it. what happened was, we showed you additional medical records that told you the truth. he uses alcohol socially. he drinks alcohol occasionally. and alcohol he rarely consumes. that is another example of half truths that you saw in this case. that is why you have to consider the entirety, the entire picture. jose's testimony, no, that was totally wrong. did jose follow up with medical care? a compliance issue. the half truth here is a social security doctor's examination of jose vila. number 1, do you really think this doctor that examined jose vila wanted to make sure he got disability payments? of course not. their job is to make sure you are denied disability payments. this is a social security doctor examining jose vila on behalf of the social security administration. we do not know what questions this doctor asked jose vila. we do not know whether jose vila answered or understood the questions. all we know is that there is a sentence that says, noncompliance with follow-up treatment and the date of surgery or date of his diagnosis is wrong in the medical records. i do not mean to demean. i do not mean to disparage. but do you remember this, because we are not sure if jose understood what "compliance" even meant. why do i say that? you will recall it took me 15 minutes for my own client to answer my question as to when he was diagnosed with his cancer. do you remember that? when he said it was late '93, i think it was '93. i showed him the medical record. i said, "jose, the answer is in the second paragraph. it says march of '94." "now, let me ask you: do you remember when you were diagnosed?" he looked and said, "i think it was '93." now, we know he suffers from depression. we do not know how that causes him to think. but you heard him up there struggling to answer that question after 15 minutes when i finally showed him a pathology report. i said, "do you remember a biopsy?" he said yes. he looked, and he said march of 1994. so you see how long it took for the question to register and for him to answer the question. so that is why it is important to consider. they put this document up there to suggest to you he was noncompliant. on the stand i think they even had him say, "yeah, i never went to my doctor." then he said to me, "i went twice." do we even know what jose understands about compliance? we have no idea if he knows what that means. yet, what did we show you? we told you about the medical record. you saw the medical record, that is not listed here, from dr. pomper the radiologist, the oncologist, who did the radiation. he examined him upon completion of the radiation treatment. that is one follow up. and there was no concern at that time. jose vila told you he went to his doctor two subsequent times. and we showed you medical records by way of blood test results on september 6 of '94 and september 20 of '94 and there was never any evidence that there was new cancer. we also -- in response to the defendant's contention that jose vila just ignored his follow-up treatment and just went on a worldwide jaunt to travel around the world what did we show you? in the passport for that year of 1994 after his radiation therapy there was not one instance of travel. that is the half truth. remember, again, when i showed him the passport, his own passport, and i showed him the page and i said, "is there any evidence of you traveling after april of 1994?" he said, "yes, right here. yes." it was the date before april. he did not understand. i showed him again and if you look he says, "no, there is nothing after april of 1994." that is the example of the half truths. you have to consider all of the testimony. something else you have to consider: you think this man got on the stand just to lie to you? if you think that on the first question of the verdict, just say no. just say no. i'm not going to waste your time. you do not need to waste ours. what did jose vila testify about? he offered testimony about his smoking history. his smoking history was confirmed independent of his testimony. when that happens what does that mean? if there is independent verification of what he is told you, it means he told you the truth. how do we establish that? there are medical records that establish how much he smoked and when he smoked. in addition to his testimony. there are other witnesses. his cousin who is related to him came up and said, "i'm not sure how much he smoked, but it was sure a lot." jose vila said, "i used to smoke in bed. i would wake up and smoke. i did it all night." the cousin said, "when i was living with him, i would sometimes get up during the night and i would see jose up. we would talk and he would smoke." that is what i mean by independent verification. so when the man is talking about his smoking history and you can verify it with other testimony, it means one thing: that man was telling you the truth. jose vila testified about his issues with depression. if it is independently verified with other evidence, it means one thing: it means that jose vila told you the truth. we have an inch or 2-inch stack or larger of medical records, behavioral records from psychiatric treatment that diagnosed jose vila with severe depression. independent of jose vila telling you how he felt and how he was depressed and sad means one thing: he told you the truth. we had dr. seely come up on the stand and he himself diagnosed the man with severe depression disorder, independent testimony. what does it mean? he told you the truth. now, they had dr. ticknor on that stand. he did not say one word to dispute whether or not the man was depressed, just like he said he was, which means one thing: maybe the man was not lying to you, because you can verify with independent records and independent evidence. that is what i mean to consider everything and not just the half truths. question number 1: was jose vila addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine and, if so, was such addiction a legal cause of his laryngeal cancer? let us take the issue of addiction first. we had dr. seely testify. dr. seely said, "the definition of addiction is a compulsive use of a psychoactive substance that caused reinforcing behaviors leading to a loss of control over use of the psychoactive substance." that is what he said. that definition was undisputed when dr. ticknor testified, did not touch it. dr. seely said that addicted people, they actually have permanent changes in their brains as a result of that behavior. dr. ticknor testified on behalf of the defense and did not dispute that. dr. seely testified that there is an absolute loss of control such that you lose free will when you are addicted. dr. ticknor testified and did not dispute that. dr. seely testified that there are certain reinforcing behaviors when someone is smoking. dr. ticknor testified and did not dispute that contention. dr. seely testified that there are certain smoking cues that activate the reward centers of the brain, and it is those cues that cause people to smoke. it is those cues that cause people that may have quit for years to all of a sudden pick up a cigarette, do not know why, and smoke it. dr. ticknor testified and did not dispute that. dr. seely took you through the criteria, and he told you and justified why jose vila met many of the criteria. of the 11, he might have met 9 or 10 of them. now, remember, all you have to do to meet the criteria to be suffering from tobacco-use disorder is to meet two, 2 of the 11, that is enough to be classified as suffering from tobacco-use disorder. dr. ticknor, the defendant's own witness, when he went through those criteria and denied, of course, that there was any type of subjectiveness involved came up with four, three, perhaps four criteria that jose vila meets, which means what? he satisfies the criteria for tobacco-use disorder. that is all we have to prove. wait. dr. ticknor says in order to be considered addicted, it has to be a severe presentation where ten percent of the people might fall into that category. but what i read yesterday, what the book that the psychiatrists use about addiction, where dr. ticknor chooses to use addiction to mean only those extreme presentations. it says in the book that: "note that the word 'addiction' does not apply as a diagnostic term in this classification; although, it is in common usage in many countries to describe severe problems related to compulsive and habitual use of substances. "the more neutral term 'substance-use disorder' is used to describe the wide range of the disorder from a mild form to a severe state of chronically relapsing compulsive drug taking. "some clinicians will choose to use the word 'addiction' to describe more extreme presentations. but the word is omitted from the official dsm-v substance-use disorder diagnostic terminology because of its uncertain definition and its potentially negative connotation." so it says some people might choose to use the word "addiction." dr. ticknor falls into that category of being some of those people. but most will not. and most will use "addiction" even if you meet two criteria instead of all of them. it just so happens that dr. seely is one of those who says, as long as you meet the criteria for tobacco-use disorder, that is addiction. we have satisfied that component there. jose vila has been shown to demonstrate tobacco-use disorder addiction. that is number 1. number 2: laryngeal cancer. no one disputes the fact that jose vila suffered from laryngeal cancer. the dispute is whether or not it was caused by smoking or whether it was caused by hpv. dr. goodwin, our first expert we put on, the head and neck surgeon, you remember him. what did he say? hpv for laryngeal cancer is not even an appreciable risk factor. it is that rare for laryngeal cancer; not oral pharyngeal cancer, but laryngeal cancer. dr. goodwin told you that the only times in his 40-year-or-so career that he has seen a laryngeal cancer caused by hpv is in the case of this laryngeal papillomatosis that he talked about that causes warts on the larynx. that is it. dr. goodwin said the only time we see hpv-related cancer, which is in the oral pharynx primarily, the tonsils and the base of the tongue, is with nonsmokers. then you heard from dr. carmen gomez. i'm not going to bring out all the charts with the slides of the pathology. you know why? because it is unnecessary. because when all is said and done this whole idea about koilocytes is not even relevant to the issue of laryngeal cancer. it might be relevant to cervical cancer, dr. felix's specialty. why is not it relevant to laryngeal cancer? you recall what dr. gomez said. first of all, you do not see koilocytes in the cancer of the laryngeal cancer tissue. you just do not see it. sometimes you mistake it. it might look like koilocytes. but what she says is as long as the cancer is keratinizing and well-differentiated, it is never going to test positive for this p16 she mentioned. remember, she even brought in an example. she said, this is the type of tissue that we see with laryngeal cancer every day. it is a well-differentiated sample, she said. she showed you the amount of keratinizing, the amount of keratin being produced. she even tested it for p16, and it was negative. and that is why she said it does not matter if you think you see a koilocyte. if it is a koilocyte, as long as it is keratinizing and well-differentiated, it is not hpv driven. what else did she say? even if you find in a tumor the existence of an hpv infection, it does not necessarily mean in the larynx that the hpv infection caused the cancer. the defense even showed her a study. do you remember? she had not read the study. they asked her, "does not it say there is an association of 25 percent?" then again when they try to ask her, "do not they say it causes 25 percent?" she goes, "no, no, no." she objected. do you remember that? she said, "i object, your honor. can i say that?" she said, "no, association; not cause." then i read to her a couple of passages. one of which was, "small sample size and publication bias complicate the assessment of the prevalence of hpv in head and neck sites beyond the oral pharynx." so you have a selection bias right in this study which makes it unreliable for other sites other than the oral pharynx where you see this type of cancer. what else? "as detection of hpv dna in tumor biopsies alone is not sufficient evidence of causation, molecular biology studies have helped identify a subset of these cancers that may be a consequence of hpv infection. such a subset is mainly found in the oral pharynx, particularly the tonsils." that is what the study shows that the defense relied on when they showed dr. gomez. finally, "however, viral detection in biopsy material alone is not evidence of causation. hpv types that have been well described as lacking the ability to induce neoplastic transformation may be coinfecting the tumor, yet not be causally related to tumorigenesis." and when i read that to her yesterday, she said, "thank you." because that is what she was saying the entire time of her testimony. it does not even matter if the koilocytes exist. it does not matter if there happens to be an hpv infection in a tumor cell. the fact remains when it is well-differentiated and keratinizing, the infection is not causing the cancer; it is the smoking. that was in the laryngeal cancer. it has nothing to do with cervical cancer. she even said, "cervical cancer is different. you see koilocytes in a cervical cancer; 99.9 percent of the time you can rest assured that that disease is caused by hpv. it is different in laryngeal cancer." dr. felix may be a world renowned pathologist, but his specialty is not head and neck cancer. his specialty is cervical and gynecological cancer. dr. felix admitted his area and concentration is gynecological pathology and cytology. that he has a consulting service. that in his consulting service other doctors have tough cases and they send them to dr. felix. 95 percent of these cases are what? gynecological pathology. dr. felix said, "if you look me up on my web site at university of southern california, it is not going to say anything about head and neck cancer." dr. felix admitted when he was first called by a defense attorney to help with a head and neck cancer case in 2009, his response was, "i'm really not an expert in head and neck cancers." so in answer to the question, we have demonstrated to you this was a smoking-related cancer. remember what else, the presentation of this cancer. this cancer that is caused by hpv will arise in the oral pharynx. that is what the testimony was. even dr. felix admitted, "it is primarily found at the base of the tongue and the tonsils." in jose vila's case, it was found in the larynx, which is not the base of the tongue or the tonsils. you heard testimony from dr. gomez. most of the time when these hpv cancers are found, they present with a lump in the neck, and the aspiration of the tumor reveals cancer. what is the first place they do (sic)? they look in the oropharynx. hpv-related cancers are more often in the lymph nodes. and that is where they are found. there is more often lymph node involvement. jose vila in his 1994 cancer and his 1996 cancer, no lymph nodes were involved. inconsistent with hpv-related cancer. there is a better outcome with hpv cancer. jose vila did not have that better outcome because he was treated with radiation in 1994 and he had a recurrent cancer in 1996 that necessitated the removal of his larynx, which i submit to you is not a really good outcome. dr. gomez said with hpv cancer you do not get the recurrence. it does not come back. with smoking-related cancers you see it. and finally, i've been through this, the hpv-related cancers are non-keratinizing and they are not well-differentiated. and jose vila's cancer was well-differentiated and extensively keratinizing. inconsistent with the existence of hpv causing the infection. and dr. gomez said: age? yeah. he was pretty young to get cancer in the larynx, but we see more and more of cancer in the larynx with young people. so in answer to number 1: "was jose vila addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine, and if so, was such addiction a legal cause of his laryngeal cancer?" why is the answer yes? because the fact is, if he was addicted -- if jose vila was addicted, it was his addiction that was causing him to smoke more cigarettes. because if he was not addicted he could put them down at any time he wanted. it was the loss of control that compelled jose to smoke. with jose smoking more cigarettes than he normally would, he was getting more toxins and carcinogens because of the addiction. as a result of these toxins and carcinogens, he developed his laryngeal cancer. if he was not addicted to those cigarettes, he would not have smoked as many cigarettes and would not have gotten sick. and that is why the addiction caused the disease. so in answer to number 1, it is a resounding yes. that jose vila -- addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine was such an addiction -- was a legal cause of his laryngeal cancer, that is a yes. we have demonstrated that jose vila is a class member. so step two, what you get now is to rely on the engle findings for the next question. and the engle findings, as the judge said, establish that cigarettes containing nicotine are addictive. cigarettes cause laryngeal cancer. philip morris usa, inc. was negligent. philip morris placed cigarettes on the market that were defective and unreasonably dangerous. philip morris usa, inc. concealed or omitted material information not otherwise known or available knowing that the material was false or misleading or failed to disclose a material fact concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes or both. that philip morris usa agreed to conceal or omit information regarding the health effects of cigarettes or their addictive nature with the intention that smokers and the public would rely on this information to their detriment. now, the question number 2 then: "was smoking cigarettes manufactured by philip morris usa, inc. a legal cause of jose vila's laryngeal cancer?" jose vila smoked no other cigarettes than marlboro, which were manufactured by philip morris, so the answer is yes because we know now that cigarettes were the cause of jose vila's laryngeal cancer. his addiction was the legal cause. and it follows that the fact that he was smoking philip morris cigarettes, that is the legal cause of his laryngeal cancer. so answer to number 2 is yes. now, there is some suggestion that the cigarettes jose vila was smoking in the dominican republic were not really philip morris cigarettes. there was that subject matter that was raised. there are countless documents in evidence, and i will read in some of those exhibit numbers, but there is one in particular. and i'll put this on the screen for you. and this is a document you will see from 1971. and you will see hugh cullman, george weissman. if you remember dr. proctor's testimony, he mentioned cullman and weissman as being executives of philip morris usa, inc., the defendants here. and routinely you saw those names on documents that dr. proctor testified about. well, what are they talking about here? they are talking about the board of directors for e. leon jimenes in the dominican republic, and they are proposing to make e. leon jimenes a member of the board. why is that relevant? it is relevant because it is the defense's contention that philip morris just gave -- kept their trademarks and allowed this company, the jimenes company, to manufacture and sell their cigarettes in the dominican republic. not the case. this document shows you that that company was owned by philip morris usa, inc. philip morris is saying that from their executives of philip morris usa, inc. and it is philip morris deciding to put on the board of directors leon jimenes. so they own the company in the dominican republic. the bottom line is, the cigarettes that were manufactured and sold in the dominican republic were manufactured in the united states. they are philip morris cigarettes. and they are the same marlboro cigarettes that are manufactured here in the united states and smoked here in the united states. if for a minute, if for a minute philip morris usa, inc. had evidence that there really were not cigarettes that they were making being sold in the dominican republic, they would have brought a representative from their company to say, no, those philip morris marlboro cigarettes were not ours. and they did not do it. so that is a nonissue. and there is other exhibits that you can look at that will demonstrate the same thing. these were marlboro cigarettes manufactured in the united states and sold in the dominican republic, and jose vila smoked them. plaintiff's exhibit 338. plaintiff's exhibit 307. plaintiff's exhibit 231. plaintiff's exhibit 304. plaintiff's exhibit 344. plaintiff's exhibit 355. plaintiff's exhibit 356. plaintiff's exhibit 349. plaintiff's exhibit 353. if you take a look at these exhibits, you will see that the cigarettes that were manufactured and sold in the dominican republic were manufactured here in the united states and sold in the dominican republic under the same cigarettes as jose vila smoked here in the united states when he came here. "question number 3: did jose vila reasonably rely to his detriment on any statement made by philip morris which concealed or omitted material facts not otherwise known or available to him concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes, and if so, was such reliance a legal cause of his laryngeal cancer?" you already have heard the finding, and that is that philip morris concealed material information about the health risk and addictive nature of smoking. that is a finding for you to consider when you are dealing with reliance. now, let us talk about reliance and what does that mean. did jose vila rely on these statements? well, certainly if they withheld information, he could not rely on information that was withheld. but what information did he rely on? remember, dr. proctor testified about this, information bombardment that the tobacco companies were sending out to the public to reassure them that you can keep on smoking until we get to the bottom of this. and that was a sham. that was a fraud. that lasted for 50 years. and it might be the case that jose did not see any of those documents. but do you know what he did see? he saw advertisements. and advertisements contain statements of the tobacco companies. and what were these advertisements saying to jose vila? those advertisements he saw, one of which was for marlboro cigarettes when he was living in spain, were telling him: you will be a part of the crowd. you will be like a cowboy. you will be riding that horse. they glamorized smoking. they normalized smoking. they made it look like it was pleasurable and safe and active instead of telling him the truth because they knew at that time that that stuff is going to kill you. you are going to get addicted to it. and they did not tell him that. and he told you when he testified, i liked those commercials. i related to that cowboy. and he saw other commercials. he saw winston ads. he saw the l&m ads he told you about. that goes to the conspiracy because there were other american manufacturers advertising their product in spain when he was a child. so the question is: did he rely on the information in the ads? and the answer is: of course he did. because he told you, i saw those ads. i remember those ads. i wanted to be like the marlboro man. what did he do? he started smoking marlboro cigarettes. after that first one was offered to him he continued to smoke marlboros. so the question is: well, what would have happened if the truth had been told to jose? what would have happened if when the tobacco companies knew their products were bad, that they could kill you, that they could cause cancer, they told the truth? so that when they were advertising jose vila would have known, these can kill me. so that when they were plugging their cigarettes in all their venues in spain, on billboards, all their advertisements, would have had that warning: these might be addictive. they will be addictive. they will kill you. the question then is: do you think he would have started smoking? we know the answer. he would not have. and how do we know that answer? because jose vila was asked specifically on the stand if he recalls his deposition testimony. it was a straightforward question: "if you knew as a 15 year-old when you first started smoking that first cigarette, if philip morris had told you this could cause cancer, would you have smoked?" and his answer was: "no." that is what reliance means. if he had known of the statements that they did not tell him about, would it have changed his behavior and his decision? and he said, it would have because i would not have smoked. that is what you have going for you. so number 3, the answer is yes. he did rely on those statements. he absolutely relied on those statements and those ads he saw when he was a kid. that is reliance. number 4 is the same answer because it goes to the conspiracy and that he also relied on these statements from the other tobacco companies. he was bombarded with these advertisements. and he remembered seeing these. so number 4: "did jose vila reasonably rely to his detriment on any statement made in furtherance of an agreement to conceal or omit material facts regarding the health effects or addictive nature of cigarettes, and if so, was such reliance a legal cause of his laryngeal cancer?" and the answer, again, is based on the evidence. yes. you are now asked to apportion fault. the question becomes, then, who is more at fault here. and i submit to you, based on the evidence, it is philip morris that bears the brunt of the fault here and not jose vila. and why do i say that? and i'm going to show you by way of a demonstrative. there was a certain question that you need to ask and you need to listen to mr. mccarter's response to those questions to determine fault. and so the first question you need answered is: why does defendant philip morris act as if it does not exist? whey do they act like they do not even exist? why is it all on jose vila? why is it always on jose vila, well, he did not try to quit? jose vila, you did not try doing that. jose vila this. because if they admit that they do exist, they have to admit fault because they took a big -- they played a big role in this. they played a big role in jose vila's decision to start smoking. and they will not address the issue. they will not answer that question: why are they avoiding talking about themselves? listen for that answer. secondly: when the defendant philip morris knew by the '50s that cigarette smoke contained carcinogens and could cause cancer, why did they choose not to tell the public? and jose vila was a member of the public. he was living in spain. they were advertising their cigarettes in spain. why could not they say at the time they were advertising their cigarettes that this is what we know about our product? they had that choice. and they did not make it. and for that we do not take responsibility. that is on them because they had the opportunity long before jose vila started smoking his first cigarette to tell him: these might kill, they might make you addicted. and they did not do it. and for that reason they are at fault unless they can answer that question for you. number three: when philip morris knew by the '50s that nicotine was an addictive drug, why did they choose to not tell the public? same question. long before jose vila started smoking, why did not they just inform? he was part of the public. maybe by the time he had that first cigarette, he would have known. the onus is on philip morris, not jose vila. see how they answer that question. why did the defendant philip morris respond to the strong evidence linking cigarettes to cancer with a campaign designed to create doubt about the health risks and addictive nature of cigarettes for the next 50 years? and you heard dr. proctor when he testified that is exactly what they did. and they created this sham organization. this organization that acted like a front that was going to do all of this legitimate research to get to the bottom of the problem. and they did not do any such thing. they did a whole bunch of research. they had renowned scientists. and they researched everything but smoking and health for 50 years. and they did not answer the question because they wanted to lull smokers to continue to smoke and not to quit. and so why did not they truthfully respond to this evidence at the time that they knew it? they had the choice, and they did not. and it caused people like jose vila to smoke because he was not informed. and for that it is their fault, not jose's. let them answer that question for you. and if they satisfy you, then it is jose vila's fault. see if they do it. when the defendant first knew that it could take enough nicotine -- they could take enough nicotine out of their cigarettes so as not to sustain addiction, why did they fail to take action? why did not they do it -- well back into the '50s when they knew it -- not take every bit of nicotine out, but take enough out so that you could smoke, smoke, smoke and you would not get addicted to their cigarettes. and that is possible to do. and they knew it was possible to do. and they had a choice, and they did not do it. why? because they wanted to addict people. they wanted people to smoke their cigarettes early, often, and for a long time. and that is why they did not do it. and just think if they had done it. if they had done it, things would have changed. but they did not. and the fault is not on jose for that, it is on them. see how they explain that to you. see how they answer that question for you. number six: why did the defendant target youth with its advertising campaign? why do you think so? do you think maybe because young people are more impressionable and do not have the judgment that adults have? do you think maybe that could be it? and see what they tell you about that. see how they answer that question: why they targeted kids like jose vila with their advertisements, with the man on a horse and the winston tastes good. see what they tell you about that. that is not jose's fault that he was being targeted. why did the defendant add ammonia to its cigarettes, including marlboro? remember what dr. proctor said? they started adding marlboro (sic) to change the ph. and what was the effect? it gave smokers that kick from the nicotine. it gave them a kick. dr. proctor even wrote on that, the "secret and soul of marlboro." and it was not that marlboro was selling because of its ads so much as it was for the fact there was ammonia in it, and it was giving smokers that kick. and why did they do that? because they wanted smokers to continue smoking their marlboros for a long, long time. and for that it is their fault and not jose's. and so when you look at jose's fault in this case, what is it? jose vila did everything they wanted him to do. what do i mean by that? he smoked their cigarettes and started young. that is what they wanted. they targeted to youth just like jose. he smoked marlboro cigarettes and smoked them for a long time, just like they wanted him to do. he smoked a lot of cigarettes for a long time, just like they wanted him to do. and the fact that he did everything they wanted him to do -- what are they telling you now? jose, you are an idiot. you trusted us. you should have known well back then we were lying to you. that is what they are saying now. how could he be blamed for that when he did everything they wanted him to do? so what is his fault in this? what is his fault? maybe he did not try hard enough to quit when his doctor in the '90s said: you got to quit smoking. maybe that is his fault or maybe not. and why is that? because even the tobacco industry and the tobacco companies knew, september 9 of 1980, that we cannot defend continued smoking as free choice if the person was addicted. sort of like dr. seely says, that your brain is rewired and changed and you have lost control. and now they want to put fault on jose because he just did not quit early enough. so where is the fault on jose vila? well, the defense is going to tell you he just did not comply. he did not comply with his doctor's orders. and if he did not (sic) comply with his doctor's orders, he would not have gotten the recurrence of cancer. no. that is not true. that cancer came back anyway. it did not matter if he complied or not. the cancer was coming back. and it did. and no one came in and said, only if he had complied early, the tumor would have been smaller. you did not hear that. all you heard was that he had a recurrence of his tumor and it resulted in his larynx having to be taken out. so there is no issue of compliance here because you have not heard evidence by -- anybody called that says jose did not comply, and had he complied he would not have gotten the cancer. who is going to say that? that cancer was coming back. but how about this: how about if jose had not started? that is the main issue here. the issue here is how come he did not quit. the issue is how come they did all that stuff to make him start in the first place. because you know what? if he had not started in the first place, we would not be here today standing before you because of his disease. so we have to look at when he started and why he started. and i've already shown you that the reason being is because of what the defense did. and now they do not want to address that. all they want to address is, why did not jose quit? why did jose trust us? why did not jose believe when he was 15 years old that we were lying to him? so i submit to you, please consider when he started, not when he quit because that is the starting point you need to consider. and they will not address that. they will not address that. so when you come to comparative fault in this case, you have to assign fault. and it is up to you how much to assign fault. and i submit to you that the brunt of the fault lies with philip morris and not with jose vila. and it is up to you. lay 5 percent on him, lay ten percent. but the brunt goes to philip morris based on the evidence in this case. so the answer to number five is whatever you feel. but based on the evidence, it is a resounding larger percentage on philip morris than it is on jose vila. number six is damages. and you heard jose vila testify about his damages. remember, we talk about compensatory damages to compensate jose vila for his disfigurement, to compensate jose vila for his pain, for his mental anguish, for what he is gone through. and what did he tell you? well, in 1994 when he had his surgery, when he had his first treatment with radiation, he told you how painful it was to eat and how there was this terrible burning in his throat. and he went through that for a period of time as a result of his radiation treatments. and he told you what happened when he had this recurrence of cancer where he was short of breath, where he is having pain, where he could not swallow, where he could hardly eat. and when he is diagnosed with his cancer, he had the laryngectomy that resulted in his losing his larynx. and what did he tell you about that, the effect that it is had on him? he told you, among other things, that he used to enjoy going to the beach and swimming. and that was something he did as a kid. and as a result of that surgery he could no longer do that. and he even tried once to go to the beach. and what did he tell you? it was an embarrassment because he has a hole in his throat. let me stop there for a minute. this man's got a hole in his throat. and he is embarrassed because people are going to look at him. now, if a person gets a stain on their tie or on their shirt, a speck, that person is so concerned that they have a stain on their shirt, they do not want to be seen because people are going to notice the stain when, in fact -- when you got a little dot on your shirt, no one's going to notice. but yet the person who is got that spot on their shirt or on their tie is so concerned that someone's going to notice this spot. this is awful. well, jose had a hole in his throat. and you know people are going to notice that. can you imagine what he is thinking, though? what that is doing to him with this hole in his throat? and he could not be around people for that reason. and he was not around people for that reason. and that is why he conceals that hole with these turtle necks. because he is embarrassed. and he should not be because he did not do it to himself; they did it to him. and so he would go to the beach. and he could not do that anymore. because he said he went one time and the sun was bad for him because it caused him pain. and the water splashed. remember, he was sitting with his back to the water and the wave came and some of it went into the stoma and he felt like he was going to die because it is like you are drowning. so he stopped doing that. and what else? jose liked to be with friends. he liked to socialize with friends. all of a sudden his friends did not want to be with him. he would call them and they would want to get together and they would tell them, sure we will get together and they would not call him. and he knew why because he said, when he would go out, he was scared because he thought he had an odor coming from this stoma that would sometimes get congested with phlegm. and he said he would make a sound when he ate because that is the way he had to do it. and he said people were offended. and people would look at him. and he would get embarrassed and was self-conscious about it, and that caused him a lot of concern and a lot of pain. and especially when his friends deserted him. you know, you know who your real friends are when you are going through a tough time. and he learned no on wanted to be with him. and so what did he do? his family would pay for him and he traveled. and he traveled to santo domingo because he said they were the only people that accepted him. and that is what he did. now, the defense wants you to think he just went on a worldwide travel to go on a vacation. now, you did not hear anything of the sort. you heard that he went to the dominican republic. and anywhere he went, it was to visit family because his family was his support. and that is why he was traveling outside the united states. to visit his family. and when i asked him: well, if you were traveling that much to go visit your family, why did not you just move to santa domingo? and what did he say? i'm an american. that is what he said. he was happy when he became a citizen. and that is why he did not move there. and what else? what else do we know has caused jose vila suffering as a result of his laryngectomy? what else do we know? this man has lost the ability to breathe through his nose. this man has lost the ability to breathe through his mouth. this man only has the ability to breathe through a hole in his throat, and that is not fun. this man can no longer smell. this man can no longer taste. this man cannot be out of a room when he is cooking something because he does not know if it is burning. this man does not know if what he is eating is rotten because he cannot taste it. this man cannot keep food in his house because he does not know when it goes bad. this man would not know if he is in another bedroom that there is a fire in the kitchen because he cannot smell. that is some of the limitations he suffers with because he does not have the ability to taste and smell anymore. this man does not sneeze through his nose. he gets a feeling in his nose but it comes out through the hole in his stoma. this man told you there are times when he is sleeping in bed that he gets this congestion and the phlegm actually goes to the ceiling. and that is disgusting. but that is what he has to live with. and that is his pain and suffering. this is a man who lost the ability to speak after he had this surgery. and he took it upon himself to learn how to do it. and how did he learn how to speak? he would pray at nighttime. and he would say words when he would try and belch. and he would say prayers and try and speak. and eventually he did learn on his own to speak. and he said the first time he talked was when a friend was driving and said he did not know whether to turn left or right and jose said, turn left. and the friend said, oh my god. why did he say that? because this was a jovial guy. this was a guy who liked to talk, who liked to socialize, who was the life of the party. and he had learned to talk again on his own. but he suffered a lot of pain. he continues to suffer a lot of pain. and he continues to be embarrassed that he lives this way. and finally, you have seen that this man has been diagnosed with severe depression issues. you got to see him on the stand, how he was able to register questions being asked and to answer questions. and there is a pile of records that talk about his depression. and the defense would suggest, well, he is had all these other stressors in his life that have really caused the depression. it is not the cancer. no. it is these other things, like the loss of his mother. of course that is a stressor. you are going to grieve. other issues involving the relationship with his sister. that again, another example of half truths. what do i mean by that? this is what i mean: they are going to tell you that after his cancer diagnosis he had these various stressors in the medical record: his relationships with his partners, his mother's death, his falling out with his sister over the inheritance from his mother's death, the fact that he was assaulted. and there is others. and yet if you look at the first record when he walked into this behavioral science place to see a psychiatrist, what was he there for? because of his cancer that he had suffered through, because of his stoma and this hole. and that is what dr. seely said was the cause of his major depressive disorder. and no one has disputed that. and you know what else the defense did not bring up that i did? and that was the fact that jose vila went through a lot of stressors before he ever developed cancer. and what types of stressors did he go through before he developed cancer? he moved three times to different countries while he was still in school as a kid. that is enough to be traumatic for a child. his father and brother could not join the family when they moved to spain. that is enough to be traumatic for a kid. his father had two strokes. that is enough to be traumatic to a kid. his father had prostate cancer. that is enough to be traumatic to a kid. his own brother died. that is enough to be traumatic for a kid. he had to leave old friends when he would move and make new friends after moving. that is enough to be traumatic for a kid. he had to leave his old schools and go to new schools after being uprooted in order to move. that is enough to be traumatic for a kid. and yet, not one shred of evidence that, despite these stressors, he was ever diagnosed with any depression issues. and what does that mean? if he was not depressed before his cancer with all of these stressors and he was diagnosed after his cancer when he had the ability to go to a doctor, it means one thing: the depression is a result of his cancer and his suffering even up till today. and so that is another example, ladies and gentlemen, of a half truth. well, so how do you quantify an amount of damages? i cannot write on a piece of paper line by line because we are dealing with pain and suffering. we are dealing with those issues. you have to quantify that. i could suggest something and i will suggest something. you might suggest something otherwise. you might think my suggestion is good. you might not. but i'm going to tell it to you anyway, because it is only a suggestion. what we do in our everyday lives is based on one thing: time. units of time. that is why we all wear watches. we are all driven by time. we make sure to get our seven or eight hours of sleep. we make sure to do our eight hours on the job. people go to school and courses are divvied up into hours, a three-hour class, a four-hour class. a 15-minute quarter in a football game. a 20-minute period in a hockey game. everything we do is guided by time. people go to work every day. they get paid by the hour, some more than others. athletes get paid zillions of dollars to perform their job. they like their job. they entertain the public. they get done with their job, they rest up for the next game which could be the next day depending upon the sport. or the next week. they do it because they want to. they do it because they are good at it. teachers, they help kids. they are trained. they go to school to be able to learn how to do their job. they do their job. they go and teach these kids, and they give their time. they come home after work. that is what they do. they get paid. they may get paid $20, $30 an hour, but they do their job and like doing their job. and then they get time off for the summer before they go back to school again. expert witnesses do their job. they come into the courtroom, they testify. they do what they have to do. they go out and they wait for the next job. that is what they do. lawyers do their job. lawyers get paid. lots of them get paid handsomely. they get trained. they like their job. they do their job, they want to do their jobs well. what does it all mean? it means that philip morris gave jose vila a job. philip morris gave jose vila a job, and his job was to suffer as a result of losing his larynx. that was the job they gave him. now, this was not a job that he was trained for. this was not a job he asked for. this was not a job he applied for. this was not a job he or anyone in the universe would want. this was not a job that has any retirement. this is a full-time, 24-hour a day job that never goes away until you die. that is the type of job that philip morris gave jose vila. the question then becomes: how much is that worth? what is an hourly rate for a job such as that, that no one on the face of the earth would want? so i have a suggestion. i have a range. a low range, a medium range and a high range. mr. mccarter: i'm going to object, your honor. that is an improper basis for calculating damages. the court: overruled. mr. kaiser: you can consider it any way you want, but this is how it is divided. this is a man who has suffered for 20 years. and if you take the low range and assign the rate of $75 an hour for his suffering for 24 hours a day for the number of days that encompass 20 years, you arrive at that figure: $13,140,000. if you take the medium range at $100 an hour, 24 hours times the same number of days for 20 years, you arrive at $17,520,000. if you go to the high range, $125 an hour for his suffering, for his disfigurement, for his anguish, at 24 hours for the same numbers of days, you arrive at $21,900 (sic). so there is a low range, there is a mid range, there is a high range. you might accept that suggestion; you might want to calculate it as ever you want to do it. now, there are future damages. he is healthy now; he does not have cancer. but he will suffer every day because he still has this hole. that is up to you to decide, whether you want to calculate it the same way. however you want to do it. i stopped with today, 20 years. the next question that you are asked: is under the circumstances of this case state whether you find by clear and convincing evidence that punitive damages are warranted against philip morris. compensatory damages deal with what this man, jose vila, has gone through. punitive damages deal with the conduct that philip morris only, in the conduct of what they did in order to deter others, and to punish them. philip morris. so the eye is on philip morris when you consider punitive damages and whether we are entitled to punitive damages. and by way of a board there are some examples of why we are entitled to punish philip morris for their actions. and this is repetitive in a way. but number 1: they knew by the early '50s that cigarettes caused cancer, and they failed to tell the public. they failed to tell the public. now, why is that? that is not acting by accident. that is intentional. they made the choice. do you remember, dr. proctor testified. when they decided to form this agreement, this conspiracy at the plaza hotel in december 14 of 1953, it was not because of safety and health concerns. it was not for that at all. it was because the bottom dollar, their sale prices, their stock prices were falling. that is why they decided to do that. so they knew by the early '50s that cigarettes caused cancer. and they had a choice: do we come clean with the public and are we honest with them, or do we conceal that? we know what they did. they concealed it. they knew by the early '50s that nicotine was addictive. they failed to tell the public. that is not by accident. that was intended. we know it was intended because you heard dr. proctor's testimony. they knew despite knowledge of the health risks and addictive nature of cigarettes, they continued to advertise and glorify and normalize cigarettes. so in all these cigarette ads that they showed billions of people -- we know they reached billions, because remember the ftc report from 1967 that dr. proctor was asked questions about. and he read to you some of those figures. that billions of people saw their ads, including jose vila. so despite their knowledge of the health risks they continued to glorify, to normalize, to show people in movies smoking cigarettes. and this is what they did by their advertisements on billboards, on tv, in newspapers, in magazines, on public transportation, skywriting. anywhere you could imagine they continued to advertise without one time saying, "these will kill you. these are going to addict you." remember, we showed you a document in response to the 1964 surgeon general's report. and a representative, an executive from philip morris, what do they want to do? they wanted a psychological crutch and reassurance to keep people smoking. they wanted to come up with a crutch that people would not stop. that was not by accident. that was intentional. when this conspiracy was formed it was formed because of concerns over losing money from the decrease in cigarette sales. i have already told you that. they targeted youth. see, this is all examples of reprehensible conduct for which they should be punished. they targeted young people. they targeted kids. they wanted kids to start out young. remember, dr. seely said, "young kids, their brains are not yet fully developed. young kids, they are more susceptible to getting addicted. young kids, they are more susceptible to having trouble stopping smoking." that is what these defendants were doing. philip morris was targeting these kids. for that they should be punished. these kids that do not have the judgment skills to be able to decide one way or the other rationally what to do. and they were targeting them. they wanted them to smoke. and he bit hook, line, and sinker into what they wanted him to do. for that they should be punished. 50 years of lying to the public about the health risks of smoking. 50 years, not a day. 50 years they went on this campaign to make sure that people kept smoking their cigarettes. and all the time that they were denying this jose vila still saw their statements by way of their advertising. he still saw that. you heard the astronomical number of deaths caused by cancer and other diseases because of smoking. the tobacco companies, philip morris, knew people were dying. they continued to keep that from the public. they knew people were dying. they continued to try and create doubt so that people would not quit and continue smoking their cigarettes. that is intentional. that is reprehensible. for that they should be published. as dr. proctor said, this was one of those world's most deadly conspiracies. for that, ladies and gentlemen, to deter future conduct and to punish, philip morris should be punished and you should find, yes, you are entitled to punitive damages. i'm going to sit down now. but i just ask that you consider the testimony in this case you have heard, the evidence in this case you have heard, and compensate jose vila for his loss. punish philip morris for their intentional acts and reprehensible conduct. thank you. mr. kaiser: what i want to do is to respond but in reverse order to what mr. mccarter talked to you about. and the first thing is talk about absurdity. the fact that mr. vila somehow has a hundred percent responsibility, that is the absurdity. and why is that? because, as dr. proctor said, they, philip morris, the most deadly conspiracy -- and they were a part of it -- in the world, that those folks, philip morris, lied to the public for 50 years; and for that, they do not take any responsibility. it is all on mr. vila. that is what is absurd about that argument. the burden of proof. there is no magical concept of this burden of proof. the burden of proof that we have in this case is: are we more likely right than wrong? simple. by the 2875 greater weight of the evidence, those scales of justice, just a little bit past fifty percent, that is all it is. it is not beyond reasonable doubt, all doubt, shadow of a doubt; it is a greater weight of the evidence. a low standard of proof. now, i just want to talk about some other things that mr. mccarter raised. this idea that carmen vila said that her cousin was not depressed. carmen vila will tell you, she is not an expert. she said she was not an expert. we have had expert witness testimony tell you that mr. vila suffered from depression, he was diagnosed with depression, not just by dr. seely, but if you look at those mental health records, you will see several instances when he was diagnosed with major depressive disorder. that is a non-issue. the fact that dr. seely testified that the type of depression mr. vila has. he talked in terms of he is not comfortable in social situations, he is not comfortable with strangers. he did not say he was inside living under a bed. and he was specifically asked: "how would 2876 he react? how would he be able to go to an airport? would he be able to go to an airport and get his ticket and go on an airplane?" he would be able to do all of those things. and remember when i talked to dr. seely about, how about his expectation of going to visit his family? and he said that was therapeutic for him. that was something that would have helped him. so that, ladies and gentlemen, is a non-issue. this idea that mr. vila did not comply, he did not follow up with his treatment. well, i submit to you that if instead of lying to the public for 50 years, when philip morris first knew that their product could kill, they should have told people, like jose vila, at the time when he was a kid, and maybe he would not have started, and then we would not be up here talking about compliance or not complying. so when they want you to put one hundred percent of responsibility on jose vila because he could not comply, you need to go back and say, wait a minute, you did not tell him when you first knew the stuff was bad, and maybe he would not have smoked; and like jose said on the 2877 stand, if he knew, he would not have smoked. that is what he said. they had this quote, mr. mccarter put this quote on the screen about the fact that mr. vila's compliance or his failure to comply was the whole basis of his depression, and that long question, what was the response by mr. vila? "i calculate, yes." what does that mean? did he understand the question? does he know what comply or not comply means? and, finally, if you look at all of these psychiatric records -- and i pointed this out during the trial. if you look at all of those records, you will not see one entry in the hundreds of times that mr. vila went for psychiatric treatment where he said: "i really feel depressed because i did not comply with my follow-up care." that is nowhere to be found. that is a red herring. that is a non-issue. and, again, what would have happened if mr. vila did not comply? does that mean the cancer just would not have come back? the cancer was coming back whether he complied or not. that is just the fact of cancer. it came 2878 back. and not because mr. vila did not comply, it is not the cancer saying, "well, mr. vila did not comply, i'm going to come back." that is ridiculous. he got cancer. now, let me ask you this: do you think for a minute when the radiation oncologist had treated him with radiation therapy for 33 treatments over 50 days, that he would just decide at some arbitrary point, okay, we are going to end this treatment, you can go home now and you are fine? or maybe, just maybe, they would have been able to quit the treatment on the 33rd day because they checked him out and said, you know what, there is no more tumor, you are fine. why on earth would a physician, an oncologist, tell him: go on your merry way, we have just decided there is no more treatment left? if there was any hint of a tumor in his larynx, they would have zapped him with more radiation, do not you think? so on that medical record that you see from dr. pomper, after his radiation ended, that is an examination, and there is nothing in that report that says, you know what, there is a 2879 question here, maybe you need a biopsy. and what mr. mccarter stayed away from this time, that he broached during the trial, was the fact that there was none of this travel around the world in 1994 after his radiation treatment ended. he is retreated from that point. why? because perhaps maybe the man was in compliance. and those blood tests, i'm not suggesting that they withdrew blood to see if he had cancer. what i'm saying is, that is two more examples of the man going to a doctor in september of 1994, instead of traveling. i submit to you, ladies and gentlemen, if you are going to think about this compliance issue and put fault on jose vila for somehow not complying, think in terms of why he was in that situation with cancer to begin with. it is because of philip morris' conduct in the '50s when they first knew that their cigarettes they wanted to sell to kids could kill them. this idea of reliance that somehow mr. vila had to actually see a particular statement and rely on it is ridiculous, because this is a concealment case, not a misrepresentation case. mr. vila could not see 2880 a statement that he did not know about and rely on it; and that is why in the instructions that mr. mccarter did not read to you, the judge told you: jose vila need not present direct evidence that jose vila relied on a statement put out by the tobacco companies omitting scientific findings on the harmful effects of smoking in order to find that jose vila relied on any statement that concealed or omitted material facts. you may infer jose vila's reliance from the evidence. that is an inference. now, somehow there is evidence in this record that mr. vila did not hear statements in the advertisements? remember with dr. proctor's testimony, we played commercials, and one of them was the marlboro man commercial, and there are words in those marlboro man commercials, and there are statements in those marlboro man commercials, and jose vila testified that he heard those commercials, and that is what he relied on. so, indeed, yes, advertising is a statement. advertising you heard is a powerful statement. advertising in this case, especially from philip morris, reached 2881 billions, with a "b," of people. and regardless of whether mr. vila heard or relied on any other statements in their documents or in their public statements that they aired to the public, that is of no moment, because what he relied on was their most important statement, and that was their advertising to sell their products. now, you heard this reference that when mr. vila was smoking in spain, cigarettes were the most expensive cigarettes on the market in spain. well, mr. vila told you, he was getting money, allowance from his family that allowed him to smoke those cigarettes. and then when he got a job at the bank, he was able to spend that money on the cigarettes. you heard, "alas, but marlboro cigarettes were just not popular at all; how on earth would he have seen advertisements for those cigarettes?" well, in order for cigarettes to get popular, do not you think you have to advertise for them first? maybe that is why he saw so many advertisements, because they were not yet popular, but they eventually became popular, they became worldwide popular. 2882 when mr. mccarter was touching on this idea of addiction, he said: clinically significant impairment. and he said that dr. ticknor, although he found four criteria, did not find clinically significant impairment. and you will remember, when i read from the book, from the dsm-5, you saw that clinically significant impairment is built right into the criteria. remember that language: "a problematic pattern of tobacco use leading to clinically significant impairment or distress as manifested by at least two of the following." and then there is the criteria. the substantial, the -- "the significant impairment is built into that criteria," so if you meet the criteria, you have met the clinically significant impairment. and i showed him other disorders. caffeine-related disorder, for example, where clinically significant impairment was not -- the clerk: you have five more minutes. mr. kaiser: how much? the clerk: five minutes. mr. kaiser: -- was not built in the clinically significant impairment was a totally 2883 separate component. so that, also, is a non-issue. on the idea of the laryngeal cancer. all of these slides, all of this idea of koilocytes is nothing but a red herring. it is an issue they want you to chase. because i harken back again to dr. gomez. she said: "you do not really care about koilocytes with this laryngeal cancer. when you see the cancer and it is keratinizing and it is well-differentiated, they do not care if there is a koilocyte or not, because it is not being driven by an infection." that is what she said; that is what the study said that i've read twice now. that is a non-issue. and you know what else? their good dr. felix, he came in here and brought a sample of a tumor that he said, "here you go, this has koilocytes," and it was from the cervix. from the cervix. why did not he bring in a tumor from the larynx? if this man has done head and neck cancers before, as a pathologist, why did not he bring in a laryngeal cancer to show us? because he deals in gynecological pathology. that, ladies and gentlemen, also is 2884 a non-issue in this case. and remember the good dr. felix when i asked him. oh, i spoke on behalf of merck for five or six times until i showed him that document. over the years he was speaking 25, 35 times beholden to the pharmaceutical companies. and what was he doing? he was dispensing that vaccine to his patients, getting paid hundreds of thousands of dollars, and he is beholden to them. and also, with respect to this koilocytes, as he even said himself, you rarely see them, you rarely see them, but when you do, it is definitive. well, he is seen them twice in these engle cases where he is testified. he is two for two. he saw them in that hexner case we talked about, and he says he saw them here. again, the koilocytes mean nothing. we have talked enough, you have been burdened enough. i thank you for your time, ladies and gentlemen, and i just ask you to consider all of the evidence and all of the testimony in this case and compensate jose vila. thank you very much.