mr. gustafson: please the court. good morning. mattie emma ward, medical records say she started smoking in 1955 when she was 19 years old. her testimony from her friend is that she started when she was 13 or 14, almost 20 years before the first warning went on a pack of cigarettes. the tobacco company documents that you have seen in this trial that are in evidence are going to tell you that they intended to sell this addictive product to kids. they knew, they knew if you get a teenager addicted to nicotine, you are going to have a lifetime of profits. that is exactly what they intended. it is exactly what they got done. she was a teenager, just like all the others, and for 50 years they profited off her lungs. y'all have been very, very patient in watching us put all this evidence in. it is taken a long time, but to tell a 50-year story of this type of fraud and deceit cannot be done in a day or two. and i think that is been clear by the way this trial has gone forward. as we all know from growing up and living our lives, and as you saw here in this trial, peer pressure, peer pressure is real. whether it is from your friends or your brothers or your cousins, whether it is from folks that you see in movies and on tv, athletes, heroes. the defendants knew that peer pressure was real and they exploited it because they knew, like we all know, peer pressure gets to young people. peer pressure gets to young people. they exploited this in their search for replacement smokers. you add a little marketing, you add a little nicotine, just the right amount and low and behold, eighty percent of the people who were her age were smokers. it would have been unusual if mattie ward did not smoke in her generation. it would have been really unusual if mattie ward were able to smoke and then just put them down and walk away without any difficulty. that, according to her doctor, who begged her to quit smoking in the '90s, that would have been really, really unusual. but you know now, you know now why that is, why that would have been unusual for her to just put them down and walk away. as mr. baringer told you in opening statement, a choice is whether you are going to wear a motorcycle helmet when you ride a motorcycle or not. that is a choice. when you are addicted, you are not addicted to a motorcycle helmet or not wearing a motorcycle helmet. you know now why it is -- you know now why it is it would have been really, really unusual for mattie ward to just put cigarettes down and walk away from them. through technologies and additives they engineered cigarettes to be addictive. they engineered cigarettes to be hard to give up. they intended it that way. they spent the next few decades of mattie ward's life perfecting ways to make cigarettes hard to give up, taking out the nicotine as they processed the tobacco and then spraying it back on, just the right amount, just the right amount to maintain addiction. putting ammonia back in it to soften the smoke, making it easier to inhale, changing the ph level, making it easier to inhale, putting levulinic acid in the cigarettes to increase binding in the brain. mr. baringer told you in opening statement they did some stupid things. they said some stupid things in their documents. ladies and gentlemen, look at that document when you go back and deliberate. i urge you, look at that document. it is about 15 pages long. what they did was not stupid. it was not stupid at all. it was complex. it was intentional and they knew exactly what they were doing. they were not giving people choice. they were taking it away. they added levulinic acid in their cigarettes. you saw that dr. cook on video last week. they are putting it in their cigarettes now. they have been doing it for a long time. they only started putting the ingredients on their website and disclosing the ingredients of their cigarettes in 1986. there is not any evidence that they were not doing this before 1986. yet, they are going to come here, they are going to get up in a little bit and they are going to tell you it was mattie ward's unfettered free choice to quit smoking; after all these additives, everything they knew, they are going to tell you it was her free choice and that her death -- her death was all her choice. mattie ward did not have enough to live for other than smoking cigarettes and she just smoked herself to dead on purpose. that is their defense. but you did not hear one bit of evidence from the defense to dispute that she died from addiction to the nicotine in cigarettes. you heard nothing from them. there is conceded in this trial, they conceded, they stipulated, agreed, nothing but cigarette smoke caused her copd, nothing else. copd caused her death. and that was only after we had to bring dr. burns in here and draw pictures of the lungs and do all that stuff to show you why it was that copd caused her death because they would not ag to it when we showed up. they agreed to it in the middle of the trial, after we put on testimony. that is why that stipulation got read here in open court that day. only then, only then would they agree. smoking caused her death. you are going to be instructed smoking caused her death. it was not anything else. there is overwhelming, unrebutted, undisputed evidence in this case that mattie ward was addicted to the nicotine in cigarettes. there is no question about it. there is no question that they designed their cigarettes to be that way. they intended it to be that way and there is no question -- there is no question that they lied to keep it going. and there is no question that it worked. they brought you nothing, nothing to say that it did not work. the only question is now -- and y'all have been here over two weeks -- the only question now is, what are you going to do about it? what are you going to do about it? our world today is so twisted and skewed because we tolerate lies and liars because it is just business. it is just business. our world is not going to square up until people stand up and say that it is wrong. it is wrong to lie. it is wrong to design a product to be addictive and market it to children. it is wrong to lie about it, to tell people it is safe. it is wrong to exploit people that are addicted to your product, to lie to them just to keep them doing what they are already addicted to. it is wrong to do that. it is wrong to tell people when they are concerned about their health, smoke these pure white filters, they are harmless, harmless to health. just what the doctor ordered. it is wrong to tell people these low tar cigarettes, you are so worried about cigarettes, having a hard time quitting, smoke these; they are better for you. they knew. they knew. they knew then just like they know now that those cigarettes were just as dangerous as the previous brand of cigarettes that they told you did not harm anybody. they knew it then and they know it now, until people stand up and say that that is wrong and speak through this verdict, this verdict that y'all are going to fill out, until somebody stands up and tells them. and we are not going to let corporations lie to people like this. their profit from lies and deceit, concealment. until your verdict makes it known that you are not going to stand by and allow that kind of conduct to take place in this country, it is going to keep on going on. merely for a bigger bag of money to carry to the bank. evil people would have to stay up nights to figure out a plan like that, knowing that people were going to die, marketing to kids. every liggett employee, every r.j. reynolds employee who testified in this courtroom, either by videotape or in their own documents, their own internal company documents, all of it shows it was intentional. it was something that they knew was false. there was not any controversy. they knew this was all false and it was all done for money. m-o-n-e-y, that is all they care about. they knew what they did was wrong and we knew what they did was wrong when we got here and then y'all learned what they really did. ask yourselves, ask yourselves, did you learn anything in this trial that you did not know when you walked in here in january of 2012? did you learn something that you did not know before? because you did. you did not know the script and it is eye opening that it happened in our lives in our country to people we love right under our nose our whole life. it happened to the best among us. mattie ward was one of them. and now y'all are going to have to decide what you are going to do about it. why do people smoke? nicotine. y'all know that. nicotine is why people smoke. and even though these folks have known, these companies have known for decades how to take the nicotine out, even though they have been able to grow tobacco that does not have nicotine in it, they not only choose to keep the nicotine in, but they engineered the cigarettes to maintain the addiction. you saw the document, how low can we go with the nicotine to maintain the physiological requirements of our customers? they engineer it that way. they increase nicotine binding in the brain by adding acid to their cigarettes. they make it as hard as they can for people to quit smoking. did you hear -- did you hear yesterday on that videotaped deposition that we took just before christmas of mr. shipe, the guy who liggett designated as their corporate designee to talk about all these issues, and he was asked if y'all could wave a magic wand, if you could just wave a magic wand and make your cigarettes not addictive, would liggett do it? did you hear his answer? he would not say they would do that. he would not even admit, even now, knowing what they know now, he would not admit it that that is what they ought to do. and they make it as hard as they can for people to quit smoking and then they tell you that mattie ward should have just chosen to quit. they do all they can to take choice away and then they tell you mattie ward should have chosen to quit. you ought to take one of your pads, draw a line down the middle of it and write choice on one side and keep a tally how many times they say choice in their closing statement. try that. they lied about cigarettes being addictive. they lied about cigarettes causing cancer. they lied about cigarettes causing copd. they came in here in court and said it was not proven that cigarettes caused copd until 1984. those lies were designed to keep addicted smokers doing what they were addicted to. you have got to remember, and i talked about this in the opening statement, you have to take yourself back in time. it was a different time back then. and they promised back then, they promised if there is anything bad in it, we are going to take it out. and they promised that everybody's their smokers' health, their customers' health was a paramount concern to them. trust us, we are going to work with the public health authorities. we will be the first to let you know if we ever find anything wrong with this product. so use these filters, pure white harmless, just what the doctor ordered; and then you find out who the doctor was. the doctor was just a guy who ran their r & d department at liggett. he was not a medical doctor. it was dr. darkus whose name is all over these documents that are in evidence, knowing, knowing that these things cause cancer. he knew it. but it is just what the doctor ordered, smoke these filters. viceroy, 20,000 filter traps. all of these, if you are concerned, smoke filters. that is what they did to intercept smokers when that dip took place in the early 1950s. that is how they intercepted smokers then. winston, that secret blend upfront that had two and a half times the carcinogens in the winston blend than the camel blend. that was the winston secret. and then years later when the filters were not calming people enough, smoke these low tar cigarettes, they are better for you. look at that vantage ad. nobody is telling you to give up smoking, but if you have given it up more times than you would like to remember, chances are you enjoy it too much to want to give it up at all. that is talking to an addicted smoker. that is in evidence. look at that. that is the brand that mattie ward smoked. that is intercepting smokers like mattie ward on the way to quitting. that is speaking to addicted smokers who are having a hard time quitting and want to take a positive step in some way. that is for people who get up in the middle of the night and cry and smoke cigarettes. that is for mattie ward, keep doing what you are doing. that is preying on addicted smokers who do not know the truth that these cigarettes, that these cigarettes are just as deadly as the old brand you smoked that we told you did not harm you either. they knew this message was a powerful one for addicted smokers and they designed it to be that way because their customers were addicted, but unlike other drug addictions, these customers, they were the best among us. they carried on jobs. they were productive members of society. they were good mommies and daddies and they took their kids to school and they played with them in the yard and they tucked them in at night and they fed them and they loved them and they smoked the whole time. smoked when they were pregnant, smoked when they were in the car, smoked when they were cooking supper, a different time back then. i can remember -- you remember crawling up in the back window of your parents' car driving down the interstate. i can remember playing games with my brothers in the back window. the sun soaking on you, warming you up in the wintertime as you drove down the interstate. our parents loved us and they let us do that. but it was a different time back then. if you saw that today, what would you think? what kind of mother, what kind of parent would let their kids ride up in the back window? people did not know back then. people did not know how dangerous things like that were back then. we know better now. you have got to take yourself back in time when you think about these messages about cigarette smoking. mattie ward was one of those people. the words that you heard to describe her in this trial were funny, dedicated and hard working. she was loving. they said she was wise. she might have come from the back woods, but she got herself on up out of there is what her sister-in-law said yesterday. she was wise. their whole defense is she was foolish. their whole defense is for somebody else, not mattie ward. mattie ward was wise. mattie ward knew that -- at some point she knew, surely it was after she smoked during her pregnancy of the one and only son she ever had. surely she found out at some point after that. surely she knew in the '70s. surely she knew probably before that because annette testified that her momma started trying to quit smoking before she left home and got married on april 9, 1972. that means mattie ward was not comfortable with this addiction that she had. she probably did not call it an addiction. she said hooked. she said nicotine fit. she was wise enough to know she had a problem. what did she do? she smoked these cigarettes that were supposed to be better for you, better than the last brand we told you was not bad for you. she made efforts to stop. she made efforts to take a positive step in the right direction. addiction to nicotine is why mattie ward smoked. addiction to nicotine is why she smoked a carton of cigarettes a week for 40 something years. addiction to nicotine is what caused the smoking that caused the copd that killed her. and liggett and r.j. reynolds brought you nothing to dispute that nothing. mattie ward was don ward's best friend, 48 years of marriage. all he ever wanted and her life cut short at 67, 68 years old. your verdict is going to have to speak to the conduct that took that from don ward. mattie ward was indeed precious. she was all those things that all those people that knew her said she was. don ward's loss needs to be recognized in your verdict. now, as the plaintiff here, there are certain things that we have to prove in order to win, that we bear the burden of proof on. we have to prove to you by the greater weight of the evidence that mattie ward was a member of the engle class, that lawsuit brought by dr. howard engle in miami years ago on behalf of addicted smokers who suffered smoking-related diseases as a result of their nicotine addiction. we have to prove that by the greater weight of the evidence. well, what is that mean, the greater weight? it is not the criminal standard, beyond a reasonable doubt. it is by the greater weight of the evidence. it means the more persuasive and convincing force and effect of the entire evidence in the case. mr. baringer mentioned 51 to 49 in his opening statement, 50 to 49. we tipped the scales in our favor. you saw their case just a little while ago. you saw it. handed a bunch of stuff to the court. did not bring you one witness, not one. the evidence is clear that we did tip the scales in our favor. the very first question on the verdict form, and this is the verdict form that you are going to get. was mattie ward addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine? there is unrebutted, undisputed evidence in this case that she was addicted to the nicotine in cigarettes. you are going to see dr. may diagnosed her with it on august 1, 1994, tobacco dependence. you are going to see dr. wagner, almost five years after she quit smoking, and he diagnoses her with tobacco use disorder, 45 years. there is unrebutted, undisputed evidence in this record that mattie ward was addicted. her doctor, dr. hanline, when she started seeing him in 2000 who documented that she quit on january 28, 2000. i want you to assume she had been told her copd was caused by smoking cigarettes and tried and failed repeatedly to quit smoking until finally able to quit in 2000. assuming that to be true and knowing she smoked at least half a pack a day for 45 years, was she more likely than not addicted to nicotine? yeah, more likely than not she was. what did dr. may say? i asked him, what did you mean by tobacco dependence? the necessity to continue use of tobacco product despite being aware that it is not good for you. does that mean the same thing as nicotine addiction? i would say yes. dr. burns testified here. she was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine by both of these manufacturers. dr. cummings, she tried to quit. her doctor told her she is got copd. she hid the inhalers from her husband, embarrassed by her smoking, trying to stop. still was not able to quit until literally she could not smoke. it was hard to force the smoke into her lungs. you heard mr. ward talk about at the end she said it was like shoving a pillow over her face when she drew on a cigarette. that is about as rock bottom as you can get with an addicted smoker. they brought you no evidence on this. liggett and r.j. reynolds brought you nothing. yet they still would not agree. they still would not agree. the clear answer here is yes, she was addicted to the nicotine in cigarettes. the second question for you to answer is, was her addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine a legal cause of the death of mattie ward? i emphasize this term, was it the legal cause of the death of mattie ward, because you are going to get two instructions from the court on this. you are going to get two instructions on what legal cause is. the first one is, it is a legal cause of death if addiction directly and in a natural and continuous sequence produces or contributes substantially to produce -contributes substantially to producing such death so that it be reasonably be said that but for the addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine, the death would not have occurred. the second instruction you are going to get on this very question is, in order to be recognized as a legal cause of death, addiction need not be the only cause. addiction may be a legal cause of death, even though it operates in combination with the act of another, or some other cause, if such other cause occurs at the same time as the addiction and the addiction contributes substantially to producing such death. addiction does not have to be the only cause. addiction can operate in combination with the act of another. we came into this courtroom telling you mrs. ward has partial responsibility here. she did not try hard enough to quit. she should have tried harder to quit. that operated in conjunction with her addiction. addiction can operate in combination with liggett and r.j. reynolds concealment of the truth. it can operate in conjunction with the tobacco industry's campaign to lie to her and tell her if you are a concerned, smoke these filters and if you have tried enough times to stop smoking and you cannot do it, try vantage. it operates in combination with those things. because if mattie ward was not addicted to the nicotine in cigarettes, if she was not addicted to the nicotine in cigarettes, would she have exposed herself? would she have exposed herself to hundreds of doses of toxins in cigarette smoke day after day after day for 40, 50 years, knowing that it is bad for her? absent addiction, would she have done that? the issue in this case on addiction as a cause of disease is not whether she had free choice. that is not what the instruction says. it is not whether addiction prevented mrs. ward from quitting, not whether mrs. ward was unable to control herself or whether addiction took over her life completely. those are not the issues that you have to answer to answer question number two on the verdict form. to answer question number two on the verdict form, just like the instruction says, whether addiction was a substantial contributing factor, one cause among many, one cause among many. because that is what addiction does. without nicotine addiction mattie ward would not have exposed herself hundreds of times a day to the toxins in cigarette smoke for 40 or 50 years. as mr. ward has said all along, mattie does bear some responsibility here. he came here insisting on that. it is part of the plaintiff's file, but neither one of these defendants will take any responsibility at all and that is where y'all come in. y'all will have to decide that. you are going to get an instruction on comparative fault, that the plaintiff has admitted that mattie ward's acts relating to the duration and frequency of her efforts to stop smoking were a partial cause of her death, in combination with the acts and omissions of the defendants. that is your instruction. mattie ward's acts relating to the duration and frequency of her efforts to stop smoking were a partial cause of her death, in combination with the acts of the defendants. liggett and r.j. reynolds deny that what they did contributed to causing mattie ward's death. they just flat out deny it. now, compare these parties because you are going to be asked to do that on this verdict form. compare these parties. mr. ward comes in here and accepts the fact that his wife should have tried harder to quit. he accepts her personal responsibility here, even though she never lied or cheated. these defendants, y'all saw what they did. we could not show you all 16 million documents and 3000 videos. we would be here until july, but you saw what they did. engineered cigarettes to be addicted and lied and concealed truths that they knew were deadly, adding stuff to the cigarettes to make it harder to quit, take away choice. the evidence here is undisputed that they designed cigarettes to be addictive as possible and you heard undisputed testimony about those ingredients and additives, nicotine, putting it back in and gauging just the right amount of that, the ammonia, messing with the ph, spiking it with levulinic acid. all of that was to make cigarettes more addictive, to keep smokers smoking, to make quitting as hard as they could, to take away choice as much as they could. how did that affect mattie ward? the evidence was that she smoked a half a pack a day for at least 45 years, at least one half pack a day, two packs a day from her daughter, ten packs or a carton a week from mr. ward, a pack a day for 45 years by dr. wagner, a pack a day smoker by dr. stringfield, a pack a day for 40 years from a baptist hospital triage sheet. mattie ward smoked millions of cigarettes, millions of doses. the first and last cigarette of the day. first thing she did in the morning when she would wake up. the first thing she did was smoke a cigarette and the last thing she did every day before she went to bed was smoke a cigarette. if she woke up at night, she smoked them then too. she smoked at work. she would leave movies she paid to go to, go outside to smoke. she smoked in the car. she smoked when she was pregnant. and then she tried to quit. several quit attempts over the years starting before annette left home in 1972. she tried cold turkey. she tried the great american smokeout. she tried filters she bought at the drugstore. she had this theory, if she would smoke the front half of the cigarette, she would not get all the nicotine. if she smoked half the cigarette and put it out, she tried to cut back that way. she tried to cut back on the amount she smoked. she used the patches. she used gum. she was going to drive to atlanta to get a $500 shot from lord knows who. what did mattie ward say to people about it? mattie ward, i cannot do without it. i've got to start back. i'm having a nicotine fit. she used the term hooked to describe herself. i cannot quit. i've tried. i just cannot. what did the people who knew her -- what did the people who knew her say about her trying to quit smoking? it was undisputed that she struggled to quit smoking. melanie leggett, she told me she was going to quit smoking because she had copd. i know she tried. she had a very hard time. i remember her quitting for a while. i do not know -- i know it took her a while to quit. annette smith, she made real honest attempts to quit smoking. it bothered her because she wanted to quit. that was probably one of the only things she never could accomplish in her life. think about where she came from and what she accomplished in her life and what was the one thing she could not do. janet ballard, her sister-in-law, she quit when she come to my son's graduation in 2003 or 2004. she was on a breathing machine. i told her i was happy for her. she said it was tough. terry ward, his mother, when ivan was on its way here, his mom had been quit smoking for about four years and she asked him to hand her a cigarette. the cravings were still there. dr. hanline said when she came to him in his office the very first visit in august of 2000, he asked about her smoking history and she said she quit on january 28, 2000. and he tells you, if it was not difficult for her to quit, if it was easy for her to quit, do you know whether she would have remembered the exact date she stopped smoking? he said, i would think not. it has hard. that was a big event in her life. dr. may, did her addiction to nicotine play a role in her decision whether she was going to be able to quit smoking? he said, i agree it did and it is not an unfettered free choice. it is unrebutted and undisputed evidence in this case that nicotine addiction is a powerful addiction. all of these groups, national cancer institute, american heart association, american cancer society, the surgeon general. it is powerfully addictive and these defendants have exploited that. the evidence was undisputed that nicotine addiction physically changes the brain. you saw this picture that dr. cummings showed you that the more nicotinic receptors were observed in brains of experimental animals during nicotine treatment and more nicotinic receptors are observed in the brains of human smokers at autopsy. he showed you a picture of it. you increase the number of nicotinic receptors when you smoke that long and then they are adding levulinic acid to the cigarettes to increase nicotine binding in the brain. ask yourselves, are they trying to take away choice? are they trying to take away choice? you bet they are. because nicotine is the source of their success. this is all undisputed. they did not even dispute this. you saw their corporate witness testify about it. it is in their cigarettes now. it is on the list of ingredients and they never even disputed it because it is true. so does nicotine addiction cause disease? of course it does. everybody says it is undisputed in this case, undisputed that nicotine addiction causes disease. all of these folks, dr. burns, dr. cummings, nida, institute of medicine, the world health organization, the surgeon general and it is undisputed and unrebutted evidence in this case that nicotine addiction caused mattie ward's death. she smoked. smoking caused the copd. copd caused her death. she smoked because of nicotine addiction. and there is no evidence to dispute that. what evidence did they bring? what evidence did the defendants bring? nothing. nothing on this issue. they are going to read you some reader's digest articles and show you some newspaper articles. they are going to give you apparently the arguments of lawyers. you know now -- you know now what the tobacco companies have always recognized internally at least, that they cannot defend continued smoking as free choice if mattie ward was addicted. they have known that -- this is 1980, the tobacco institute, talking about their defense lawyers telling them that. but they are fixing to get up here and tell you it was mattie ward's free choice to quit. because to them, it does not matter whether mattie ward was smoking. if she quit smoking, she should have done it sooner and if she did not quit smoker, she chose to smoke. it is that old game my big brothers played with me when i was little. heads i win. tails you lose. it does not matter. they are going to say the same thing every time. it does not matter if it is mattie ward. it could be anybody, not just mattie ward. if they quit, they should have done it sooner. if they did not quit, they chose to smoke. same old story. the story they tell you here is the story that they tell you here ain't no different from the story they been telling for 50 years. it is the same story. this bit about 60 million people quit and you are wondering how they get 3000 kids to start smoking every day. 60 million people quit. it must be pretty easy. it should not be that hard. it is where they have always been, and it is where they are always going to be. if they do not get the kids to start doing it, their business is going to dry up. that is where they have always been. that is where they are always going to be, the very message that they use to get kids to start smoking now is the very message they used in this courtroom to try to get y'all to say mattie ward had a free choice to quit smoking. mr. baringer: objection, your honor. may we approach? the court: jury will step out a moment, please. [#deleted sidebar#] security officer: jury is in the box, your honor. the court: please continue. mr. gustafson: please the court. as i was saying, you know now what they have always known, that they cannot continue defending smoking on free choice, if the person was addicted. the fact that mattie ward was addicted is undisputed, unrebutted evidence in this case. they are fixing to tell you that she had free choice to quit, even though her own doctor said it was not an unfettered free choice. they are going to tell you it was. it is unrebutted, undisputed that mattie ward's addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine was a legal cause of her death. now, if you check no on questions one or question two, mr. ward loses and r.j. reynolds and liggett wins and you will have pinned the blue ribbon on them, that is the way we want y'all to do business in america. mr. baringer: objection, your honor. the court: sustained. mr. gustafson: if you check yes on questions one and two, then the engle findings will apply, and the engle findings are going to be all binding on this jury, if you checked yes on one and two. nicotine is addictive. smoking cigarettes causes copd or emphysema, that all of these tobacco companies, reynolds and liggett, as well as philip morris and lorillard were negligent. that all of those four tobacco companies placed cigarettes on the market that were defective and unreasonably dangerous, and that all of them, reynolds, liggett and pm, philip morris and lorillard and the council for tobacco research, all of them concealed or omitted material information, not otherwise known or available, knowing that the material was false or misleading; and then the last one was that they all got together in an agreement to conceal or omit that information. you have seen the whole story. all of those findings were binding on the jury and the court and these parties. but you have to answer yes to those two questions. if you answer no to either one of those two questions, it is over. for mr. ward it is over. this is one of those stories that had only one side. they did not oppose it. they knew, their own documents have been used to prove this case, their own internal information. and they did it all for money. they knew that people were going to die. they did it all for money. you are next going to come to question number three on the verdict form. did mattie ward have copd before may 5, 1990? the court is going to give you an instruction on answering this question. and that instruction is if the greater weight of the evidence supports the claim of mr. ward that mattie was a member the engle class, then you shall consider the following defense raised by the defendants. on the defense the issues for your determination are number one, whether mattie ward had copd before may 5, 1990 -- and that is question number three on the verdict form -- and if so, whether mattie ward knew or by the use of reasonable care should have known before may 5, 1990 that she had copd and that there was a reasonable possibility the injury or damage was caused by smoking cigarettes. and the last part is if the greater weight of the evidence supports this defense, mr. ward's claims are time barred. if you answer yes to question number four on this verdict form i'm going to get to it is over. mr. ward loses. r.j. reynolds and liggett win. but the greater weight of the evidence has to support that defense and what did you see? while we had to prove whether mattie ward was a member of the engle class, reynolds and liggett had to prove that this claim is time barred because she had copd, knew or should have known she had it before may 5, 1990. they have the burden of proving that and what did they bring you? nothing. what was the evidence here? well, dr. may first diagnosed early copd on august 25, 1993. then a year later on august 1, 1994 she has a chest x-ray, and the chest x-ray is normal. lungs are clear, well-inflated, no active disease identified. i'm not trying to tell you she did not have copd then. we know she had copd then. early copd was diagnosed the year before, but it was early copd. she is got a normal chest x-ray because looks what happens after you have had copd a couple of years. pull up the next chest x-ray report, please. later on september 25, 1996, she is got mild hyperinflation which suggest mild copd. that is what happens to you when you have copd. it starts getting worse and you start seeing things on chest x-rays. but she did not have copd before august of 1993. she certainly did not know she had it because dr. may testified that there was no evidence that she had it before 1990. you see on september 25, 1996, which is slide 35, dr. may for the very first time prescribed inhalers to mattie, the very first time. now, if she had copd going way far back, she would have been on inhalers for a while. and then she had a pulmonary function test that was read as severe copd in 1996, but you can see here dr. may said she had a lot of trouble coordinating her breath with the pft machine, and i do not think our data is worthwhile on that. and that is why her pulmonary function test, as dr. burns showed you, got better later on because this test did not have worthwhile later, just like dr. may said. mattie ward did not have -- they failed to prove that she had copd before may 5, 1990, and dr. may testified. is there any evidence mattie ward had been diagnosed with copd when she first came to see you on august 25? he said, i do not know of any. annette smith said her mom had problems four or four years before that february 8, 2000 visit with dr. may when he showed her the chest x-ray and told her it was emphysema. annette smith also said that when she said her mom had problems in the '80s, that is when she thought that that doctor's visit in 2000 was actually in 1990, and that is where she got the '80s from because it was four or five years before that doctor's visit, which we know now was in 2000. arthur ballard, we read all these depositions to you. he did not know she had copd. he said it was a couple of years or more before she died when he found out she had copd. barbara ballard did not know she had copd even though she had been around mattie on a number of occasions. janet ballard did not know about it until her son who was 22 at the time of this october 9 deposition. mattie came to his high school graduation sometime after 2000, and that is when she found out mattie had copd. dan smith, his own mother-in-law, he only knew a couple of years before she died. terry ward did not know. willie ballard did not know. joan schofield who worked with mattie for a number of years never saw mattie sick or complaining about health problems. mary mattheis was asked, would it have been back in the '80s when she had copd? no, not that far back. she was not sure of the dates. melanie leggett, she did not know that mattie had copd until mattie told her she had copd. dr. burns, who testified about all these issues, he does not know of any evidence that she had copd before august 25, 1993. clearly, the evidence here they did not prove by the greater weight of the evidence that mattie had copd before may 5, 1990 and you should check no on there, and certainly on question number four, did she know that she had copd or reasonably should have known before may 5, '90 that she had copd and know there was a reasonable possibility it was caused by smoking cigarettes? no, she did not. there is no evidence otherwise in this case. if you check yes on question number four, then the case is time barred and mr. ward loses. r.j. reynolds and liggett win. the evidence is clear the defendants did not carry their burden of proof on either one of those questions. the next questions on the verdict form are five, six, seven and eight. you are going to get and basically for each one, was smoking r.j. reynolds brand cigarettes a legal cause of the death of mattie ward, and the same question for liggett and philip morris and lorillard. it is undisputed unrebutted testimony in this case that it was. you are going to be instructed that smoking was a legal cause of her death. the first instruction you are going to get is that smoking cigarettes was the legal cause of her death and the next issue is whether smoking cigarettes manufactured by r.j. reynolds was a legal cause of the death of mattie ward and whether smoking cigarettes manufactured by liggett was a legal cause of the death of mattie ward. the r.j. reynolds cigarettes include those made by brown & williamson as well as american tobacco company because they are all one company. next you are going to get is on that smoking cigarettes manufactured by r.j. reynolds is a legal cause if it directly and in a natural and continuous sequence produces or contributes substantially to producing the death so that it can reasonably be said that but for smoking those cigarettes death would not have occurred. the same instruction goes for liggett, but for smoking those cigarettes, her death would not have occurred. you get to the next instruction. in order to be regarded as a legal cause of the death smoking cigarettes of r.j. reynolds need not be the only cause. smoking r.j. reynolds cigarettes may be a legal cause even though it operates in combination with the act of another or some other cause, and the same thing for liggett. now we are putting all the brands together. that is what the instruction recognizes. and then the last instruction is the invisible instruction. if you find by a greater weight of the evidence that the combination of smoking cigarettes manufactured by any one manufacturer and those manufactured by other companies contributed substantially to causing mattie ward's death in indeterminate degrees and amounts, meaning if you cannot say how much she smoked of one brand versus another, then i instruct you that smoking cigarettes manufactured by r.j. reynolds is considered the legal cause of mattie ward's death, even though you cannot determine the exact contribution of each company's cigarettes. and the same exact instruction for liggett, the same exact wording for liggett. all these cigarettes act in combination with each other. and we showed you -- we called dr. burns to testify. dr. burns, i asked him, did the combination of smoking cigarettes manufactured by reynolds as well as those by other companies contributed substantially to causing her death? yes, there is absolute no question that they did. i asked him the same question about liggett. there is no question that they did. they brought you nothing to dispute or rebut that, nothing. and the court is already going to instruct you that the smoking is a legal cause of her death. and we know from all of the testimony that the brands of cigarettes that she smoked were the brands that caused her death. that is unrebutted. that is undisputed and different witnesses said she smoked different brands but they are all included on here. everybody said she smoked viceroy except melanie leggett and melanie leggett did not know her when she smoked viceroy. her brother knew it. annette knew it and mr. ward knew it. annette told you that viceroy was the main brand in the '60s and into the '70s, but she could not tell you the exact year. nobody is going to be able to do that. and then we get to the main brand of vantage, which annette said she started smoking in the early '80s, and then it went all the way until mr. ward told you that is the carton of cigarettes she had in the house the day she went in the hospital in 2000. the undisputed testimony in this case is that all of those cigarettes, whether they were made by reynolds or liggett or lorillard or philip morris, all of those cigarettes were a legal cause of mattie ward's death. and under the instructions that i just went through real quick, all of those acted in combination with each other. dr. burns testified every one of those cigarettes mattered. every one of them contributed. so the answer to all of these questions for each one of those manufacturers is yes. then we go to question number nine. your honor, we are about an hour, are not we? the court: another five minutes. mr. gustafson: question number nine is the next question for you to answer. was the agreement between r.j. reynolds, liggett, philip morris, lorillard, council for tobacco research, tobacco institute and others to conceal information regarding the addictiveness or the health effects of cigarettes or both, or the actual concealment of such information, a legal cause of the death of mattie ward? his honor is going to give you two instructions on answering this question. the first one is whether the agreement to withhold information or information regarding addiction were the acts proving in furtherance of that agreement were a legal cause of the death of mattie ward. in order to be a legal cause of her death we have to show that mattie ward relied on statements by either r.j. reynolds, liggett or any of the other companies involved in the agreement, which statements omitted material information concerning the health effects of cigarettes or their addictive nature or both; and we do not need to prove direct evidence of mattie ward's reliance on any specific statements by defendants or their coconspirators. we do not have to come in here and say mattie ward saw this tv commercial or the frank statement or any particular cigarette advertisement. we cannot show you that because she ain't here now. but we showed you the totality of the evidence and we showed you her brand use and all of that brand use follows to a tee this marketing plan that we showed you. on this issue of whether their concealment, whether their bad acts are a legal cause of mattie ward's death, the same type of thing. the issue there is not whether the defendants could have said something that would have made her stop smoking, whether information on the harms of smoking was available; it is not whether mrs. ward ever saw a warning on a pack of cigarettes. it is what the instruction tells you. and the instruction tells you it is whether the defendants' false controversy -- whether the defendants' false controversy was a substantial contributing factor because that is the next instruction, which is number 46. the agreement to withhold health information regarding addiction or the acts proven in furtherance of that agreement are legal cause if it directly and in natural and continuous sequence produces or contributes substantially to producing loss; and it goes on down, in order to be regarded as a legal cause of loss, the agreement to withhold information regarding addiction and the acts proven in furtherance of that agreement need not be the only cause. it can act in combination with her addiction. it can act in combination with her failing to try harder to quit. it can act in combination with their agreement to lie or the fact that they all conspired to do that. and the question is not -- the question is not if claude teague had taken one of the many documents that he authored that we put into evidence here, it is not whether claude teague stuck it in the mail and mailed it to mattie ward, whether she would have quit smoking. that is not the issue. that is not what the instruction says. did their conduct contribute to her continued smoking that caused her death? there is undisputed evidence here that the tobacco industry in their agreement to lie and deceive spent more in one day on their message to the public than the surgeon general spent in an entire year. and that message was carefully and methodically crafted to speak to addicted smokers to keep them smoking, to give them false, fraudulent alternatives to quitting like those filters and like that low tar stuff that mattie ward smoked. every bit as deadly and they knew it. they wanted -- just like they said in 1964 in response to the surgeon general report internally, they said -- this is in 1964 regarding the surgeon general's report, we must in the near future provide some answers which will give smokers a psychological crutch and a self-rationale to continue smoking. and then after 50 years, after 50 years of doing this, deceiving the people, withholding information they knew to be true and bragging to themselves about their success, how successful and how smart and successful they were, they come here and they are going to tell you that mattie ward did not rely on that. and if she did, she should not have. how can that be? how can that be? ask yourselves, is that fair? is a position like that, all of the success that they lauded on themselves and bragged to themselves about, it just did not work on mattie? it worked on everybody else but not mattie. what did the evidence show? the evidence shows that the industry was infatuated with school age kids and they have been following this for decades trying to get kids to smoke. they called them replacement smokers. the court: your 60-minute break. mr. gustafson: did you want to take a break right here, your honor? the court: it is up to you, sir. mr. gustafson: we can. the court: we are going to take about a five minute break. (jury excused) (recess) the court: we will be in recess for five minutes. the court: we are back on the record with everyone present. mr. baringer. mr. baringer: your honor, the last portion of mr. gustafson's opening raised essentially the same type issue. he said -- he was talking about the industry conduct and then he said they are going to get up here and tell you that she did not rely on this conduct. is that fair? number one, it suggests that my making an argument about reliance is unfair and he relates it back again to industry conduct that he is claiming is wrongful. it just compounds the problem that we already had and it suggests that i am doing something wrong just like the industry did as he alleges by raising a defense of whether or not they meet their burden of proof on reliance. it compounds it. your honor, this jury is hopelessly tainted now. i move for a mistrial. mr. feiwus: join the motion. the court: motion is denied. call in the jury if they are ready, please. (jury present) security officer: jury is in the box. the court: please continue. mr. gustafson: please the court. they were focused. they have always been focused on getting young people to start smoking. that is what this whole document is about, a retrospective analysis. how different companies and different brands have been able to get young people to smoke and they are still focusing on it now. what it shows us it would have been unusual for mattie ward to be smoking -- to not be smoking in her age group. 1930s, the average starting age was under 18 years old. she fits right into that. she was one of those school-age girls that they targeted and it is undisputed that girls her age on average were smoking before they were 18, and there is not one bit of evidence that you have gotten from the other side that shows that they did not want those kids as customers. not a bit. it would have been unusual if she did not smoke. the unrebutted, undisputed testimony is that defendants did all they could to capitalize on a youth market because that was their future. they knew nicotine was addictive and they lied about it and they engineered the cigarettes to be as addictive as possible. they brought you no evidence to rebut this. they brought you no evidence that they did not do that. the entire time that mattie ward smoked, from the time she took her first draw on a cigarette in 1949 or 1950 until the last time she did it in 2000, they knew their cigarettes were highly addictive and they lied about it publicly. of course, liggett voluntarily put a warning on their packs in the mid-1990s sometime, but before that they lied about it. r.j. reynolds did not tell the truth about it until after mattie ward quit smoking. behind closed doors among themselves when they could tell each other how smart and successful they were at carrying out this little program, they celebrated how addictive their cigarettes were, how it kept people smoking and how it made them rich. they did not just know that cigarettes had nicotine that was addictive, but they knew that they caused cancer and they knew that they caused copd and they never told the truth about that either. they lied about that too. there was not any proof. nobody has proven it. it is just a statistical relationship and that does not prove anything. they concealed -- they concealed what their own top scientists told them they knew was true, that it caused all those diseases and without even looking at their internal documents we know, we know what a difference the concealment made. because during those days most people mrs. ward's age smoked. most people in her age group smoked. it was odd not to smoke back then. you heard mr. ward talk about that and today -- today they are required to tell the truth. today they are required to tell the truth and today one in five americans smoke. back then it was one in two. the truth is powerful. the truth is powerful. and r.j. reynolds and liggett and the others, this concealment, this whole program made them a lot of money and they talk about how much money it made them. it resulted in millions and millions of americans who were addicted and continued to smoke and the result was 20 million dead americans. 400,000 good americans every year dying of smoking-related diseases. the defendants when all those studies started to come out took note of it back in the early 1950s. dr. teague did his survey of cancer research in 1953 where he said that studies of clinical data tend to confirm the relationship between heavy prolonged tobacco smoking and the incidence of cancer of the lung; and even today when they were cross-examining dr. cummings they said, we did not say actually that he concluded it caused cancer. it said the studies just tended to confirm. mincing words about it even now. mr. baringer: objection, your honor. the court: overruled. mr. gustafson: in 1954 liggett, march 25, 1954 they have this conference. dr. darkus, same one, just what the doctor order, filters from 1954 pointed out that liggett and myers' major concern is to produce cigarettes the public would use, and then to make these cigarettes the best possible from a health standpoint. they knew what the truth was. they knew it. in 1958 you saw this document that the liggett folks put into evidence that trip report from those corporate folks that came over from england interviewing everybody about whether cigarettes cause cancer and with one exception, the guy up at yale, with one exception the individuals whom we met believe that smoking causes lung cancer. by causation, any chain of event which leads finally to lung cancer and which involves smoking as an indispensable thing. they told the corporate tikes from england what they would not tell americans. 1961, liggett and myers again internal, cigarettes contain biologically active materials, cancer causing, cancer promoting, poisonous stimulating, pleasurable and flavorful. 1962, alan rodgman at r.j. reynolds, the company is studying the detailed composition of smoke. they are concerned with carcinogenic or cocarcinogenic compounds. it raises an interesting question. i read this to you in opening. it is in evidence. how can we sit here and say it does not cancer while internally we know? such data might affect adversely the company's economic status. money, money. that is all they cared about, money. they did not care about people, did not care about how many were going to die, because they knew they were going to die. all they cared about is whether mattie ward went up to the winn-dixie and bought another pack. there is no question that sales dropped in the early 1950s for the first time since the great depression. we see that drop in the early 1950s and so the tobacco company heads decide to meet at the plaza hotel in december of 1953. you know the truth now. they were not there to help smokers, look out for the public or anything. they were there to keep their profits. they did not turn to doctors or scientists or public health officials. they hired a public relations firm. what a huge disappointment. what a -- how disappointing is that? the public relations firm goes around interviewing everybody. you have seen the forwarding memo. it is fortunate for us cigarettes are a habit they cannot break. boy, would not it be wonderful if our company was the first to produce a cancer free cigarette. what we could do to competition. suppose everybody smoked just one cigarette less a day, that would be maybe 40 billion a year. the stock market fall is terrible. that one document shows they knew it was addictive, they knew people could not stop, they knew it caused disease and they knew they were out to make a lot of money if they could keep people smoking. but you know liggett did not come. you know that from the documents. but it was not because they did not agree with the program, thought it was wrong or anything. they thought the controversy would blow over and they stayed out of it. they kept their powder dry in terms of spending money on the dues and everything until they joined in 1964 right after the surgeon general report when they knew they could not ignore it anymore. the game plan was they were going to conceal the truth and they would reassure the public and take out that frank statement, promise to make the health of their consumers paramount. we are going to work with the public health officials. look out for you. and you know the truth now. they never had any intention of doing any of that. it was the opposite. they wanted to keep people smoking. they wanted to keep people buying cigarettes. they could have cared less about people's health. they certainly were not going to cooperate hand-in-hand with the public health officials. they were the targeted enemy from day one. they created the tirc, go out there and lie for them. now it became the council for tobacco research. after that surgeon general report came out, they changed the name but a leopard does not change its spots. they kept on doing the same old thing until the '90s. they created the tobacco institute to be their little pr arm for them to speak for them. they did that until the end of the '90s, creating a controversy that they knew did not even exist, just to keep people like mattie ward smoking. reassure smokers none of it is true. they started communicating with smokers. it was a different message. there is no need to stop. there is no need to worry. there is no proof it is harmful. if they ever identify in cigarettes bad, we are going to take it out. you saw the videos. meanwhile, here, try these filters. pure white, harmless to health. viceroy ads with all the filter traps and then later on they come out with the low tar. smoke these if you are concerned. if you believe any of that stuff, smoke this stuff. the low tar frauds for the health concerned smoker. they did it for 50 years, the whole time. the whole time they knew it was dangerous. they knew what they were doing was wrong. you have seen the tobacco institute, our basic position may be subject to a finding that we are making false or misleading statements to promote the sale of cigarettes and it just continued on. that was 1968. they kept on going until 2000. they never intended to work with public health officials. you see in 1968 they are attacking the shockingly intemperate defamation of an industry that led the way in seeking answers to the cigarette controversy. by the way that we know does not even exist because we made it up. they tell you it did not work. in 1972 they are attacking the surgeon general again. the number one health problem in the cigarette smoking but to the extent to which public health officials may knowingly mislead the american public. tap into that, do not trust the government. all of us in america who always have. tap into that. tell people the government is lying to you and trying to take away your freedom, trying to take away your choice all the while they are spiking those cigarettes, trying to keep people smoking trying to take away their choice. all they did was not stupid. it was not no accident. in 1980 they are attacking the surgeon general. the first time in history the secretary had to share the spotlight. we won top billing that night on all the networks. how was this program working out for them? do not listen to me. listen to them. they bragged to one another about how smart and successful they were while the strategy was brilliantly conceived and executed over the years. they had it all planned out and it was extremely successful. they spent $250 billion between 1940 and 2005, $250 billion. there ain't never zeros on the calculator in your cell phone to do that math. you ain't got enough. it was extremely successful. would they have spent that kind of money if it did not work? the ftc report tells you in 1978 they spent more money -- the industry spent more money in one day than the surgeon general spent in an entire year. do you think they would have done it if it did not work? it was working out great for them and nicotine was the secret and they knew that nicotine was the secret to their success. it is what makes cigarettes so dangerous. that is what causes disease. that is why we need to keep exposing themselves to the physiological requirements of nicotine. that is '59. 1963, brown and williamson it is addictive when the business is selling nicotine. it causes all this stuff. 1972, mr. teague, although he did not mail this to mattie ward, we are a highly ritualized and stylized segment of the pharmaceutical industry. all the physiological effects and satisfaction is the sine qua non of tobacco and they will not take it out even though they know how. after all that, after all this knowledge of doing what they do to nicotine, what happens in 1994? the ceos all go to congress and testify under oath, nicotine is not addictive. that is 1994. why did they do that? why do they keep lying? why did they keep lying? well, you know why. they have always known they cannot defend themselves. they cannot defend smoking on free choice if the person was addicted. behind closed doors, when the rest of us are not around, they recognize just how powerful nicotine addiction really is and it is exactly why the free choice argument has to fail. mattie ward bears some responsibility here but not all of it because she was addicted and there is no question. they are going to ask you to put your stamp of approval on free choice even though they know they cannot defend continued smoking on free choice if the person is addicted. they spent billions on this message and they are going to come here and tell you that mattie ward did not rely on it, did not see any of it, but what did her daughter annette tell you? she started smoking the low tar stuff, vantage in particular because they advertised it was better for you in the early 1980s and she smoked it for the next 17 or 18 years until she quit smoking in 2000. the evidence shows you she got their message. look at the statement of business. this is in evidence for vantage. it is the break-through the consumer has been waiting for in the present anti-environment vantage and similar products resulted in the full-flavor low numbers category where they can move without compromising. we think that vantage will be the product that can stem the decline in cigarette smoking. and then you go to the advertising platform and rationale. it is in the area of normal flavor smokers that our prime target resides. you heard them they cross-examine mr. ward on it. she liked the full flavor cigarette. she fits this marketing profile to a tee. she is not a he, but she fits this marketing profile to a tee. look at the brands. marlboro, winston, pall mall, camel, kent. a concerned smoker, she is that person. when it comes right down to it, he is an edgy smoker. his concern has to do with health. that is why mattie ward tried to quit smoking all those times after all those years, and the whole idea of vantage was to keep concerned smokers like her smoking. if you cannot quit, take a step in the positive direction. take a positive step and smoke these. she kept smoking vantage and that is what folks have testified to in this case. remember, that is exactly what r.j. reynolds was shooting for, and yet today after pioneering mass marketing, this industry pioneered mass marketing of the product, after spending all that money, bragging to themselves about how effective their whole message campaign was, they are going to suggest to you that advertising that is shown to increase the consumption of every product ever used on it, and it did not work on cigarettes or it did not work with mattie ward. ask yourselves if that is true. what was their motivation? y'all know. it was money. conspiracy is an agreement between two or more parties to do something unlawful. i want to talk to you just for a minute about cigarettes being a legal product. this case is not about whether cigarettes are a legal product. this case is not about making cigarettes. they cross-examined dr. cummings on that. there is not a question on this verdict form about cigarettes being legal or illegal or being banned or anything like that. your decision in this case has nothing to do with whether cigarettes are legal. whether a product is legal or not has nothing to do with whether it is defective. they are just as liable for their defective cigarettes, whether they are legal or not, than any other manufacturer is who makes a product that is legal but also defective. that is the way the law works. this case has nothing to do with whether cigarettes are legal. the only thing that is relevant about cigarettes being legal is it makes it easier to start and it makes it harder to quit. that is the only relevant thing about cigarettes being a legal product in this case. easier to start using and harder to quit. mrs. ward told mary mattheis at school that cigarette smoking was just an accepted thing to do when she was a little girl, and that is how she started smoking when she took up after her brothers in that regard. this case is not about legality or the illegality of cigarettes. this case is about determining whether the defendants share in the responsibility, whether they are responsible and accountable for their conduct. if you find mattie ward to be a member of the engle class by checking yes on questions one and two, then the engle findings are going to apply and these defendants will already have been found to have conspired with each other and with the other companies to conceal information and mislead people like mattie ward, and that is why we have shown you the documents from the other companies, from philip morris and lorillard because they were all in it together. that is why we showed you a phillip morris president, mr. cullman talking about women wanting to have smaller babies in 1969 or whenever that was on meet the press. he was not speaking for philip morris. he was speaking for all of them. he was the president of the tobacco institute. they were all in it together. the things that they wrote were stupid, is what they told you, like it was an accident. like it was just some crazy guy in the basement of the building that said those things. that was their whole game plan, the history of these companies. question number nine. the evidence is clear and you should check yes. that is going to take you to question number ten. if you answer no to questions five, six and nine, five and six are for the defendants r.j. reynolds and liggett. if you check no to those and then you check no to question number nine, it is over and the jury instruction -- the verdict form instructions tell you that. check nine yes because the evidence is clear and they did not even dispute it. now, the defense has admitted into evidence 71 articles from pensacola newspapers. they just stuck them into evidence a little while ago and they admitted 33 reader's digest articles. now from 1956 to 2005, 71 newspaper articles from pensacola newspapers would be 1.3 articles per year over that period of time, 1.3 articles per year. as for the reader's digest, those 33 reader's digest articles, you heard dr. cummings, on average reader's digest put out 18,000 articles in mattie ward's lifetime. that is one article -- 33 articles is about one article every year and a half about the dangers of smoking in reader's digest, including many that came out, the ones they put in evidence, many of them came out before mattie ward was even born. and all of that for a magazine that no one even said she read, reader's digest. they are going to run through them all back to back. throw them all up, boom, boom, boom. they can look pretty convincing when they do that, but everybody knows that is not how messages get delivered in real life. 70 years, 50 years of articles are convincing going down one after another, even though it was really 1.3 a year. it looks convincing, but that is not how real life works. you are going to come to question ten. you know that mr. ward accepts partial responsibility for his wife. you should -- you do not technically have to, but you should put a percentage number next to mattie ward's name. you should do that. you should also recognize the conduct and the evidence that you heard about r.j. reynolds and liggett and the very little you heard about philip morris and lorillard. this question here, this question number ten, please state the percentage of fault, if any, that was a legal cause of mattie ward's death that you charge to any of them. this is not just about a percentage of cigarettes she smoked from each manufacturer. it is about the conduct. you are comparing mattie ward's failure to try harder to quit. mattie ward's listening to a message about low tar cigarettes when she should not have listened to it. you are comparing her conduct with the conduct of these manufacturers. that is what this question is about. it is for allocating responsibility among everybody. and the truth is if what these companies said did not matter, why did not they just tell the truth? why did not they just tell the truth if what they said did not matter? if nobody was listening why did they keep spending all that money? why did they brag to themselves about how successful and brilliant they were? because it worked. if nicotine addiction is not the reason people quit smoking, take the nicotine out. if they are really smoking for that turkish blend in their camel, take out the nicotine, make it a fair fight. make it a fair fight. make it a real choice. because when they talk about how they cannot take out the nicotine because they will lose customers, what is that tell you? that just shows you how important nicotine is. that just shows you how important it is. it shows you that they really seek to take away choice, not provide it. everything they do, putting those ingredients in cigarettes is to take away choice. there is no evidence here that mattie ward lied or cheated. there is plenty evidence that they did. there is no evidence that mattie ward knew what they knew or that her knowledge, whatever it was, even came close to what these manufacturers knew. they brought you nothing. this is liggett's defense, that puts philip morris and lorillard, who are not parties to this case, it is liggett defense. they have to prove it. what did liggett tell us? liggett says it has no knowledge regarding alleged misconduct or alleged fault by philip morris or lorillard and has no personal knowledge and takes no position. they acknowledge that philip morris and lorillard manufactured and marketed cigarettes and maintained various opinions, but their position is that the mere manufacturing and marketing of cigarettes and the maintenance of an opinion and the mere membership in certain industry groups are insufficient by themselves to constitute misconduct or fault. what did liggett bring you about philip morris and lorillard? nothing. mr. feiwus: objection, i would ask the rest of our answer be read as part. the court: please complete it. mr. gustafson: to the extent that evidence of alleged misconduct or alleged fault by philip morris or lorillard comes in at trial, if at all, it will be elicited and presented by evidence and testimony during plaintiff's case-in-chief by witnesses other than liggett personnel and will concern, among other things, the alleged brand usage of the decedent smoker. determining comparative fault of any party or nonparty, if any, ultimately rests with the jury based on the totality of evidence presented at trial. they have no personal knowledge regarding alleged misconduct or fault by philip morris or lorillard. that is their defense. they have to prove it and what did they bring you? nothing. i'm going to suggest to you these decisions are yours and yours alone, but i'm going suggest to you that you put thirty percent on r.j. reynolds, thirty percent on liggett. you should put thirty percent on mattie ward and you should put five percent on philip morris and lorillard because you know that they participated in the whole scheme. even though they are not defendants, you should not ignore philip morris and lorillard because they are part of this whole thing. but this decision is yours and yours alone. the next question on the verdict form is number 11. what is the amount of damages sustained by mr. ward for the loss of his wife's companionship and protection and for his pain and suffering as a result of mattie ward's death. and the court is going to give you a damages instruction as to how you calculate this. that is difficult. there is no exact measure how you do it. but you should recognize, it should respect and acknowledge mr. ward's loss. and i want to say something that he does not want your sympathy. it is embarrassing for him. his heart is so full he has a hard time talking about mattie. he just erupts. he apologized to you for that. but he loved her. she was everything to him. the one thing he does not want is your sympathy. he does not want your sympathy. he gets plenty of that. he gets sympathy on christmas morning when he wakes up alone and he calls his children. he gets sympathy on thanksgiving when he goes to someone else's house to eat. he gets sympathy on the day of the anniversary of her death and he gets sympathy on the anniversary of their marriage. he gets sympathy when he has to go to birthday parties of their grandchildren without his wife who loved those grandbabies and great grandbabies so much. do not give him sympathy. give him justice. give him justice. it should be the fair. the amount you put on number 11 should be fair and just in light of the evidence. there is no exact standard of measuring that. and you should not make any reduction in this amount that you put on number 11 based on anything you put in number 10. do not reduce it because the court is going to reduce it. that is in your jury instruction. i believe it is in the instruction on the verdict form. the court will reduce the amount based on whatever percentages you put here next to these folks in item number 10. you are going to have to evaluate this loss that mr. ward had such trouble describing to you, and i'm not going to try to cheapen with words or try to tell you the story about 48 years of being dedicated to another person. but you can see mr. ward standing there for five hours in the hospital over the body of his wife after she died because he did not want her to be alone. you can see him coming home at 4:00 in the morning and being unable to crawl in that bed that they shared for 48 years. he ain't slept in it since. you cannot unring a bell like that. what you put on item number 11 should acknowledge mr. ward's loss. i'm going to suggest to you, because he is got a lot of life left, i'm going to suggest to you $5,000,000. you can award more than that. you can award less than that. what you award -what you award should acknowledge mr. ward's loss because it was real. and it is a pittance compared to what they spent. mr. baringer: objection, your honor. the court: sustained. mr. gustafson: lastly, the last two questions on this verdict form are under the circumstances of this case state whether punitive damages are warranted against r.j. reynolds and whether punitive damages are warranted against liggett group. you are going to get an instruction on these two questions about awarding punitive damages and the standard. the standard is a little higher here. it is not the greater weight of the evidence. it is got to be clear and convincing evidence. you have gotten plenty of clear and convincing evidence for two weeks about the conduct of these companies. can you put the instruction up? there is four different standards here. the first standard is the conduct or policies causing loss to the plaintiff was so gross and flagrant as to show a reckless disregard of human life or the safety of persons exposed to the extent of such conduct and then it says or. it can be any one of these four standards. you will have these in the jury room with you. they meet every one of these four standards. if you took somebody and you blindfolded them and you handed them a dart and you put that jury instruction on a wall and you spun them around a few times and you face them toward the wall and you have them throw a dart at the jury instruction, it would not matter where the dart landed. they meet every single one of those four standards. the law recognizes how rare that is when it puts an "or" between each one of them. the law recognizes if you meet any one of those four standards, punitive damages ought to be warranted. punitive damages are warranted if you meet one of those four standards and they meet all four. this is not a situation where they did not mean it. it is not a situation where it was an accident and it was just a couple of crazy people for a little while. they did this for decades. they knew they lied. they did not care what the results were as long as it put money in that bigger bag that they wanted to carry the money to the bank. it is reprehensible. it is the worst, most reprehensible conduct that corporate america has to offer us. y'all are going to have to stand up and do something about that. you are the only ones that can. you are the only ones that can. these were real people that got affected. mattie ward was a real person. she was not just one of the millions they described in their documents. she was real. think about the aspirin manufacturers dr. burns talked about. think about when reye syndrome came out and the aspirin manufacturers actually did cooperate with the public health authorities to tell people if you have got a baby and they get sick with a fever, do not give them aspirin because it can kill your baby. imagine if the aspirin manufacturers acted like the cigarette companies acted. oh, that is not true, it is not proven, babies have been dying since the beginning of time. keep giving aspirin to your babies. there is no proof it causes any harm. if they ever tell us anything about aspirin that causes babies to die, we will be the first to let you know. keep giving aspirin to your babies. who within the sound mind and voice would accept that as reasonable conduct? nobody. nobody would tolerate that. there is undisputed, unrebutted evidence that these defendants' conduct was reprehensible and you should check yes on 12 and 13. it is clear and convincing evidence. and the only truly acceptable answer based on the evidence that you heard in this case is yes on both of those questions. thank you for paying attention. thank you for your patience during this trial. mr. gustafson: if it please the court. i'm going to be brief, ladies and gentlemen. i want to start by pointing out on question number ten that mr. feiwus was just addressing regarding the percentages of a budget from the tobacco institute from 1980, where he said that philip morris and lorillard bear more responsibility in this case, even though they are not defendants, and even though liggett brought no proof, that philip morris and lorillard bear more responsibility here than liggett. i want to show you what liggett had to say about this right before this trial, and this is what was played to you yesterday. "regarding this defense, mr. shipe, you have identified lorillard and philip morris in the defense. is there something in particular that philip morris or lorillard did at any point in time that you believe, you being liggett, merits an allocation of fault greater to philip morris and lorillard than liggett should share?" and his answer, is, "i'm not aware of anything along those lines." that is the evidence in this case. what liggett's lawyer tells you is not evidence. that is the evidence in this case. mr. feiwus repeatedly said that liggett was and is a responsible manufacturer. and i want you to evaluate that statement in light of what the evidence was in this case. "does liggett agree that it would be inappropriate for it to conceal information regarding the health risks of using its products?" and liggett, their testimony was, "liggett does not have a position on that." y'all are going to have to take a position on that. you are going to have to take a position on that when you answer questions 12 and 13. the question number 13 has to do with liggett. and the position that you take on liggett's conduct should be a check in the yes box on punitive damages. liggett tells you in this case that they are a responsible corporate cigarette manufacturer, and if you remember, they had talked about the nine volumes of materials they gave to the surgeon general back in 1962 or 1963 where they said they shared -- mr. feiwus just told you they shared all of their data with the surgeon general and they got this thank you letter. but what they did not do was they did not tell the surgeon general that all their fine scientists in a.d. little company up in boston, massachusetts knew and concluded that cigarettes cause all kinds of disease. they did not tell the surgeon general that. they kept that to themselves. and then july 3rd, 1963 they get a thank you letter from an unwitting assistant surgeon general who does not know what liggett knows, that when liggett submitted nine volumes of material, liggett withheld the information that it knew and concluded that their cigarettes cause disease. and they got a thank you letter that way and now in january of 2012, they come here and they wave that thank you letter around like it is a certificate of achievement; when the way they got that thank you letter initially was they withheld information from the very public health officials they tell you they cooperated with. ask yourself -- ask yourselves if that makes any sense, if that is fair. liggett also tells you that they were not a member of this conspiracy. well, you know, that if you answer yes to questions one and two, then you will have determined that liggett is a member of that conspiracy because the engle findings tell you they have already been found to be guilty of being a member of that conspiracy, findings that are -- mr. feiwus: objection, your honor. the court: sustained. rephrase. mr. gustafson: that they have already been found to be a member. it states here that r.j. reynolds and liggett each entered into an agreement with one another and with philip morris, the american tobacco company and it lists all those companies. liggett was a member just as much of a member as everybody else. r.j. reynolds argued to you that by showing you and telling you that mr. ward takes responsibility for mattie's role in this on question number ten, that we were just trying to sound reasonable by taking responsibility for mattie's role in this. ask yourselves, did mattie ward design cigarettes to be addictive? did mattie ward put ammonia in cigarettes to make them more inhalable? did mattie ward design cigarettes to free base nicotine when you smoke them? did mattie ward put levulinic acid to increase nicotine binding in the brain? she did not do any of that. she did not even know about it. they kept all of that a secret. they kept all of that secret. truth is powerful. truth is powerful. the truth will give you motivation to do what you need to do. they kept all those things a secret. r.j. reynolds tells you that either on the addiction question, which nobody, nobody has brought you any evidence that mattie ward was not addicted; and nobody, none of them have brought you any evidence to oppose the evidence that was undisputed and unrebutted in this case that her addiction to nicotine caused her death from chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. they have not brought you anything but arguments of lawyers. we brought you evidence. they brought you the lawyers. r.j. reynolds put this up, was addiction a legal cause of mattie ward's death? and they way they define this issue is, did mattie ward have the ability to quit but chose to continue smoking or did nicotine addiction control mrs. ward and leave her no meaningful choice, no matter how hard she tried, but to continue smoking causing her death? and they tell you that because she could get through a church service or not smoke in the car on the way to the mall or refrain from smoking in a classroom at work, that must mean that nicotine addiction did not control mrs. ward and leave her no meaningful choice. this is a convenient, convenient r.j. reynolds definition of addiction, that if it were true would allow them to say nobody is addicted to nicotine. that is the way they arranged that issue for them to argue that. nobody would meet that definition. they have told you that 60 million people have quit. you heard dr. cummings explain to you where they got the number 60 million. there is a survey that is done and the question, the very first question, have you stopped smoking in the past year? if you say yes to that question, you are one of the ones who have quit and they extrapolate that number out. and that is how they get 17 million quit by 1965 or 1970 and another 13 million by 1980. that is where they get those numbers. mattie ward could have been one of those smokers who quit. mattie ward quit smoking in the '60s, she quit smoking in the '70s. she quit smoking in the '80s. she quit smoking in the '90s and she is one of the 20 million who died. that number, 60 million, does not take into account relapse. they cannot argue that it does because it does not. it does not take into account relapse, all the people who have quit and then failed to keep not smoking, they all went back to it, all those people that did that. you saw the statistics on it. the 60 million number does not take that into account. i want to talk to you briefly about the brands. there is no question in this case that mattie ward smoked chesterfield. mr. ward testified yesterday, sitting right there, that chesterfield was the main brand, along with the other three, but chesterfield was the main brand in the early years. no, he could not say what years she started and what years she stopped. no, he was not able to do that. but chesterfield was the main brand. mr. feiwus has told you that there is no evidence that it was. well, use your collective memory. i do not have a transcript of mr. ward, but that is what he said sitting there yesterday. if somebody was paying attention, they would have known that. mr. baringer testified that the only way for us to prove r.j. reynolds has liability, according to them, and that we cannot sustain the burden of proof on whether r.j. reynolds cigarettes caused her any harm is because mr. ward was not going to be able to testify as to what percentage of her smoking was to each related brand. he showed you one instruction and it is necessary -- you are going to get these instructions, but you need to see this because instruction number 19, which is the one that he said i did not get right and i did not. it should have said instead of by any one manufacturer, it should have said by r.j. reynolds. that was the mistake on the jury instruction. but it says, if you find by the greater weight of the evidence that the combination of smoking cigarettes manufactured by r.j. reynolds and those manufactured by other companies contributed substantially to causing mattie ward's death, in indeterminate degrees and amounts, then i instruct you that smoking cigarettes manufactured by r.j. reynolds is considered the legal cause of mattie ward's death, even though you cannot determine the exact contribution of each company's cigarettes. we spent 30 minutes today of y'all's time talking about brands and percentages and every lawyer in this room knew you are getting that instruction, that they all combine together. and you do not have to know whether it was two percent of marlboro, thirty percent of vantage or twenty percent of viceroy. you do not have to know all of that. there is no evidence she did not smoke those brands. those are the brands she smoked. we did not ask mr. ward to come in here and make up percentages on each of one those brands. we did not ask his daughter to do that because we know what the law is. she smoked those brands and those are the brands that dr. burns' unrebutted, undisputed testimony said that is what caused her copd and that is what caused her death. it was her addiction to all of those cigarettes. mr. baringer told you that smoking was normal back when mrs. ward was starting to smoke in the 1950s. it was normal. and they acted like r.j. reynolds and the rest of these companies did not have anything to do with that. how -- how is it that smoking cigarettes went from rare in the 1890s and 1900s to being everywhere by 1950? how did that happen? did people just -- the whole united states of america just pick up this rarity and start doing it or was it mass marketing people? how do you think that happened? if nobody ever told you about an ipod or an iphone, do you think people would have them or do you think marketing has a little something to do that? because 15 years ago we did not have that stuff and everybody has got it now. you cannot swing a dead cow without seeing a kid walking around with the stuff in his ears. it is everywhere. no one can tell you i bought one because i saw an advertisement, but you know that is how they found out about it. you know that is how it is. we all know that. they made smoking normal. they made it acceptable and they made it seem normal. it was in the movies, on tv, on the radio, everybody was doing it and that is because they marketed it that way. then they come here and they tell you it did not work. ask yourselves if that makes any sense. mr. baringer said we do not know, we do not know whether people started smoking filtered cigarettes because the public health people were saying it was a better thing to do, or whether it was because the way the companies marketed filtered cigarettes in the '50s, and you cannot say what contributed to what and what people relied on and, therefore, the plaintiff did not -- the plaintiff did not carry their burden of proof. this is final instruction number 24 and final instruction 24 tells you, in order to be regarded as a legal cause of loss, the agreement to withhold health information or information regarding addiction and the acts proven in furtherance of that agreement need not be the only cause. the agreement may be a legal cause of loss even though it operates in combination with the act of another, some natural cause or some other cause, and the agreement and acts in furtherance of it contribute substantially to producing such loss. do you think that the public health community would have recommended people switch to filters if they knew what the cigarette manufacturers knew, if they knew what the cigarette manufacturers not only knew but kept to themselves? we all know they would not have. if the cigarette manufacturers came out and said, look, this stuff causes cancer and the filters do not do any good, then people would have really had a choice. am i going to keep doing this or not? and then they would have found out the truth about nicotine, levulinic acid and ammonia and ph. the truth is powerful. it affects how people act. we know that it does because one out of five americans smoke today. where back then it was one out of two. we do not have to prove exactly what she relied on as long as we prove that the acts of these companies contributed substantially to her behavior and what do we know? we know she smoked viceroy as a main brand in the '60s, '70s. that is what annette testified to last week. we know her main brand from the early 1980s until she quit smoking in 2000, whether that is 17 years or 18 years, i do not know; but it was the early 1980s to 2000 her main brand was what? y'all all know it. vantage. what did they say when they were putting vantage on the market? well, r.j. reynolds said, we think that vantage will be the product that can stem the decline in cigarette smoking. how did they market vantage? they marketed vantage, their advertising platform and rationale for vantage was that it is the area of the normal flavor smokers that our prime target resides. these are marlboro, winston, pall mall, camel and possibly a kent smoker, is more likely to be male than female and that he is a concerned smoker. the term concerned can be sugar-coated, but when it comes right down to it, he is an edgy smoker. mr. baringer talked a long time about how mattie was nervous, she had nerve problems and that is why she smoked cigarettes. she was an edgy smoker. her concern had to do with health, just like this document says. she started trying to quit in the late 1960s. she tried to quit multiple times in the '70s and '80s and '90s. you have heard all the testimony about that. vantage was marketed to people just like mattie ward. mattie ward, as you heard dr. cummings, she fits -- she ain't a he, but she fits that marketing plan to a tee. they got her. and they come in here and they say she never listened. she never got their message and you know she got their message because the evidence was clear about that. they also said in repositioning this brand, we would state it as follows. it will be a truly unique cigarette that permits the smoker to feel good about his smoking habit. permits him to feel good about his smoking habit. how do you tell somebody they can feel good about their smoking habit when they are worried about their health? well, you kind of -- you know they are concerned about their health if they are trying to quit smoking. if they are still smoking cigarettes, it means they cannot. so they know how that usually works. people try and they cannot give it up and they try and they try. well, how many times have you decided to give up smoking? maybe you just ought to keep smoking because you like it too much to give it up. they quote that medical record from dr. may where she said, i like it too much. why do you think she says she liked it too much? because she was addicted. mr. feiwus told you there is no evidence that she was addicted. there is no evidence she was not addicted. i do not know how many doctors we had to parade in here and tell you that. reading depositions, dr. hanline, dr. may. we brought you dr. cummings and dr. burns. we showed you dr. wagner's record. there ain't any question about that. that is how you market to an addicted smoker. that is how you market to them. how many times have you tried to give up smoking? mr. baringer also said we do not know what role advertising played. we do not know if she relied on the public health authorities on filters or the cigarette companies on filters. and then you hear it again, we do not know what role advertising played and whether she relied on it. well, we do know. we do know whether she relied on advertising because annette testified just last week in this very courtroom. she was asked, do you recall -- can you estimate a time based on things that were going on in your life around the time when you first saw your mother smoking vantage? she said probably in the '80s, early '80s. and why is it that you recall that in the early '80s? she said, well, i mean, it was just a different pack of cigarettes. it had a target looking thing on it or something and i just asked her why she had switched and she said -- she just said that they were supposed to be better for you if you were going to smoke. they did not have as much tar or nicotine in them. they have told you for hours today that mattie ward did not get their message, that there was no evidence that mattie ward got their evidence. i showed you the marketing plan. i showed you what the intent of the marketing plan was, who they were going after. i showed you what the ads were, what they looked like and now i've shown you the testimony of her daughter who talked to her about it. they say there is no evidence. well, we do know. this is not a we do not know yet again. we do know. she smoked vantage because they told her it was better for her. it is a positive step in your smoking career. from 2:00 to 2:30 today mr. baringer talked about all the things that we do not know. he showed you a clip of harry reasoner and he showed you half of it. i want to play the next two minutes of what mr. reasoner said that r.j. reynolds did not show you. i leave it to you to decide why they did not show it to you. (video clip lp1027c was played) mr. gustafson: january of 2012, they come here and they tell you we do not know why she switched to low tar. i just showed you the evidence that was right here. and we do not know what contribution cigarette companies made to people taking up filters. and you know the instruction says you do not have to know exactly, and we do not know whether these cigarettes caused her copd or not. when the instruction you get says they all work together. mr. baringer: objection, mischaracterizes the argument. the court: overruled. mr. gustafson: and we do not know if she is addicted. we did not know, he told you right here in january 2012, just today. you were hearing excuses for why it was okay for r.j. reynolds and the rest of these companies to say -- to keep it to themselves and it was not proven yet. that is 2012. still, we do not know. we did not know then and it was okay for us not to say anything. mr. baringer: objection, your honor. the court: jury will step out a moment, please. [#deleted sidebar#] security officer: your honor, the jury is in the box. the court: counsel, please continue. mr. gustafson: thank you, your honor. mr. baringer argued in their closing, r.j. reynolds closing argument that reynolds does not control what other companies do. this was about the whole idea of giving smokers a choice. really giving them a choice, making it a fair fight, taking the nicotine out. they are really smoking for the taste. they are really smoking for that tar. give them that, but make it a fair fight. do not make it addictive. mr. baringer called that ridiculous. it was ridiculous, that reynolds does not control what the others do. well, y'all saw the evidence here that they are able to get together to increase profits and lie to the public and lie to their customers and go to a big fancy hotel and do that as long as it makes them more money; but they cannot get together -- reynolds does not think they can get together to take nicotine out to give people a real choice. they could have given mattie ward a real choice. they could have given millions of people a real choice. they chose money instead of people. mattie ward could have had a real choice. mattie ward could still be here today if she had a real choice. why not mattie ward? because that is what this case is about. y'all have heard enough from lawyers. we have been going all day. i would think that if mattie ward was here, she would probably want me to shut up and give y'all this case. you are going to come back in here with justice in your hand. justice is on that verdict form and come back in here with justice in your hand. mr. ward is going to take your verdict. no matter what it is, he is going to take your verdict home with him and he is going to live with it. this is his one chance and you are his jury. your r.j. reynolds' jury and liggett's jury. come in here and deliver justice. do what is right. do what is right. follow the instructions and do what is right. thank you.