2 mr. shields: thank you, your honor. we were talking about all of the massive documentary evidence about their denials and misrepresentations and concealment that cigarettes caused cancer. there is another aspect of that as well, and that is their denials that cigarettes were addictive long after they knew they were addictive and they were internally researching how to manipulate the content of cigarettes to make them more addictive. one of the documents we have shown to you is a 1969 report from one of the premier researchers -- you have heard his name time and time again from philip morris -- dr. wakeham, in a presentation that he made to the philip morris board of directors. now, you may have had this implication from time to time from the defense, that it is a scientist here and a scientist there and they are not really speaking for the company. this is the presentation to the board of directors of their corporation, the top people that run the company. and what this document indicates is their clear understanding of why people smoke and how to keep them smoking. they start by recognizing that they get smokers to begin with when they are children, when they are teenagers, and that they start smoking as teenagers for reasons that have nothing to do with nicotine or the cigarettes but have to do with glamorizing them, feeling like they are an adult, for all of these psychosocial reasons. that is why children begin to smoke. we are all going through -- all have gone through that adolescence process, and that is what happens. and they fully understood that. but how do you keep them smoking after that point in time? what this document recognizes is that their understanding of how you keep them smoking is their addiction to nicotine. this was not only recognized in this document to the board of directors, but they undertook a massive internal investigation by dr. dunn. the next document about nicotine's addictiveness and the incentive to keep people smoking by manipulating nicotine. you are going to have all of these documents. 23 it is a lot of documents to look through. it is a pretty massive pile over here. and among those you will have this document that clearly indicates their understanding that the way you keep people smoking is the nicotine content. and as dr. farone testified to you -- remember dr. farone. he was at philip morris. he was one of their internal scientists. and he told the truth and said, "we all knew that cigarettes caused cancer and we all knew that nicotine was addictive. and we manipulated the content of cigarettes to make sure that people continued to smoke because of their addictiveness." that fact is set out by a rather important admission made in 1963 in a document that you will have, marked strictly "private and confidential," in which "there is a candid and clear admission, moreover, nicotine is addictive. we are then in the business of selling nicotine, an addictive drug." that is the truth that they knew clearly by the early '60s, if not before that. but they united. finally in 1988 the surgeon general of the united states, he issued a massive report -- one of those documents you will have over there -- that goes through all the evidence that nicotine is addictive, that it is similar to cocaine, that it is similar to heroin addiction, and they responded by denying it. here's the evening news from the day that surgeon general's report was issued. (a video clip was played and transcribed by the court reporter to the best of her ability as follows:) announcer: "the smoking war escalated today. a new report from the surgeon general of the united states added a weapon for people who oppose smoking and their representatives in congress. it also drew fire from the tobacco industry. medical correspondent susan spencer reports." susan spencer: "surgeon general koop drew his smoking gun on the tobacco industry today, declaring what a lot of people who cannot kick the habit already know: the nicotine in cigarettes is addictive, very addictive." surgeon general koop: "i would say it is just as addictive as heroin or cocaine. our nation has mobilized enormous resources to wage war on drugs, illicit drugs. we should also give priority to the one addiction, tobacco addiction, that is killing more than 300,000 americans each year." susan spencer: "anti-smoking groups said this report puts their fight on a new footing." unidentified speaker: "because a finding that smoking is addictive knocks out the tobacco industry's number-one argument, that is, that smokers smoke because of their freewill." susan spencer: "others said the official finding that smokers are addicted may actually help them quit." unidentified speaker: "people should be encouraged. now we know what the nature of the beast is that is been controlling them. it is a 8 drug." susan spencer: "as expected, the tobacco institute called today's report unwarranted, saying that since people do quit smoking, tobacco clearly is not addictive. "in response, the surgeon general noted that some people also get off heroin. "susan spencer, cbs news, washington." (the video clip was ended.) mr. shields: now, you saw the reference in that report to the number of people that die each year from tobacco, 300,000. recall that dr. burns testified later than it was close to 440,000. why is that? that is because in the year since 1988 more people die each year from cigarette smoking, primarily because of the number of women that started smoking and the long lag between when starting smoking and when cancer finally occurs to return to the addictiveness. they not only denied it following the surgeon general's report saying it was an irresponsible scare tactic -- and you will have that document -- a few years later in 1994 they were compelled by subpoena to appear before a congressional committee and required, as you saw witnesses here, to take an oath that they would tell the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the truth under penalty of perjury. and each of the presidents of the tobacco companies, including the president of philip morris and including the president of r.j. reynolds, stood up under oath and said tobacco and nicotine was not addictive, despite the fact that all of their internal documents going back 30-some years showed to the contrary, not only that they knew it but they were internally researching how to make the cigarettes more addictive by manipulating the content of nicotine. let us take a look at their testimony. (a video clip was played and transcribed by the court reporter to the best of her ability as follows:) unidentified speaker: "let me begin my questioning on the matter of whether or not nicotine is addictive. let me ask you first -- and i'd like to just go down the row -- whether each of you believes that nicotine is not addictive. i heard virtually all of you touch on it. and just yes or no. "do you believe nicotine is not addictive?" unidentified speaker: "i believe nicotine is not addictive, yes." unidentified speaker: "mr. johnson?" unidentified speaker: "congressman, cigarettes and nicotine clearly do not meet the classic definitions of addiction. there is no intoxication" -- unidentified speaker: "we will take that as a no. and again, kind of short, if you can just -- i think each of you believe nicotine is not addictive. i just would like to have this for the record." unidentified speaker: "i do not believe that nicotine or our products are addictive." 19 unidentified speaker: "i believe nicotine is not addictive." unidentified speaker: "i believe that nicotine is not addictive." unidentified speaker: "i believe that nicotine is not addictive." unidentified speaker: "and i, too, believe that nicotine is not addictive." unidentified speaker: "all right." (the video clip was ended.) mr. shields: those denials were not just on c-span, as mr. reilly told you in opening statement, but the evening news covered that very testimony of all the networks. and the major story in all the newspapers the following day was that the cigarette company presidents denied that nicotine was addictive. and they continued that denial until 2000, following the first engle trial, when they finally admitted on their website. now, what is the contrary evidence to all that i've been telling you, about their long campaign of denial and deceit and misrepresentation and fraud and concealment? was there any evidence they presented you denying anything that dr. proctor said or dr. burns said or dr. goldberg said? the only evidence they offered was from mr. jupe. despite all of their internal scientists and corporate executives and people that had denied over the years, did not bring a one of them to testify. did not bring a one of them to say, "here's why i said it and here's what i meant." instead they brought somebody that did not even come to work for them until 1995 and who claimed on that witness stand that he had not read or seen any of the documents, despite the fact that he is asked deposition after deposition about them, including by me less than two months ago when he also denied, as he admitted on the stand, that he had read the documents. and he was shown the documents and required to read them. and he comes into court two months later and says, "oh, i've never read these." why do you think it is that they put on a witness and they never have him read all of the documents that are relevant to what they did? because they cannot deny it. there is no contrary evidence to this. the evidence is not just compelling, it is the only evidence at this trial. now, compare that conduct to mrs. warrick. like most smokers, she continued to believe, as she testified, that cigarettes were not hazardous. she testified, when asked the question directly, that she did not know that cigarettes were harmful until the '80s when all of those events, the death of her sister, calvin's heart attack, the death of her friend, to coalesce for them. she, like most smokers at the time accepted their denials. now, why do we know that most smokers did it? because these companies researched their smokers and 4 tried to determine what they believed and did not believe. and we showed you those documents in dr. proctor's testimony and in dr. goldberg's testimony. their own internal surveys indicated that close to two-thirds of the smokers, their customers, accepted their denials and rejected that cigarettes caused cancer and were harmful. dr. goldberg said, "even those that said it was harmful compared it to getting out of a bathtub in terms of the risk." they knew they had provided a psychological crutch that worked. not only did dr. goldberg testify to that, but one of the documents you will have is from the federal trade commission. look at it closely. it describes its survey research around the country of smokers in trying to determine the effectiveness. let us move to the federal trade commission. video tech operator: which one? mr. shields: the federal trade commission document. while she is finding it, what their survey documents indicated is that -- here we go. here's the federal trade commission report. and what this federal trade commission report indicated is that the commission believes that the warning label on cigarette packages has not succeeded in overcoming the prevalent attitude toward cigarette smoking created and maintained by the cigarette companies through their advertisements, particularly the barrage of commercials on television which portray smoking as a harmless and enjoyable social activity that is not habit-forming and involves no hazards to health. that is what the united states government concluded from its survey of smokers, and that is what the compelling evidence shows here as well. let us talk about causation now. you are going to hear about causation, i expect, from the defendants, as they try to say, "but anything we did did not cause her to smoke." the evidence is to the contrary. dr. goldberg testified that she started smoking in the first place, as she did, because of their marketing and advertising, using celebrities and athletes, creating the impression that everybody smoked, creating the impression that it was glamorous. mrs. warrick testified she started smoking because of the glamour, because you went to the movies, you saw everybody smoking, and everybody around her smoked. then she became addicted. and with addiction comes the difficulty of trying to quit and the willingness to accept the denials of the companies as a reason not to quit. and so dr. goldberg described for you their massive advertising campaign in which they drowned out any public health message. you may recall his term for that, as a marketing professor, was "share of voice." and he had this fulcrum that he showed you 15 as to what was going on. you had the tobacco industry's heavy, sophisticated advertising promotion, and you had to compare that to what public health warnings were available. now, you saw yesterday various articles and public health information that was put on for you, but where was the witness to say, "this public health message ran on the following stations for the following time periods and with this frequency"? where was the witness that told you, "this was on all the time so somebody would have known it"? they did not put on anybody. dr. goldberg testified that what the federal trade commission and what he had determined as well was, first, that these warnings, under the fairness doctrine, were only for a limited period of time in the late '60s; secondly, in order to comply the stations, in fact, played them but at 2:00 in the morning, so that they technically complied, but how many people were up to see those kind of warnings and with what frequency? and then after the ban on advertising on television, those health messages virtually disappeared. that is the undisputed testimony. no testimony from the defendants at all about what any of that material meant or how often it was played. they also showed you some documents, some newspapers in life magazine and so forth, as if that would indicate to mrs. warrick that she knew something or should have known something. what they did not tell you was that in each of those articles the tobacco industry denies what the article claims. what they did not tell you is that that life magazine was full of ads. as dr. goldberg said, the ads just dominated. and surveys have shown that for those magazines that took tobacco advertising, they seldom put out any anti-tobacco or public health message. the fact is, marketing works. the fact is, their advertisement works. i know we all say, "oh, i'm not impacted by advertising. i'm not impacted by marketing. i did not go out and buy tide because there is all that advertising on television." but that survey evidence indicates to the contrary. ask yourself this question. do you think the tobacco companies, as sophisticated in marketing and advertising as they were, would spend the vast amount of money that they did on their heavy, sophisticated advertising program if it did not work? they knew it worked. they tested it. they surveyed eight people. it worked. it convinced their customers to continue smoking their product. and a few public service announcements and articles in the paper did not change that. so the simple and compelling logic here is as follows: she started smoking as a child because they focused their advertising on children to get them to smoke. she became addicted. and then once she became addicted, she needed a psychological crutch to continue to smoke, and they knew it. and so with their heavy, sophisticated campaign of 4552 denial and deceit, they continued to persuade her to continue smoking over the years. now, they may say, "well, she could not recall a specific thing we said or a specific document." that misses the point. nobody 50 years later can say, "oh, i remember the frank statement," or 50 years later, "i remember this specific ad," although she did testify in some detail about what she remembered about a lot of ads. the fact is, it is all of that together that creates this image of what you believe. that is what they created. they created a whole culture around her of smoking that took her decades to break through and recognize the harm and then attempt to quit. there is a related causation issue that i want to talk about next. and that is, did cigarette smoking cause her death by causing her death through lung cancer and copd? all of their evidence in this case literally dealt with that issue. they put on dr. bishopric. they put on dr. shuman. they talked at length about whether or not, in fact, she died of cigarette smoking as opposed to heart disease. that is a false issue. it is a false issue because whether she died as a result of copd or lung cancer, she is still entitled to recover. the estate is still entitled to recover. that does not provide a defense to this claim. it just determines what kind of recovery she gets, whether it is what is called a "wrongful death claim" or whether it is a survival claim. now, the undisputed facts are she was diagnosed with copd in 1991, that dr. bagnoli started treating her for copd and treated her for the rest of his life -- her life, that she grew progressively worse, being disabled in 1994 from working, going on oxygen full-time, requiring a walker, ultimately requiring a wheelchair, that she was diagnosed with lung cancer, the worst kind you could have, stage iv, that she went through debilitating, toxic chemotherapy, that she went through radiation, that she spent 17 days in the hospital just before her death, severely anemic, immunocompromised, with pneumonia, frail, older than her stated age and wasting, and that she died within four days of when she got out of the hospital. and her treating physicians, dr. bagnoli, dr. nurani said it is because she had lung cancer and copd. but instead of calling her treating physicians or her local heart doctors or anyone else, they brought in two doctors from miami to say, "oh, no, it is heart disease." now, those doctors had to admit that copd, in fact, can cause the very condition that they were talking about. they had to admit that chemotherapy can cause the very condition that they are talking about. they had to admit that smoking-induced coronary artery disease can cause the very condition 11 they are talking about. they had to admit that, in fact, as dr. shuman said, they may well have been contributing causes to her death. and that is the standard, whether they were substantial contributing causes. they did not have to be the only cause. her heart disease could have been related to other things as well, as long as there was substantial contributing causes. but i'm not here to tell you, believe the local doctors and reject their experts, because it does not make any difference. the fact is, we are entitled to recover either way. i'm not going to spend a lot of time talking about their experts. you are going to have to decide, do i believe dr. bagnoli? do i believe dr. nurani? do i believe the local physician that did the autopsy that said it had nothing to do with her heart condition, or do i believe a thousand-dollar-an-hour doctor from miami that they brought in? but if you believe, in fact, she died from unrelated heart disease, all right. it does not mean we do not have a claim; it just means we have a different claim. and as we are now going to turn to damage and talk about it and we will see, the irony is that the survival claim, as opposed to the wrongful death claim, probably has more economic value. so let us talk about damages. the first kind of damages we are going to talk about are what are called compensatory damages, that is the damages for her actual injuries, whether you call it wrongful death or whether it is a survival claim. and so you need to understand the difference between a wrongful death and survival claim. and one of the questions you are going to have to answer very early is was her death on february 7th caused by either or one of a combination of her smoking-related illnesses? that is, "did copd or lung cancer cause or substantially contribute to causing her death?" if you answer yes to that question, it is what is called a "wrongful death claim." and a wrongful death claim has certain damages that the law of florida provides. it provides that you can recover for medical bills, funeral expenses, calvin warrick, her husband's, loss of support and services, calvin warrick's loss of companionship, mental pain and suffering. those are the damages provided by florida law for wrongful death. but if you determine that, in fact, she did not die from her copd or lung cancer, it does not mean she did not suffer. she had 19 years of suffering from copd. she had extreme suffering during the last year of her life from lung cancer. all it means is the "no" answer to the question is that it is what is called a "survival action." what does that mean? all that means is the claim that she would have had, had she still been alive today, survives her death so that her estate can assert it. 22 and the claim that survives her death that she would have had, if she were still alive today, is that she could recover for her medical bills, she could recover for her pain and suffering, she could recover for her mental anguish, she could recover for her loss of enjoyment of life, for her inconvenience, physical impairment, and aggravation of her preexisting condition. those are all parts of the damage that can be recovered in a survival claim. basically, the difference is, wrongful death damages, you both recover medical expenses and -- on both, but for death, of course, you have funeral expenses. and the emphasis on the wrongful death claim is on the damage to mr. warrick, whereas a survival claim is the damage to her that she had for the 19 years prior to her death. and that is why i told you that in many respects that survival claim may well have more value, be worth more in damages for the wrongful death claim. that is why i'm not going to spend a lot of time disputing with them about whether it is a wrongful death or a survival claim. now, what do we know about the damages? first, the medical bills. it is agreed that the medical bills are $683,682.27. there is no evidence to the contrary. in fact, there is an agreement that that is the amount. and we are going to ask you, whether it is wrongful death or whether it is survival, to award that amount of money as a starting point. secondly, it is undisputed that the funeral expenses were $2,692.49. no dispute. we are going to ask you, if there is a wrongful death claim, to award that amount of money. next, on the wrongful death claim, as i told you, the emphasis on it is calvin, whereas the survival claim emphasis is on mrs. warrick. the unrefuted testimony is that one of the elements of the loss of the value of services and support is $234,000. you remember mr. spruance that testified towards the end of our case, the life care planner, rehabilitation guy who determined what the value was? the only evidence you have is his testimony as to the value of those loss of services, and that is $234,000. so that we are going to ask you if you find wrongful death claim to award that as well. let us go to the next one. in addition, if you are going to award the wrongful death claim, you have to determine the entitlement for full reimbursement for calvin warrick's loss of companionship, mental pain and suffering from july 1991 until today. why july 1991? well, it could probably be argued to be earlier than that, but that is the time period when the copd was first diagnosed. and so he suffered some loss of companionship during that entire time period because of her disabilities, because of her problems. and so we are going to ask you to award damages, under the wrongful death 7 claim, for that 19-year period of time. now, let me say this -- and this is going to apply to the survival claim as well -- the law does not provide a precise formula about how you award damages for such items like loss of companionship and pain and suffering. those are left to your enlightened conscience as jurors. that is what you are here to determine, among other things. now, there are various ways to do it. and i can suggest ways to do it. i doubt the defendants will suggest ways to do it, but they could. but it is going to ultimately be up to you. one way to do it, which makes a lot of sense, is to think about the time period. think about the fact that it is 19 years. during those 19 years every hour, every day, every month, every year these damages occur, whether they are wrongful death damages for calvin or her pain and suffering in the survival claim. now, we are used to thinking about being paid by the hour. we are used to thinking about compensation based upon time. one logical way that you can go about determining these kind of damages is to think about the total number of hours, total number of days, the months and years during that 19-year period, and to think in your mind, how many hours a day, and apply an hourly figure, as you would if you were being paid by the hour at your job, and apply it over that 19-year period of time. and that works both not only on calvin's loss of companionship, mental pain and suffering, but it works, if you are talking about the survival claim, on her pain and suffering, impairment and the losses that she would have had during that time period. so that when you answer no, if you answer no, and you are over here for her pain and suffering, her mental anguish, her loss of enjoyment, her inconvenience, her physical impairment and her aggravation, think in terms of each of those occur every hour, every day, every month, every year over that 19-year period. now, clearly, the pain and suffering is worse during the last year when she is on chemotherapy and radiation and she is hospitalized and anemic and has pneumonia and respiratory distress, so severely immunocompromised. so it may make sense in terms of figuring out time periods and how much to apply for an hourly basis to think about much larger amounts during that time period. but even if you go back -- and she is totally disabled by 1994. she is on oxygen by 1997. she is on a walker, in a wheelchair, unable to do things, in constant pain and suffering. so it is not just the last year of her life. you are going to have to figure that out. and we suggest to you the most logical way of dealing with these damages is to approach it from that standpoint, to make that very simple calculation and figure out how much you, in your collective wisdom, think it will be appropriate to 18 reimburse the estate for those losses, whether it is wrongful death in calvin's claim or the claim that would survive her death as if she were still here. now, there is a second damage issue you are going to have to address. we have talked a lot both about the original engle findings and if you find she was a member of the class that she gets the benefit of those. among those findings are civil conspiracy and fraud by concealment. but we offered you massive evidence of that as well of all of their fraudulent concealments and their misrepresentations and their misstatements of everything. that is what is justification for punitive damages. the court's going to instruct you on the florida law of punitive damages and the standard that you, as a jury, have to apply in order to award punitive damages. punitive damages are damages in addition to the compensatory damages that are designed to deter and punish the wrongdoer for their conduct. ladies and gentlemen, if there was ever a case that justifies the award of punitive damages, it is this case. if there is ever any wrongful conduct that justifies deterrence and punishment, it is what they did over that 45- to 50-year period of time, that massive civil conspiracy designed to keep their smokers addicted, knowing, ultimately, that they would kill 440,000 people a year, or more, and knowing that as long as they provided their denials and the psychological crutch, they could keep those people smoking and keep making all of the profits that they were making. you are going to have to ask yourself one question and answer it on this verdict form. is the estate of eveline warrick entitled to punitive damages? it is a simple question you are going to have to answer. the evidence is overwhelming, under the standard of florida law, that there is entitlement to punitive damages. if ever there was a case, this is the case in which there is entitlement for punitive damages in which you ought to be thinking about deterrence and punishment. one final subject, and then i'm going to sit down. they have asserted a defense. it is called a "statute of limitations." and that is going to be one of the questions early in the case that you are going to have to face. you are going to have to answer this question on the verdict form. and it is this question: "did eveline warrick know, or by the use of reasonable care, should she have known before may 5, 1990, that she had chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and that there was a reasonable possibility that it was caused by the defendants' actions?" what is all that about? that is what is called a "statute of limitations." a statute of limitations is a time period in which a lawsuit must be filed. and if it is not filed within that time period, the 3 claim is barred. you cannot bring it. now, that date, may 5, 1990, is based upon the engle class action. it is four years before the engle class action was filed, because there is a four-year statute of limitations for these kinds of claims. so not only do you need to determine whether she was a member of the engle class, but also whether -- as a member of the engle class, whether there is a statute of limitations defense, which is this question. now, since it is a defense, they have the burden of proof, not us. they have to prove to you by the greater weight of the evidence that she knew or should have known before may 5, 1990, that she had chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. if they do not meet that burden of proof, that is, if it is equally divided, if you cannot decide for sure, that defense is gone, since they have got the burden of proof, and you would answer this question no. now, what is the evidence on this question? the evidence is from dr. bagnoli. he said, "i diagnosed her a year later -- so that there would not be any statute of limitations defense -- "in 1991 that she had chronic obstructive pulmonary disease." and he testified she did not know until then that she had chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. that is not unusual. dr. burns told you in his videotape that because of the function of the lung -- remember that chart he had of lung function and how it dropped over the years -- that it took a pretty extreme drop in lung function before you had symptoms and knew you would have some problem. in fact, the evidence here is, the way eveline warrick ended up in dr. bagnoli's office was not that she thought she had some lung problem; she was hospitalized for what she thought was a reaction to a red bug bite. and it was as a result of that hospitalization that she got sent to dr. bagnoli. he did the tests and said, "you have got chronic obstructive pulmonary disease." and he told you that, in his judgment, she clearly did not know before then. so the question becomes should she have known? should she somehow have known before a doctor ever diagnosed her, before a doctor ever told her, that she had chronic obstructive pulmonary disease? now, the defense is going to argue she should have known because she had a cough earlier. a cough is not chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. a cough does not indicate, "gee, i've got this lung condition that is a serious, chronic disease." the testimony is until there is this test, even a doctor does not know for sure whether or not you have chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. there simply is no support for the claim that she should have known before that diagnosis. remember that testimony i showed you at the beginning, where she said in response to specific 14 questions, "i did not have any breathing problems; i did not have any asthma; i did not have any problems that led me to think there was any difficulty until 1991" when dr. bagnoli diagnosed her condition. so the answer to this question, one of the first three questions you have to ask [sic], has to be no. you got three questions that you got to answer initially: one, was she addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine? the answer is yes, from the compelling evidence. that is the first part of proving she is a member of the engle class. the second question you have to answer is whether that addiction was a cause of her chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. the answer to that is yes. and the third important question is whether or not this statute of limitations applies, and the answer is no. those are the first three questions you have to answer, and then you will move beyond that to whether she had a wrongful death claim or whether it was a survival claim. and, believe it or not, i'm going to sit down at this point in time and let the defendants have their say. i'll be back to talk to you in more detail after they have given you their argument and tell you what responses i have to their argument. i thank you again, not only for your attention in the close to last two hours, but your attention throughout this trial. it is a pleasure to be in front of a jury that is engaged and interested and attentive to everything that is going on. thank you so much.