7 mr. reilly: judge, that suggests that my closing argument might make somebody sleepy. and i hope that is not true. and when i practiced this last night, i practiced it by saying, "good morning, everybody," and i'm still making it. the jury: good morning. mr. reilly: so good morning, everybody. the jury: good morning. mr. reilly: you know what, i want to start my closing argument in kind of the same way that mr. shields did, and that is by thanking you for your service. when we started this, when we were picking you guys as jurors, we said things like tremendous responsibility, tremendous power. remember all that? and when we were talking about it, i said, you know, we are going to ask you to leave your jobs and your homes and your families and come spend a lot of time with us. and you have done it. and i said, "your job is going to be to listen closely to all the evidence in this case," right? and then you were going to have to put that together with the law that judge boyer is going to give you here in just a little bit. actually, it is probably going to be monday, i think. and, you know, for this system to work right -- i asked all you guys, "is there any better system in the world?" you know, we talked about raising hands, and is anybody not from here in the united states and do they have a system -- a better system anywhere else in the world? and we all agreed that this was the best system. and for it to work really well, you guys got to do what you did in this case. and what is that? you paid very close attention to the evidence as it was coming in. and sometimes that was not all that easy. and i know that because some of it was long depositions on that screen, including one where i was cross-examining dr. farone. and i'll be perfectly honest with you. i got a little sleepy, myself, listening to me cross-examine. so i know it was hard sometimes. but you guys did a great job. and we really, all of us, on behalf of myself, mr. bradford, everybody in this room, we appreciate the work you have done. but, of course, your work is not over yet, right? now we have come to the most important part. this is where you actually resolve this civil 7 dispute. this is where you take the evidence that you heard from the witness stand and the documents and things that are going to be sent back with you into the jury room, and the instructions that judge boyer is going to give you, and you put it all together, you answer the questions on the verdict form, and you resolve this dispute, right? all right. so now let us get started. you know, at the very beginning of this case, when i gave you my opening statement, i put this board up. and you notice that we are going to see an awful lot of the boards that i put up, because i told you that what i wanted you to do was to watch the evidence and see whether or not it did not turn out to be exactly what i told you it was going to be. that is what i told you. and i said, "you know what, this case is going to be about three words." i said, "we can distill this whole case down into three words." and what were they? control, who was in control of mrs. warrick decisions, lifestyle choices, that came with the potential for long-term health consequences? and i said, "for sure that is going to include smoking," right? but i said, "that is not the" -- in order to know about why somebody does what they do, you have to look a little broader than that, right? you have to know more about the person than just their smoking. you have to know how they live their life, right? so i said, "we are going to be looking at" -- "we are going to have a little window into how ms. warrick lived her life, and it is going to include things like smoking, diet, health, weight, all that kind of stuff." and you did, you got a little window into who was in control of mrs. warrick's lifestyle decisions, including her decision to begin smoking, continue smoking, quit smoking. i said this case was going to be about causation. i said, "you are going to be asked what was the cause of her death." and mr. shields just referred to this as a "false issue." it is not really a false issue. it is an issue in this case. and you guys have to resolve it for us. and what is the question? the question is: did she die because of her lung cancer or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, or did she die because she had a terribly diseased heart, a heart twice as large as its normal size, with electrical problems? did her heart stop beating because it had electrical problems, too large a size, and it beat for the last time because of that? and i should start this by saying, mr. engram and i are going to divide up the defense side of the closing argument, and he is going to talk to you about that. and then i said, "once you know the answer to who was in control of mrs. warrick's decisions and what was the cause of her death, then you would be able to determine who was responsible in this case." 18 who was responsible? and i said, "you know what, you will not see these words on the verdict form; you will not see these words in the instructions. this is a distillation." and that is true, you will not see them on the verdict form. but that is what this case turned out to be about. as you watched the evidence in this case, that is what you saw unfold, when we talked about whose case this was. this is not a class action. this is not a case about america, in general, or american people or the american population or people who answer surveys. this is a case about one smoker, right? and who is that? that is eveline warrick. that is whose case we are here about today. all right. so, now, what does -- what are the questions that we asked you to answer? and i have the verdict form. it looks like this. and you are each -- i do not know if everybody gets a verdict form, but everybody gets a set of instructions. but the first two questions that you are going to be asked to answer -- can everybody see this? the jury: (nods head.) mr. reilly: okay. "was eveline warrick addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine? yes or no?" and, number two, "if your answer to question 1 was yes, then you need to answer the second question, which is, 'was eveline warrick's addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine a legal cause of her chronic obstructive pulmonary disease?'" okay. now, what did the evidence turn out to be regarding whether or not mrs. warrick was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine? well, you guys had two addiction experts come here. the plaintiffs brought dr. frazier, and we brought dr. hayes, right? dr. hayes was the lady that appeared last in this trial. and dr. frazier said, "yes, mrs. warrick was addicted." and here in this courtroom on direct examination, she said, "in my opinion, my clinical judgment, mrs. warrick was addicted from the time she was in her -- either her late teens or her early 20s, sometime in the late '50s or early '60s." and she said, "i use as my guide a manual here, the dsm, but" she said, "i do not have enough information to use this going all the way back to the '50s or the '60s." so here in this courtroom, on direct examination, she said, "so i used my clinical judgment to make that determination." but then on cross-examination i reminded -- what is the best way to do this? let us use two of these. can you see this one, too? a juror: yeah, except for the bottom. mr. reilly: except for the bottom? a juror: (nods head.) mr. reilly: how about that? a juror: (shakes head.) mr. reilly: still in the way. okay. you know 3 what? i'll do it another way. there you go. sorry. and if anybody cannot hear me -- because the court reporter told me before i got started, she said, "speak up, mr. reilly. you are too soft-spoken," so... on cross-examination i reminded her that in her deposition she had testified that she said, "i can tell you, based on my clinical experience and based on the fact that she started so young and if she was smoking a pack a day, i would not be surprised if she met the criteria for nicotine dependence in her late teens or early 20s. nobody could tell you within medical certainty unless they were there at that time and interviewed her to see if she met the criteria, so i cannot say with medical certainty. i can say it would not surprise me at all, based on my clinical experience of treating patients for lots of years with nicotine dependence." so then she was asked, "so it would not surprise you, but you really do not know?" "no, i do not. nobody would." that is what she was reminded of. now, what did dr. hayes say? dr. hayes said, "i also am using this same criteria, the same criteria found in this manual." and she said, "you know what, just as dr. frazier had said in her deposition" -- she said, "you know what, there is just not enough information before 1991 to make that determination. but i will tell you this, if her smoking -- if her quitting history that she described after 1991 is accurate, then i'll say that she meets the necessary three criteria for determining that somebody is nicotine-dependent as of 1991." but she said, "there are reasons to be uncertain about that. there are reasons for questioning." and, you know, she is a forensic psychologist, ph.d. in forensic psychology. and she told you what that means is that she is trained in looking at folks who say things for reasons. like the person who claims insanity because he or she wants to avoid the death penalty, right? so now dr. hayes said, "look, i'm not saying that -- i'm not" -- she did not -- she did not accuse mrs. warrick of not telling the truth. she only said, "there are certain things in the medical records that raise some question." for example, she said, "look, was there any indication on mrs. warrick's part about having quit smoking in 1993 when she was diagnosed with that lesion on her epiglottis?" do you remember that? and how, when the doctors told her -- and this is that medical record that talks about here "she was a one-and-a-half-pack-a-day smoker." "off," in other words, she quit smoking in december of 1993. january '94, that is when they have this epiglottis. and remember dr. bagnoli said, "that lesion went away over some period of time because she stopped smoking." now, he could not be specific 14 as to how long, but he said, "you know, this is not something that happens overnight." and then -- remember mrs. warrick testified that she could not -- she could not stop smoking between 1991 and thanksgiving 2000 except for a couple days at a time, or maybe two or three weeks, maximum, one time? but here was her podiatrist record, and it was filled out by mrs. warrick on july 7th, 1994. and the question was asked, "do you smoke?" and her answer was "no." now, mrs. warrick did not say anything about this in her deposition. she did not say anything about the epiglottis situation in her deposition. now, do we know whether or not mrs. warrick stopped smoking between december of '93 and july of '94? is that why she said she was a -- she wrote no to being a smoker? we do not know. did she stop smoking for longer than july 7th, 1994? we do not know. we do not know. but that is why dr. hayes raised this issue about whether or not she truly was addicted from 1991 on. because if she really could stop and if she really did stop, that would be inconsistent with the history that she gave, right? and now we have these medical records that raise that question. i have an echo. all right. but, you know, i leave that -- the answer to that first question, "was she addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine," to your sound discretion. you guys heard the evidence. you guys decide. you will decide, regardless of whether i tell you to. but there is a second question here. and mr. shields really did not focus on a significant part of this question. part of your instructions, part of your obligation, part of what you are obliged as jurors to do -- you cannot skip over it. you know, it is like if you are building an airstrip or you are doing a maintenance project or you are teaching folks about how to do something or you are filling out the paperwork for reimbursements or determining the validity of claims, you got to do all the steps. you cannot leave any of them out. even though some of them are harder than others, even though some are doggone hard, you still got to do every step, every step. so what you have to determine is whether or not if mrs. warrick was addicted, whether or not her addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine was a legal cause of her chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. now, have you seen yet the definition of legal cause? well, mr. shields did not explain it to you at all, but here it is. let us read through it because it is hard. it is filled with legalese. "addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine is a legal cause of copd if it directly and in natural and continuous sequence produces or contributes substantially to producing such copd so that it can reasonably be said that, but for the addiction, the copd would not have occurred." would not have 25 occurred. now, i'll tell you. i said it slowly because it is hard, and i know that law students spend three years in law school trying to learn what that means. and then lawyers like me spend the rest of our lives trying to figure out how to communicate it to people, because it is hard. it is a hard concept. but what it boils down to is that -- and this is their burden of proof. this is their burden of proof. they have to prove to you that if she was addicted, her addiction was so strong, so powerful that without it, that but for it, she would never have gotten her copd. without it she would never have gotten her copd. that is how powerful it has to be. that is their burden of proof. they have to bring a bigger mountain of evidence on this point than we do. that is their obligation. now, what mr. shields showed you and walked through was the second half of this. and it basically says that addiction does not have to be the only cause. it can work in conjunction with some other cause. but that does not alleviate, that does not eliminate their obligation to prove that the addiction was, in the first place, a legal cause, the "but for" cause, of why she got her copd. now, i realize -- i realize this is not easy. it is just like i said. it is a step you have to -- you cannot skip over it. you cannot skip over it. it is part of what you have to wrestle with and determine. now, to help you -- to help you with that issue there is something we need to focus on -- and mr. shields talked about it -- and that is their admission. what is their admission? what did they admit in this case? and you are going to see it in your instructions. what did they admit in this case? norma warrick, as the representative of the estate of her mother, admitted that eveline warrick's acts and omissions relating to the duration and frequency of her efforts to quit smoking were a partial cause of her copd. in other words, they have said, "look, her efforts at quitting were a legal cause of her getting copd." now, why did they admit that? they had to admit that. mrs. warrick, as mr. shields just told you in his closing argument, never even -- never -- never tried to quit until 1991. when did dr. bagnoli diagnose her with copd? 1991, same day, same day. so if you -- i mean, it says, "the duration and frequency of her efforts." there were none. there were no efforts -- there was no duration, there was no frequency, there were no efforts to quit before 1991. all right. so what does this mean? what does that admission mean? now, they said it. and i do not want to overlook it. when they made that admission, they tacked on that they think that 10 philip morris and r.j. reynolds are responsible, too, right? that is the way they worded their admission. but they admitted that mrs. warrick was in control -- this is what this means. what that means is that they have admitted that mrs. warrick could have quit smoking in time to avoid her copd and her lung cancer, and her lung cancer. it means that eveline warrick's decisions were a direct, substantial contributing factor to her copd and her lung cancer. that is this actual test for determining whether something is a legal cause. that is what they admitted, and you will see it in the instructions; you will see it in the instructions. all right. why did they have to acknowledge this? it is because you now know -- you had a window into the life of mrs. warrick. if you go back to that question of control, who was in control of mrs. warrick's decisions about beginning smoking, continuing to smoke? and another way of looking at that is, every day when mrs. warrick woke up and looked in the mirror, was there somebody else looking back that was responsible for what she did that day? was there somebody else who was looking back saying, "no, today you will or will not start smoking; today you will or will not decide to quit; today you will or will not decide to not smoke anymore?" is mrs. warrick different than anybody else? was there somebody else in the mirror, really and truly? remember when i put this timeline up -- and it is the very same timeline, very same timeline, no changes -- and i said, "you know what, we are going to walk through mrs. warrick's life." and i'm just going to take you right back through it, because -- well, i'm not going to make all the stops i did before. i do not have -- i'm not going to take that much of your time. but i did not change anything on this timeline. and mr. shields said i did not -- i did not develop the evidence that represents many of the stops on this timeline. but you know what? i'm going to show you the evidence in each and every one of the stops that relates to mrs. warrick, each and every one. because i've been doing this a very long time, and i'm not going to put something on a timeline that i create that i cannot support. i'm never going to do that, never. mr. shields said i misrepresented the evidence in this case. i'm never going to do that, never. i explained to you in my opening statement that the evidence would show that mrs. warrick was born into a family where the dad -- i did not say he was a tobacco farmer. i said he grew his own tobacco, and he did. that is exactly what the evidence showed. he grew his own tobacco for his personal use. he gave it to his father-in-law. he grew it so that he could make cigars, cigarettes, snuff, chewing tobacco. that is what i told you, and he did, and she testified to it. 21 i said he grew it, he harvested it, he cured it, he flavored it, he cut it up, and he turned it into cigarettes, cigars, chewing tobacco and snuff. and that is what the evidence showed. now, who did he enlist to assist him in that task? eveline warrick. you remember what i said -- and i do not have the testimony -- i did not bring this testimony because i did not know he was going to -- mr. shields was going to say what he said -- but you remember i said that the evidence would show that the one thing she wanted out of his estate when he died was that knife that he used to make those cigars and cigarettes to cut up the tobacco. and you remember in her deposition she said -- and i got it -- "that is the one thing i wanted and i got it." was that important to her? mr. shields said that she did not smoke his cigarettes. well, in fact, that is not true. this is on? thanks. here's the testimony. now, let me tell you why you see this on printed form like this. it is because -- although you see a videotape, whenever there is a video being made, a videotaped deposition, they also have a court reporter there, and she takes everything down and they turn it into a booklet just like this. and so that is why you see this. and this is the actual transcript -- this is the work of -- you have seen this team of court reporters coming in and out. they actually make daily copy of what goes on in this courtroom. so this is the actual trial transcript. so this is mrs. warrick testifying on the video -- whoops. did i just do something bad? i did. i pushed that button. thank you. saved my life. so this is the actual testimony. "i did not start smoking until i was 13. i did try some of daddy's cigarettes." i did try some of daddy's cigarettes. "when was that?" "i was about 14 years old, i guess, 12, 13 or 14 after i started smoking." "how did you get ahold of some of his cigarettes?" "i just wanted to try one of them and he gave it to me." "okay. what did you think of it?" "it was a lot better than lucky strikes." "so you thought his tobacco was pretty good?" "huh?" "his tobacco was pretty good, you thought?" "yeah, i can remember it, the difference in the taste." "okay. and this was just a roll-your-own cigarette" -- "uh-huh." -- "made with his tobacco?" "uh-huh." 6 "and what was different about the taste?" "it was just -- it was not as strong, and it had more of a flavor taste to it or something." "by flavor taste, what do you mean, a particular flavor or" -- "well, not like a vanilla flavor or anything like that. it just had a -- kind of a sweetish taste to it a lot. i can remember it." you know, this is when she was 13 years old. how many years later -- this is 2009. she can still remember the flavor of his cigarette. "okay. did you frequently smoke the cigarettes made from his tobacco" -- "no." -- "or was it just one time?" "just tried them a couple of times maybe." so, sure, she tried her dad's cigarettes. i would leave that down, except it blinds me. all right. who else smoked in that family? well, you know that her dad smoked. you know that her mom did not. you know that her grandfather did, because sometimes he would get some of her dad's cigars. you know that her older sister, annie marie, smoked. you know that because you have heard that testimony in this case. now, why did mrs. warrick begin smoking? well, i'm not going to tell you that she did not say that she thought it was glamorous. she said -- you can see a passage in her deposition where she says she thought it was glamorous, advertising, everyone was doing it, everyone was doing it. and, yes, her dad smoked; her older sister smoked, the sister she was really close to; her friend nancy smoked. lots of people smoked, no question about it. you remember, though, i asked dr. goldberg -- i put up that chart that had four things on it. it was parents, peers, siblings and environment. and i asked dr. goldberg -- remember, dr. goldberg was the guy -- the old professor who went to that seminar, seminar -- went to that conference of plaintiffs' lawyers on how to win big verdicts in tobacco cases, how to find jurors in mock trials who would be favorable to the plaintiffs' side of the case; you remember that? he is the guy that i -- they asked him, "how much money have you been paid?" and he said "600,000." and then i said, "well, wait a minute. five years ago you said you have been paid 700,000. did you give some money back?" and he said, "no, i did not give any money back." and then i said, "well, you calculated that you made another $50,000 a year over the last five years, so that would be about a million bucks you made?" well, i asked him, "in all of the 20 or 25 cases that you have looked at, have you ever seen a fact scenario like that?" a factual scenario where you had a -- where you had a family that was that into making their own tobacco company, making their own tobacco products -- "factual background like that?" and he said, "no, i have not, no." 17 so what were the influences that caused ms. warrick to begin smoking? i think it is awfully clear in her case -- and this is all about mrs. warrick. this is not about the american public. this is not about some -- this is not a class action. this is just about mrs. warrick, right? you know that. all right. so that is starting smoking. advertising. did mrs. warrick talk about advertising? yeah, she said a lot about advertising. i'll do it one at a time. and this is what she said. and, look, just so you know that it really did come in a trial transcript, for every entry that i've shown you, i've put at the bottom the exact page and line numbers on the transcript, just like i showed this. every page is numbered and the lines are numbered. so you know that what i'm showing you is right out of the trial transcript. so mrs. warrick was asked about advertising. mr. shields said we did not ask her enough questions. did not ask enough detail. but i'll show you. we asked -- i'll show you that mr. shields did not show you what we did ask. "when did you and your husband have this conversation about the marlboro man?" "oh, we used to laugh, talk about it when it would come on tv all the time." "okay. so that was when it was on television?" "uh-huh." "and what about it made you laugh?" "it was such a stupid commercial to me." that is what she thought about advertising. let us see some more. let us see some more. mrs. warrick said a lot of stuff. "did you ever talk about cigarette advertisements to anyone other than your husband?" "oh, yeah, i've talked about it, but who and when i cannot remember. another one i always thought was stupid, the virginia slims." "virginia slim?" "that one to me is a disgrace to women." was she being positively influenced by advertising? let us see some more. "were there any other cigarette advertisements that you thought" -- misspelled, sorry -- "were stupid?" "i'm sure there were a lot of them, but i just do not remember them because, well, they had no reason for me to remember them." and then here sort of sums it all up. "anything else, any specific ad?" "not really a specific ad." "okay." "i really do not pay that much attention to ads." and is that really any different than anybody else, really? if you went out on the street and interviewed people, do you think they would say, 2 "you know what? cigarette ads are why i started smoking. cigarette ads are why i kept on smoking," really and truly? let us go to the '50s. yes, wynder and graham. their first witness, their first live witness, dr. proctor, said, "with wynder and graham's study looking at groups of people, smokers and nonsmokers, who got lung cancer more often?" and he said, "that is when science -- even though people had been trying to engage in science before they got -- they got conflicting results -- but as of 1950 using what they call 'epidemiology,' the science started to take hold connecting smoking with lung cancer." 1950, 1953, science is starting to grow, no doubt about it. was it a secret from the american public? you remember i showed you life magazine -- i showed you-all those magazines. you are going to have them. you are going to have them. this was no secret from the american public, no secret at all. and you will have the mag- -- i mean, was life magazine a secret? reader's digest a secret? come on. now, mr. shields talked about the frank statement, and, yes, there is no doubt that the frank statement was published. now, that is why we have to talk about legal cause for just another minute. because i told you at the beginning of this trial that during the course of this trial you would see things that the cigarette manufacturers -- ideas that people had, statement peoples made -- statement people -- statements people made, and recommendations people had that today i would not do and you would not do, no doubt about it. i said they clung too long to the idea that smoking had not been proven to cause lung cancer or other diseases. they clung too long to the ideas that smoking was not addictive. no debate about it. but this is not a class action. this is not about the american public. this is about one person. and what the plaintiffs have the burden of proving in this case is that something that philip morris or r.j. reynolds did actually was a legal cause of injury to mrs. warrick, actual legal cause of injury to mrs. warrick. legal cause -- this is the way i think -- this is a little diagram that i've created that i think is helpful in terms of thinking of legal cause. and what is that? whatever it is, whatever it is, whether it is a newspaper ad or an interview on television or something like that, there has to be a direct connection between whatever it is and ms. warrick such that it had a substantial impact and then it can be a legal cause. so as we go through this, i'm just going to be asking you guys to consider, is that something that had a direct connection with mrs. warrick that resulted in having a substantial impact so that it was a legal cause of why she either began smoking, 13 continued to smoke or did not quit smoking until 1990 -- or did not begin to quit smoking until 1991 or did not quit smoking until 2000 at thanksgiving. all right. so let us use as our first example this frank statement. where was it published? did anybody come here and say it was published in anything that -- any newspaper that mrs. warrick was ever even close to? was -- mrs. warrick was asked specifically, "have you ever heard of something called a frank statement to cigarette smokers? "a what?" "a frank statement to cigarette smokers." "that, i'm not familiar with." did that have a direct connection, a substantial impact, was it a legal cause of anything for mrs. warrick? well, you know the frank statement did not cause her to start smoking, because the frank statement did not get published until january of 1954. she is been smoking for five years, right? so it sure as heck did not cause her to start. did it cause her to continue to smoke? was there any evidence of that? well, there cannot be because she did not know anything about it and, frankly, there is no evidence that it was ever published in a paper that she could have ever seen. well, how about -- mr. shields had spent a lot of time, i think the majority of his closing argument -- talking about things that philip morris or r.j. reynolds thought internally, wrote an internal memo about, or something like that. so mrs. warrick was asked point-blank, point-blank -- mr. shields said she did not get asked enough direct questions. she was asked point-blank, "have you ever heard a cigarette company make a statement about smoking and health?" "not the cigarette companies." there is the page and line. "well, how about the council for tobacco research" -- i'm sorry -- "how about the tobacco industry research committee? do you know if you ever heard any statement made by the tobacco industry research committee?" "no." "no, you did not?" "no, i did not. i do not remember hearing anything that they did." "well, how about the council for tobacco research or the tobacco institute, organizations with connection to philip morris or r.j. reynolds? have you ever heard any statement made by the council for tobacco research?" "no, not that i know of." "do you know if you have ever heard a statement made by the tobacco institute?" "of the what?" "the tobacco institute." "i do not think so." so, again, is there a direct connection that has a substantial -- that had a substantial impact that resulted in a legal cause of injury to 24 mrs. warrick? and how could it be? it would have to be something that caused her -- since it did not cause her to start smoking, it would have to be something that she heard or saw or read that caused her to continue to smoke. all right. now, let us go back to the timeline. and let us go to the late '50s. i'm going to put this right over here. mr. shields brought up this "annie marie situation" in the late '50s. and he said that i had misrepresented what the testimony was about annie marie's situation. and i'm going to show you right now i did not misrepresent a thing. here's the exact testimony. "do you know when she was diagnosed with copd?" this is annie marie's copd. "probably back in the late '50s." "how did you find out about her being diagnosed with copd?" "talking to her" -- "talking to her and going with her to and from the hospitals and the doctors' offices." and he said we did not ask enough details; we did not find out when. "so did you take her to the doctor then?" "the late '50s, many times." many times. but she was asked more detail than that. mr. shields said, you did not ask whether or not the doctor said it was caused by her smoking. mr. shields said you did not ask -- here's more of the transcript testimony. "when she was diagnosed, did you-all talk with the doctors about what was causing the copd?" "yes." "what did they say?" "they said it was her heavy smoking, and she was a welder during the war in the shipyards. they were constantly on her to quit smoking." this is -- i appreciate that they would like to not have this testimony on the record, but it is there. there is the transcript right there. this is the late '50s. this is their own client. now, they want to have a whole bunch of excuses for why this testimony occurs. but that is her testimony. that is her testimony. "what was causing the copd?" "yes." "what did they say?" "heavy smoking, and they were constantly on her to quit smoking." now, mr. shields suggested, well, this cannot be right because she said the doctors used the phrase "copd" and that did not get coined or used until mid '60s. well, i've got two suggestions for you in that regard. the first is, i asked dr. proctor, their science historian, a ph.d. in the history of science -- i asked him point-blank, "there were doctors who were telling their patients in the '50s 9 'i'm diagnosing you with any of those diseases, it is all one and the same, chronic obstructive lung disease, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, that is copd, emphysema, chronic bronchitis, and telling them it is caused by your smoking,' right, and that is in the '50s?" and he said, "i'm sure some were, yes." "and you would agree with me that if you were being told by your physician that that is the diagnosis and in the physician's opinion that is why you have it, that would be a powerful source of information letting you know about the health risks of smoking, would not it?" and dr. -- their expert said, "i would hope it would be powerful." of course it would be powerful. imagine sitting with -- a sister sitting with the sister she is particularly close to, the sister she loves, and listening to the doctors diagnose her with copd. what are the symptoms of copd? chronic cough, shortness of breath. who said so? their expert, dr. burns, their expert. chronic bronchitis, you remember dr. -- dr. proctor just got through telling you that they are all interchangeable, chronic bronchitis, emphysema, copd, cold. it is all the same, it is all the same. "chronic bronchitis is usually used either to refer to just a chronic cough or to be a synonym for chronic obstructive lung disease." this is all coming from their witnesses, their client, their experts. so as of the late '50s -- and we sure got plenty of detail -- as of the late '50s, what does mrs. warrick know? she knows -- she sat there with her sister many times in the hospitals and the doctors' offices listening to the doctors look right at her sister and say, "you have copd." now, maybe she used the term "copd" because she is going to watch her sister over the next 25 years with this illness. you remember dr. andrews, the guy from tampa, he came here and told you, "this is a long-standing disease. this is a disease that you have for decades." and he said, "the symptoms are chronic cough, shortness of breath." and he told you, "look, doctors diagnose that, especially family practitioners, internists, they diagnose you with copd all day long based on chronic cough and shortness of breath." well, here she is in the late '50s, her sister's got copd, and the doctors have told you, "it is due to your smoking." is that a powerful piece of information for mrs. warrick? does she decide that at that moment that she is going to make any effort to quit smoking? is she going to give up the pleasure that she derives from smoking? look, this is -- we are here because a lawsuit is been brought. i'm telling you this story. i'm telling you about this why? because we are in litigation. 20 is this a criticism of mrs. warrick? absolutely not. this is america. you get to make up your mind here whether or not you are going to smoke or not. you get to decide for yourself. you get to look in the mirror every morning, and you get to say i'm going to drink beer. i'm going to drink scotch. i'm going to smoke cigarettes. i'm going to smoke cigars. i'm going to smoke a pipe. i'm going to eat mcdonald's. i'm going to -- i'm going to live my life. that is what we get to say here in america. we fought for that right. all right. let us go to the '60s. throughout the '60s mrs. warrick is going to be with her sister, right? does not go away. her sister lives in this town. ms. warrick lives in this town. she is going to watch her from the late '50s all the way through to her death in 1985. yes, mrs. warrick said i did not know about the health -- another point in her deposition. she said, "i do not know about the health" -- "i did not know about the health risks of smoking until the late '80s." people say things that just do not make any sense sometimes. how can that be possible, right, with this history? and you remember in my opening statement i talked about the "roy kitchen" story. and i said, you know what? it is not perfectly clear, not perfectly clear, that mrs. warrick connected roy kitchen's death from cancer with his smoking; pretty clear, but i said in my opening statement, not perfectly clear. and here's the testimony. i did not pull any punch on that. "okay" -- this is mrs. warrick. this is the page and line. "okay. do you know what roy died of?" "cancer." "okay. and when did he die?" "back around '64 or '65." "okay. did you relate the cancer of any of the kitchen boys to their smoking?" "yes." now, that is not crystal clear, but pretty close. now let us see in just a minute just exactly how crystal clear we are about another kitchen. 1964, the surgeon general's report -- you know, mrs. warrick -- you are going to see the coverage. you saw the coverage. and, frankly, i'm going to show you harry reasoner right now, because you will remember this was what was on all three channels back in the day, cbs, abc and nbc, and this is what the broadcasters were telling you about the surgeon general's report. can we play that, shreve (phonetic)? thanks. (a video clip was played and transcribed by the court reporter to the best of her ability as follows:) announcer: "this is a cbs news extra on smoking and health, the findings of the surgeon general's committee." 5 harry reasoner: "almost from the moment that cigarettes were introduced they were attacked. but the attacks took a new turn ten years ago and culminated in today's report by the surgeon general's committee. "this, in summary, is what the committee says. cigarette smoking is a major cause of lung cancer in men, and data on women smokers points the same way. cigarette smoking is a significant cause of cancer of the larynx and probably the most important cause of chronic bronchitis. cigarette smoking may be related to other lung diseases. "male smokers have a much higher death rate from heart disease, although it is not proven that smoking is the cause. "on the question of filters, the committee says there is no evidence that they do any good, but it did not exclude the possibility that an effective filter might be developed. "in short, the committee said, 'if you smoke cigarettes, you increase your chances of dying early. the sooner you start, the more you smoke, the more you inhale, the worse your chances are.' "in this kind of a country, it comes down to you, whether you like it or not. no one is going to forbid an adult to smoke, and it is now quite clear that no one is going to tell him it is good for him either. "the decision is his, the decision and the health that may depend on it. "this is harry reasoner. goodnight." (the video clip was ended.) mr. reilly: i cannot tell you whether or not mrs. warrick saw that broadcast. i know that their addiction expert, dr. frazier, wishes what harry said was not true. remember one of the first things i asked her on cross-examination is, "you are a person who wishes that americans did not have the choice to smoke, are not you?" she said, "yes, i wish americans did not have the choice to smoke." that is all right. you are welcome to your opinion, but, as harry said, "in this country we do have that choice." she also said she is never met somebody -- she is never had a patient come to her who said, you know what, i enjoy smoking and i do not want to stop. she said she is never had anybody say that. 1966, the first warning labels go on the package of cigarettes. "caution: cigarette smoking may be hazardous to your health." we asked mrs. warrick in detail about that warning and other warnings, in detail. "what did you think when the warning labels first went on the packs?" "i really did not think anything." "okay. did it surprise you?" i'm going to sneeze -- do not take it down. maybe i'll talk myself out of it. "did it surprise you?" "not really. i just did not pay any attention to it, i guess." 16 "did that warning tell you anything you did not already know?" did it tell you anything you did not already know? "i do not think so." how do you square that with "i did not know about the health risks of smoking until the late '80s?" "were you not concerned that there was a warning on the cigarettes that you were smoking?" "i just did not really pay any attention to it, i guess." "okay. well, why not?" "probably busy with something else." "that is okay. you do not have to pay attention to them if you do not want to." "would you not have paid attention to warning labels on cigarettes because you loved your cigarettes?" "probably." did mrs. warrick enjoy smoking? you bet she did. she enjoyed smoking for a variety of reasons. "because you loved your cigarettes?" "probably." what did she enjoy about cigarettes? i did not take out each and every line item, but these are generally the reasons why she said; she said she enjoyed the taste, especially the cigarettes manufactured by philip morris, the saratogas, socialization, relaxation, boredom, and the pleasure you get from smoking, and the pleasure you get from smoking. all right. let us go back to this timeline. thelma kitchen, late '60s, early '70s. she said -- i will not tell you what i said. i'll just read it to you. mr. shields said she did not know -- she was not connecting her friends' death from cancer to their smoking until the late '80s. this is exactly what she said about thelma kitchen's death. and mr. shields, in his closing argument, did not even mention thelma kitchen, did not even bring her up. he only talked about the kitchen boys, remember? "okay. what did thelma die of?" "she had cancer." "what kind of cancer; do you know?" "it was lung cancer and throat cancer." "do you remember the decade? was it the '60s or '70s?" "i think it was the late '60s or early '70s, somewhere in there." "okay. did you relate her smoking to her cancer?" "thelma, i did, uh-huh." now, does that lack clarity? did she say, "no, not until the '80s, the late '80s," or did she say, "thelma, i did, uh-huh"? did i misrepresent this to you in some way? did mrs. warrick -- at any point in this time, did mrs. warrick give any indication she had any interest in quitting smoking? did she say, "i want 4613 1 to quit smoking. i want to give up the pleasure i'm getting from smoking. i want to try to quit. i'm going to" -- no, not once. mr. shields said it, and he was right, in his closing argument, that mrs. warrick did not make any effort to quit smoking until 1991. and that is okay. we get to make those decisions. but now we are in a lawsuit. the '70s, 1970, the pack warning changes. you have already seen what mrs. warrick said about warnings. i think mr. block, when cross-examining dr. hayes, said, "well -- but she smoked," what did she say, a half a million cigarettes? that means she had a half a million opportunities to look and see whatever the warning was at the moment, right? at least 300,000 opportunities since the warnings went on the packs in '66, right? i put on this timeline eveline tells gail, "smoking is dangerous." you know where that came from was the testimony of dr. hayes yesterday. dr. hayes was given all the depositions in this case. now, we did not read -- we did not read all the depositions that were obtained in this case. but an expert gets to review them all, gets to review them all. and so that is where she got this statement. "eveline told her daughter gail, 'smoking is dangerous.'" and that is what dr. hayes told you from the stand, in 1971. now, 1971, joe cullman. and mr. shields just played it for you. and, like i said, philip morris clung too long to the notion that smoking had not been proven to cause illness. no doubt about it. did mrs. warrick watch face the nation and see joe cullman? you already saw her statement, "i never heard a thing the tobacco industry ever said about smoking and health, not once." so, once again -- i will not put it up -- once again, has mr. shields satisfied the obligation of that hard thing you have got to look at, and that is, did he prove that there is a legal cause connection between philip morris's statement by joe cullman and mrs. warrick continuing to smoke? you already know the answer to that. or jim bowling, do you remember -- do you remember on that interview, the interviewer has a british accent. why is that? because that was for a program shown in england. is there any evidence in this case that mrs. warrick ever went to england? none. was there any evidence that she ever saw jim bowling, james bowling? mr. shields said, well -- but we did not bring you any of these people. these people are dead. they were old adults in the '70s, right? that is 40 years ago. 1975, ms. warrick -- now, is that exactly when they switched to saratogas? nobody really knows because we do not really -- she was not really clear. she actually thought she switched to saratogas in, like, '70, '71, which was not possible, because, as you learned from dr. goldberg, saratogas were not made until 1970 for the very first time. 12 okay. so i put it on the board at the very first opportunity, 1975. i did not -- i did not quibble about that. 1975. i accept it. and how long did she smoke saratogas? they do not really know. but i'll give her ten years, ten years of smoking out of 50 years of smoking history. i said '85 [sic], fine. why quibble about it? why did she switch to saratogas? because of advertising? no. she actually gave two reasons. i have one on the board. i'll tell you about both. they were talking about -- in this part of the -- of the deposition, they were talking about her husband switching to pall malls. and so the question was: "probably the same sort of thing when he started pall malls, they were just out of your brand that day?" this is talking about how she switched to saratogas. "uh-huh." "and you got a new brand and decided it was all right?" "i know that is how i started on saratogas." i know that is how i started on saratogas. "they are out of my brand at the store so i pick another, (inaudible) saratogas, and i liked them." "did you like the taste of the saratoga better than the taste of the viceroy? "yeah." so did she continue to smoke saratogas? yes. did mr. warrick say, "we like saratogas. we liked them best"? yeah. okay. so that is why they switched. now, the '70s. mr. shields said that i was terribly overstating mrs. warrick's situation in the '70s in connection with her cough. he said, "all she had was a cough." and he said that i said that the doctors told her to quit. i never said that. i told you in my opening statement that her doctors told her, dr. sapp in particular, said, "your cough and your breathing problems are due to your smoking." and now i'm going to show you that testimony. and this is from their client, mrs. warrick. "when did the cough get worse?" "actually, back in the '70s it got" -- what did she say? she did not say i have a little cough. she said, "it got pretty bad." "and you were seeing dr. sapp at that time; is that correct?" "uh-huh." "and was he telling you then that the cough was related to the smoking?" "yes. he had the same problem." mr. shields said we did not ask enough questions. we asked some more questions. i was not there. i did not ask the question, but were more questions asked? you bet. "did you tell him you were having breathing problems?" "he knew it, yeah. we discussed it." so here we are, her cough got bad, she is having breathing problems, dr. sapp knows it. 23 "did he tell you that the breathing problems were related to the smoking?" there is the page and line. "yes, many times." now, you know, she stopped seeing dr. sapp in the '70s, early '80s, something like that. now, do we have his medical records? no, we do not have his medical records. he is been dead. his records are gone. but this is their own eveline warrick's testimony. for this to be wrong, she is got to be inaccurate. they have to run away from her testimony. they have to say, "no, no, do not believe her. believe her when she says something we like, but do not believe her when she says something we do not. she is inaccurate. she is sick. she is not able to recall things correctly, right"? "yes, many times." "many times. and that was back in the '70s?" "yeah." did i make this up? there is the page and line of the transcript. breathing problems, bad cough. what are the symptoms of copd? what symptoms has her sister had now since the late '50s? what diagnosis has she sat there and listened to the doctors give to her sister? and she is sitting right there. right there. right there. yes, it relates to the third question on the verdict form. and what is that third question? "did eveline warrick know or by the use of reasonable care should she have known, before may 5th" -- this is in the '70s. her sister's diagnosis is in the late '50s. she is at dr. sapp's office. she follows with dr. barnhart. this is in -- that is in the '70s. that is 20 years before may 5th, 1990 -- "that she had chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and that it was reasonably caused by the defendants' actions?" what is that? making cigarettes. well, you know, this issue was addressed by both dr. bagnoli and dr. andrews. they asked dr. bagnoli, "dr. bagnoli, did she know she had copd before 1991? should she have known that she had copd before 1991?" and dr. bagnoli said, "no." but then on cross-examination, dr. bagnoli was asked, "did you have mrs. warrick's deposition?" and he said, "no." he was asked, "do you know about her being cared for by dr. sapp or dr. barnhart?" "no." "do you know about her breathing problems? do you know about her chronic cough in the '70s?" "no." "do you know about her sister annie marie and her copd diagnosis in the late '50s and her disease and her death in 1985?" dr. bagnoli sees mrs. warrick for the first time in 1991. annie marie has been dead now for six years. did dr. bagnoli know anything about annie marie? not a thing. he was asked, and he said, "i 8 do not know." we gave dr. andrews -- you remember the pulmonologist that came from tampa that runs the -- that works at the va, runs their -- what do they call it, the -- i forget exactly the clinic that he runs, but it is the tumor clinic, basically, where they cannot -- it is really hard to figure out -- all the doctors are sending in their difficult cases to see whether or not these people have lung cancer or not. and we asked dr. andrews -- who we gave the deposition of mrs. warrick to, so he knew that she saw dr. sapp in the '70s and that she had seen dr. barnhart. he knew about her -- her description of her chronic cough, her description of her breathing problems. he knew about annie marie's diagnosis in the '50s, and he knew about annie marie's death. and so i asked him these three questions. "let me ask you this, is there anything that would have prevented mrs. warrick from being diagnosed with copd in the late '70s?" "no." and you remember dr. andrews explained to you that copd is a long-running disease, that you go from mild to moderate to severe. when she sees dr. bagnoli in 1991, what does he diagnose her as? severe. so that means that she is had this disease for decades, right? that is exactly what dr. andrews told you, no dispute in this case. no dispute. so does she have copd when she sees dr. sapp and dr. barnhart in the '70s and '80s? sure, she does. dr. andrews told you she does, and it is not disputed by anybody, nobody. so then the question was posed to dr. andrews: "is there any reason why she would not have been able to reasonably determine that she had copd in the late '70s?" "no." "is there any reason why she could not have asked dr. sapp or dr. barnhart, 'what is the nature of my reason -- of my illness'"? just asked, "what is the nature of my illness?" you see, this question does not just say, "did you know." it says, "could you reasonably have determined?" "could you reasonably have determined?" "by the use of reasonable care, should she have known before may 5th?" that is the '70s and the '80s. those answers by dr. andrews are not disputed by anybody that actually knew the history that mrs. warrick provided, not disputed by anybody that knew the history. you can keep your expert in the dark if you want and then ask him the question and he will answer you based on the information he has. that is why i think it is important to give the expert all the information. give him the history. all right. that is the '70s. let us go to the '80s. 19 you are being very patient with me. '80s. 1985, annie marie dies of copd and lung cancer. mrs. warrick's testimony that they are relying on that she does not know about the health risks of smoking that say that she does not know until the late '80s, her sister dies in 1985. the warnings on the packs now say explicitly "smoking causes lung cancer." and just to show you -- you know, they suggested that philip morris or r.j. reynolds should have put a list of the carcinogens in cigarette smoke on the packs maybe or in an ad in the newspaper. after all of this, after all of this, can you reasonably say that mrs. warrick would have changed how she operated her life one bit if philip morris had put a list of the carcinogens on a pack of cigarettes? you do not leave your common sense at the door to this courtroom or the security checkpoint. you bring it right on into the jury box. you bring it right on into the jury deliberation room. maybe even more dramatic, 1988, calvin has a heart attack. mrs. warrick -- they say it is due to his smoking. mrs. warrick testifies -- "what specifically did you tell your husband after his heart attack about quitting smoking?" "i said, we both needed to quit." "did you" -- "but even i did not try until 1991." so here she is talking about calvin does not try. and she says "even i did not try until 1991," three years later. now, she sat there and watched her husband have a heart attack. do you really think for a minute that if philip morris or r.j. reynolds had put something on a pack of cigarettes about carcinogens in cigarette smoke that she would have done something different than she did, really and truly? all right. i've already shown you the -- there is no dispute that mrs. warrick did not try to quit until 1991. mr. shields started his closing argument off by telling you that. okay. i've already shown you the medical records regarding 1993. mr. shields showed you the tobacco industry's ceos testifying before congress, as was shown on c-span in 1994. is there any indication in this case that mrs. warrick ever saw those guys on c-span? no. did i tell you in my opening statement that i thought they clung too long to the idea that smoking was not addictive? you bet i did. but did it have an impact in this case, in mrs. warrick case? because they have to prove that it was a legal cause of injury to mrs. warrick. direct connection, substantial impact, legal cause. thanksgiving day she quit smoking. no dispute as to how that happened. "and, i do not know, there was just something 4 about that dog that was telling me, 'you got to quit.' and i was sitting there smoking a cigarette. i put it out, and i never put another one in my mouth.'" now, remember i asked both addiction experts, but especially dr. hayes, "that "quit" on thanksgiving, does that raise a question as to whether or not somebody's addicted to have those brain changes when the nicotine is going to be gone over the next," what did she say, "half-life of a day and a half, two days?" so when are the -- "if you are going to have withdrawal symptoms because you have an up-regulation or an increased number of neuroreceptors and they are all crying out for nicotine, when are you going to have withdrawal symptoms?" "you are going to have them in the first week or two weeks," she said. did mrs. warrick have any of that? she was not on nicotine replacement. she had no medication, but she had no withdrawal symptoms, no irritability to lack of concentration, no craving, no difficulty. no difficulty. no difficulty. all right. that takes us back to the first question on the verdict form "was she addicted" and leave that to your discretion. "was addiction, if she was addicted, the legal cause of her developing her chronic obstructive pulmonary disease?" i believe the answer to this one is no. on that question about whether she reasonably -- with reasonable care should have known before may 5th, 1990, that she had copd, because we know she had it, the answer to this one is yes. all right. and if that is the way you answered those questions, that ends your responsibilities in this case. that is the way this verdict form is set up. actually, it says -- shreve (phonetic), can we do this? is it this one? video tech operator: you just have to uncover it. mr. reilly: thanks. "only if you answer both the first two questions yes and you question" -- "and you answer question 3 no do you go on to question 4." only if you answer the first two questions yes and if you answer the third question no do you go on to question 4; otherwise, your work here is done. if you go on to question 4, then you have to answer the question, "was eveline warrick's lung cancer a legal cause of her death?" and that is a question that mr. engram is going to talk to you about when i sit down. all right. and that is the first verdict form that you are going to have. depending upon how you answer that, you may have no verdict forms after this. your work would be done. sorry. next page. you have to answer question number 5. if you answer those questions, you have to answer both was her -- "was lung cancer the legal 15 cause of her death or was copd the legal cause of her death?" so you have to answer both of those if you answer questions 1 and 2 yes and question 3 no. all right. now, there is a second verdict form. if you -- and i do not think you go beyond that. i think the evidence in this case has shown you do not go any farther than that and your work is done. but there is another verdict form, and i probably should go through it with you, so i will. and i will not spend nearly as long going through this as i did through the other one -- or through that evidence. you have been very considerate. now, let me remind you that the decisions by that jury in miami ten years ago have nothing to do with answering a single question on this first verdict form, nothing. this is all you guys. these findings do not even apply -- they do not have any impact whatsoever unless you have to go to the second verdict form. and i do not know -- the two verdict forms are virtually identical, if you go on, whether it is a survival action or wrongful death action. so i've just picked one. and i'm just going to run through these questions. and, yes, if you get here, those jury findings from the jury in miami ten years ago would be binding on you, but you still have to determine whether or not any of those activities -- do you have a marker? -- any of those findings were a legal cause of mrs. warrick's -- this is the wrongful death action verdict form. you have to decide whether any of those activities were a legal cause. and that is true all the way through. for each one of those theories, you have to make the determination of legal cause. you have to make the determination of whether or not those things had a direct connection, a substantial impact, and were a legal cause. and as an example of that -- oh, for example, number 2, "state whether the defendants" -- "state for each defendant whether the fraudulent concealment was a legal cause of eveline warrick's death." you have to ask yourself, did the plaintiffs prove in this case that anything that philip morris or r.j. reynolds failed to say about the health risks of smoking actually caused mrs. warrick to die. if you answer those questions in that way, then you get down to question number 7. matter of fact, you are going to have to answer, i think, about ten or 11 more questions. but you would get down ultimately to question number 7 at one point. and you would have to apportion responsibility between mrs. warrick, philip morris, r.j. reynolds, and there you would be having to determine whether someone has acknowledged that they had the power, the ability, but did not exercise it to quit, and quit in time to avoid getting any illness whatsoever. does somebody else really have a percentage of responsibility in why they got sick and why they 4630 died? was there really somebody else looking in the mirror or when they had the power, when they had the ability to stop smoking, stop in time to avoid getting their illness altogether? and that brings us to -- the only thing i'll say about damages -- i really do not talk about damages. the only thing i'll say about damages is, we stipulated to the dollar amount of the -- of the medical bills and funeral expenses, because we do not dispute things that should not be disputed, should not be disputed. now, as far as mr. spruance was concerned, the only thing i'll say about that is that all 235- or -45,000 dollars, the warricks did not pay a penny of that. they never shelled out any money for somebody to come spend the night with the warricks. they never spent any money to have somebody come and cook a meal or clean their house. those were all things that mr. spruance thinks that they should have gotten, should have had available to them. and so that is how he made his calculation. that is how he made his calculation. okay. then we come to the final question, and that is -- number 11, and that is, "under the circumstances of this case, please state whether" -- sorry -- "by clear and convincing evidence punitive damages are warranted against each defendant." and i will tell you once again, in the instructions you are going to see that this is not something in the air. this is not in general. this is not a class-action question. this is about mrs. warrick. this is about mrs. warrick and what conduct of philip morris or r.j. reynolds actually impacted her, actually impacted her. now, if you answer that question, then your work will not be done. there'll be another session, there'll be another opening statement, more evidence, closing argument. so your work will not be over. all right. i want to con- -- oh, one other thing. mr. shields said that all that evidence we put in about newspaper articles, magazine articles, videos, he said that was only limited until about 1970 or '71 and then it all petered out and it was all shown after midnight, and all that kind of stuff. you will have these back in the back with you, but we selected -- mr. bradford, in particular, selected just examples of those public service announcements. and, of course, you saw the harry reasoner cbs news report. that, of course, was not at midnight. the bill talman announcements, that is 1967; the "killers" ad, that is where the cowboys come in, that is '68; the snakebite where the snake comes out and bites you, that is '69; the "nice and clear" where the ashtray empties out, that is '69; the warnings where they had all of the various warnings, that is an example. that was '69. the obituary of bill talman, walter cronkite. 11 you know walter cronkite was not on at 2:00 on the morning. that is '69. the huff and puff, that is '70; "dreams," that is '70; "great american smokeout" with ed asner, '77; "great american smokeout" with ed asner, '78, while larry hagman's are in the '80s. it did not stop. it did not stop. all right. you guys have been very patient and very attentive. and so i thank you. i'm going to sit down and mr. engram is going to get up. he is going to talk to you about -- i'm sure he will talk to you a bit about r.j. reynolds, but he is also going to talk to you about what caused her death. and now after i -- after both of us sit down, then mr. shields gets to get back up and he gets to address you again, because he has the burden of proof on everything but the statute of limitations. he has to show you that they brought a bigger mountain of evidence in this case about mrs. warrick, connecting to mrs. warrick than we did. and i will not get to get back up, nor will mr. engram. and we will not have another opportunity to come back and say, hey, wait a minute. mr. shields mischaracterized what i said in my opening statement or he did not give you all of the causation, legal cause instruction, he did not give you all of the quotes. i will not get to do that. so all i would ask is that as he makes -- and he has another hour to talk to you, if he wants to use it. so all i would ask is that you just think in the back of your mind, what does this have to do with mrs. warrick? does this really connect to mrs. warrick, really, in a direct way resulting in a substantial impact. because that is what you are going to get in the instructions. thank you very much. mr. engram: thank you, your honor. ladies and gentlemen, i want to thank you, too for the time that you have spent here for the last three weeks. when mr. reilly back during jury 16 selection in the courthouse downtown talked about jury duty, he talked about it being both a privilege and a responsibility. well, i also think that it is a great sacrifice for you to be away from your families, and your jobs, and spend this time and give this attention to the case and the witnesses and the evidence, and on behalf of mr. latham and myself and our client r.j. reynolds, we really do appreciate that. our system would not work without people like you that make this kind of sacrifice. what i want to talk about with you about today is the evidence we presented on a couple of issues because of eveline warrick's death and the work that the scientists and other employees at r.j. reynolds tobacco company have been doing over the last 60 years. but before i talk about that, i want to look back at these last nine days of testimony and make three observations. first of all, i like to think of the closing statement as a report card. you get to check off the things, the promises that we made to you in our opening statement and see if we were held to those promises. the second thing, though, not only is this like a report card, but i wondered -- i wondered during closing, i wondered during the presentation of evidence, during the witnesses who testified, were the plaintiffs and the defendants trying the same case here. we told you when we came -- when we began our opening statement that this case was about, first and foremost, mrs. warrick. it was about what she knew about the risks of smoking; it was about the choices mrs. warrick made; it is about what diseases and conditions that she had; and it is about what caused her death. that is what we told you this case was about. the plaintiff, though, on the other hand, has spent very little time talking about mrs. warrick. they have tried to retry that first engle case. and they brought generic experts, general experts, experts who knew nothing about eveline warrick to prove a case of general company conduct, to prove the case of some unknown plaintiff. and, certainly, they did not prove the case of mrs. warrick. we know that mrs. warrick knew nothing about the frank statement. we know during their closing they put up seven documents. and as mr. shields put those documents up on the screen and said that they were representative of the millions of pages of documents, that is what dr. proctor told you, he put up company documents from 1953, 1961, 1962, 1963, 1967, 1969 and 1972. he put up two ads. he put up two ads. and do you remember what cigarette brands they were about? the first one was old gold and the second one was for camels. eveline warrick did not smoke old gold and she did not smoke camels. why would he be showing you 4646 1 these ads about somebody else's brands of cigarettes? old gold is not even made by philip morris or r.j. reynolds. and the last observation i want to make is that we put in part of our case through our cross-examination of plaintiff's witnesses. and so even though the plaintiffs took six days to present their evidence through their witnesses and the defendants took only three days, when we are cross-examining their witnesses, we are putting on evidence as well which we believe proves our case. so do not just think about the defendant's case as being the evidence that you heard tuesday, wednesday and thursday of this week. think about what other evidence we elicited when we cross-examined the plaintiff's witnesses. and i'm going to try to highlight some of the things those witnesses said. so let us talk about the evidence you heard on the cause of mrs. warrick's death. you heard in plaintiff's opening statement that they told you that mrs. warrick's death was caused by her cancer and her treatment for her cancer or from her copd. well, which one was it? those are three different potential causes. but more importantly, they never told you how her copd or how her lung cancer or how her treatment for her lung cancer caused her death. they never answered the how-she-died question. they had dr. bagnoli testify that mrs. warrick died from both her copd and her lung cancer, even though he could not tell you how either of those diseases caused mrs. warrick's death. and, remember, dr. bagnoli said that the autopsy report that calvin warrick requested at the insistence of norma warrick did not say she died from copd, did not say she died from her lung cancer. they brought dr. nurani, the radiation oncologist, who treated mrs. warrick. he never said that copd caused mrs. warrick's death. and what did he say about the cause of death? we had a few questions at the end of his videotaped deposition. but remember, he said that a medical examiner, a forensic pathologist would be a better expert to testify on the cause of death. and that is the kind of expert we brought you in dr. mark shuman, the medical examiner from miami-dade county. and what did he say on copd? well, he said that mrs. warrick's copd was stable for many years and that the autopsy, with respect to her lung cancer, that the autopsy showed that she had no cancer in her lungs; that the chemotherapy treatment had worked and the autopsy doctors could not find any evidence of cancer in her lungs at the time she died. nor did the autopsy doctor find any evidence of pneumonia when mrs. warrick died. and it is almost as if they are telling you, we do not know how mrs. warrick died. we know she had copd; we know she had lung cancer. it must have been one of those; we are going to leave it up to you to decide. but that is not the way it works, ladies 12 and gentlemen. you have to base your decision on the evidence in this case. mr. shields, in his closing, was not talking about cause of death but he -- i wrote this down -- he said, data or not, use your common sense. well, data is a type of evidence. you are not going to be instructed by judge boyer, evidence or no evidence, use your common sense. we want you to use your common sense, but you have to rely on evidence in making your decision. and the plaintiff's witnesses do not provide you with any evidence as to how mrs. warrick died. and because they do not, they cannot meet their burden of proof on the cause of death. let us look at how mr. reilly and i, though, proved to you that mrs. warrick's sudden cardiac death was caused by a grossly enlarged heart that was electrically unstable and that resulted in her heart going into v. fib, ventricular fibrillation. there were only two witnesses who talked about how mrs. warrick died when her heart stopped beating, when it went into sudden cardiac arrest. dr. bishopric, the cardiologist from the university of miami school of medicine and dr. shuman, the medical examiner and forensic pathologist from miami-dade county. and what did they say specifically about mrs. warrick's heart that we can agree on? well, let us get out the report card. in my opening i said we would prove mrs. warrick had an enlarged heart, and we did that. you will have the autopsy report. you will have the medical records, and there are numerous references to the enlarged heart. we told you in opening mrs. warrick's heart weighed 650 grams at autopsy. and we proved that. you have it in the autopsy report. we also proved that the normal weight for a woman's heart is 300 grams. both dr. shuman and dr. bishopric testified to that. both of them testified that high blood pressure causes hypertrophic heart disease. hypertrophic was one of those medical terms for an enlarged heart. both of them testified that mrs. warrick's weight contributed to her enlarged heart. the evidence is in the medical records mrs. warrick weighed over 200 pounds until april of 2009. you will see the photomicrographs, the actual slides of the tissue from mrs. warrick's heart and her heart was filled with scar tissue and fat at autopsy. dr. bishopric talked about how genetics play a role in an enlarged heart. enlarged hearts are more vulnerable to arrhythmias. both dr. shuman and bishopric testified to that and they both said that smoking does not cause an enlarged heart or hypertrophic heart disease. and that is what our report card shows. you know, the plaintiff did not call mrs. warrick's treating cardiologist or medical 23 examiner. and the plaintiff has the burden of proving the cause of mrs. warrick's death in this case. they have filed the wrongful death claim and it is their burden to prove that she died a death due to something our clients did or failed to do. in fact, not only did mrs. warrick have one cardiologist, she had at least two cardiologists. do you remember when dr. bagnoli came here, mrs. warrick's lung doctor, and said mrs. warrick was seeing dr. ramezani, a cardiologist before she ever started to be treated with me? well, doctor -- and the other cardiologist that we know mrs. warrick saw was a dr. baker and you will see those medical records from the baker gilmour cardiovascular institute. but why did not they bring mrs. warrick's own heart doctors to court? well, i think you will find the answer in the medical records that we showed you with dr. shuman and dr. bishopric. in 2002, dr. ramezani is one of the heart doctors who found that mrs. warrick had electrical problems with her heart. this is an ekg and at the top you have mrs. warrick's name, the date, december 12, 2002, sinus tachycardia with occasional premature supraventricular complexes. and dr. shuman testified, as did dr. bishopric, that premature ventricular complexes are these electrical problems, arrhythmias, irregular rhythms in the heart. tachycardia was one of those types of arrhythmias where the heart beats too fast. and so in december of 2002 we have evidence from dr. ramezani that mrs. warrick had electrical problems with her heart. remember, too, the other piece of evidence that we put up from dr. ramezani; the cardiac catheterization that he did in 2001. dr. ramezani did this catheterization six months after mrs. warrick had quit smoking in thanksgiving of 2000, finding that the left main coronary artery is normal in size and free of any significant disease. the left anterior descending coronary artery is also free of any significant disease. the circumflex coronary artery is normal in size and appears to be free of any significant stenosis. so six months after mrs. warrick quit smoking, her coronary cardiac catheterization is normal. and what about dr. baker, of the baker gilmour cardiovascular institute? in april of 2008 dr. gilmour interpreted mrs. warrick's echocardiogram and he said it showed good ef. dr. shuman said ef stood for ejection fraction, but significant cardiomegaly. and y'all remember what cardiomegaly was? it is just another word for -- medical term for enlarged heart. so is it any wonder why the plaintiffs did not call dr. ramezani or dr. baker when they knew that both of her cardiologists had records that were damaging to their theory about the cause of 8 mrs. warrick's death? let us talk about what dr. shuman, the medical examiner, did to determine the cause and manner of death. remember, that is what he said that forensic or autopsy pathologists do, and he is somebody that does 200 a year. he does -- he is done 2500 autopsies during the course of his practice as a forensic pathologist. and dr. shuman said that a medical examiner determines the chain of events that lead to death. and that chain of events actually comes right off the death certificate, what they are required to find in the death certificate. and in mrs. warrick's case, there are basically what i'll call three links in the chain of events. the first link is her longstanding high blood pressure. well, we showed you and we will just run through these quickly. every year of her life that we have medical records for, from 1982 and then beginning again in 1998 through april of 2009, mrs. warrick had high blood pressure readings recorded in her medical records. did they get better? sure they did. but she had 12 years of high blood pressure and the toll that that took on her heart is the second link in this chain of events. she had an enlarged diseased electrically unstable heart; a heart that weighed 650 grams at the time she died, more than twice the size of a normal person's heart; so much fat that not only did it surround the heart, but it infiltrated both the left and right ventricles and scarring. remember, interstitial fibrosis was just another medical term for scarring in the heart muscle itself. that is the second link. the enlarged heart is the second link in the change of events that led to mrs. warrick's death. you know, dr. shuman talked about the enlarged heart. he is the one that put up dr. baker's 2008 report that i showed you a moment ago. and dr. shuman, in discussing enlarged heart, said that they are electrically unstable, that they are more vulnerable to these electrical problems, they are more vulnerable to arrhythmias and irregular heartbeats. and he also testified that mrs. warrick had progressively worsening irregular heartbeats, so much so that by october of 2007 she had a 24-hour holter monitor, and this showed two things. did not blow up the first thing, but it showed sinus bradycardia. well, that is the opposite of what she had in that earlier record with dr. ramezani when she had tachycardia. that is the fast irregular heart rhythm. bradycardia is a slow irregular heart rhythm. and then -- but dr. shuman wanted to point out that the computer recorded 1,310 isolated premature ventricular contractions -- premature is early -- ventricular contractions. what did they say about how many premature ventricular contractions a normal person has? they 19 said you should not have any; zero. this was not the only test that we -- mrs. warrick had run and that we brought and presented to you. in july of 2009 we know that mrs. warrick underwent placement of a loop recorder similar to a holter monitor, except it actually, as dr. bishopric described, gets placed inside just under the chest skin. and why had she been having -- why did she have this loop recorder? because she fainted at home in the bathroom, and when she fainted she fell and hit her head in the bathtub. well, the loop recorder showed that she had periods where her heart just stopped beating for more than three seconds. and we used this description on the heart monitor that you see on tv shows, instead of seeing a regular heartbeat, for three seconds it would flat line. mrs. warrick had to have a pacemaker put in july 2nd, 2009 to treat this period -- this period where her heart stopped beating for periods of more than three seconds. link number three. what is the final link in the chain of events? well, that final link is the v. fib, the ventricular fibrillation. on the day that mrs. warrick died she was found with no pulse, not breathing for 20 minutes, but with an electrical rhythm; an electrical rhythm that the jacksonville fire and rescue described as v. fib or ventricular fibrillation. and remember that dr. shuman described v. fib as the heart muscle just quivering -- not pumping, not beating -- just quivering. what did the jacksonville fire and rescue call it? the ems? they found -- they reported what they found when they initially arrived. on initial contact there were no pulses, no heartbeats, with a v. fib rhythm. primary impression: cardiac arrest. secondary impression: cardiac rhythm disturbance. the evidence is overwhelming that mrs. warrick had a severe electrical problem with her heart and the chain of events establishes that this is what caused her death. you know, there was even a time in 2007 with dr. zenk, one of mrs. warrick's partners, where she was skipping a heartbeat. her heart, regularly irregular. not isolated. regularly irregular with four skipped beats per minute. what is her diagnosis? her diagnosis is arrhythmia. it is a little bit covered up here. and for the plan for that first diagnosis, for diagnosis number one, patient to see her cardiologist in a few weeks. what did dr. zenk want to do? she did not want to wait a few weeks. she wanted her to have a holter monitor right then. and it is the holter monitor that she has two years later with -- in fact, the date on that -- i'm sorry, could you go back? i just want to correct something there. the date on this -- do we have the first page? 4 i see it is on the title but i believe the actual date is july 21, 2007. that exhibit is defendant's exhibit 44. it is in the record, and you will be able to review it, but that is my recollection, is that the date is july 21, 2007. it is not until 2009 when she is having these fainting episodes that they actually do anything to treat mrs. warrick with this heart electrical problem that she has. you know, dr. bagnoli knew about this. he came and testified to you that, you know, in his opinion, it was either copd or lung cancer. did not tell you how, but he knew that when he saw mrs. warrick in july of 2009, he knew enough that when mrs. warrick had these fainting -- recurring fainting spells, he knew enough to suggest to her doctors that they needed to consider cardiac arrhythmias. and, finally, dr. bishopric explained that the type of pacemaker that mrs. warrick had had a dual chamber pacemaker designed to make sure that the heart did not go below a certain critical level. but mrs. warrick's heart just was not beating on schedule. it was stopping for periods of greater than three seconds. it was skipping beats -- four beats, every minute. those are the kinds of issues that she had when the fire and rescue found her. now, let us go back to dr. shuman's three links in the chain of events for a moment. longstanding high blood pressure; enlarged, diseased electrically unstable heart; and ventricular fibrillation. you know, dr. shuman was asked a question on cross-examination by mr. shields, and i just want to go through each of these points with respect to their testimony so there is no confusion. dr. shuman and dr. bishopric both agree that ventricular fibrillation was the final link in the chain of events leading to mrs. warrick's death. there is no dispute about that final link. dr. shuman and dr. bishopric both agree that mrs. warrick had this massive enlarged heart, more than twice the normal size for a woman, and there is no dispute about that. and dr. shuman and dr. bishopric both said that high blood pressure, longstanding high blood pressure can cause a heart to become enlarged. you know, dr. shuman explained that the heart is a muscle and it gets larger when it is put under stress, just like any other muscle in the body. and i asked dr. shuman if high blood pressure was the only thing that can cause an enlarged heart and he said, no, obesity can do it, valvular heart disease, genetic defects can also cause enlarged hearts. dr. bishopric was also asked these same questions by mr. reilly. and it is in the transcript, 3713, why did mrs. warrick's heart get so big? and dr. bishopric said, she does not know why people's hearts get big in every case. sometimes 15 the cause is clear, like when they can do a genetic test and determine it, and sometimes it is not. well, there was no genetic test done at the autopsy. so we do not know whether genetics contributed to her enlarged heart. but dr. bishopric added, that mrs. warrick had hypertension, and that certainly did not help. she was a very heavy woman and the heavier you are the bigger your heart gets, it is just the way it is. mr. reilly then asked dr. bishopric, does hypertension, high blood pressure, affect the size of your heart, and her answer was, yes, it does, it makes it bigger. let us talk about what the -- and remember -- remember what the jacksonville fire and rescue records says, cardiac rhythm disturbance. what did the examination of the heart tissue itself show? the doctor who performed the autopsy made slides to look at mrs. warrick's tissue, not just from the lungs, but all of the tissues from her autopsy to look at under the microscope. and we had some pictures of the tissues from her heart and these showed that mrs. warrick's heart was diseased. remember, dr. shuman came down and pointed out that these were the fat cells, these white clear circles were all the fat cells surrounding mrs. warrick's heart. and that all of this, these black dots, these cells between the long pink or purple fibers, the muscle tissue itself of the heart, that all of that was abnormal. it should not have been there. but it was evidence of an inflammation and fibrosis and the significant disease and damage that mrs. warrick's heart had. and that is what the autopsy report finding is with respect to the heart. hypertrophy of the heart. 650 grams. large amounts of fat. fat outside. fat inside. fat in two ventricles. and scarring in the heart muscle itself. that is all uncontroverted. dr. bagnoli said, no, they got that wrong. he never said anything of the sort. and you will have these medical records and these pictures with you when you retire to the jury room to begin your deliberations. nothing in that autopsy report will suggest to you that mrs. warrick died from her cancer or died from her copd. and we would ask that you answer those questions on the verdict form, questions 4 and 5 -- and your honor, i do think there is a typo in the verdict form that we will have to correct. that should be, please proceed to question 5 -- was eveline warrick's lung cancer a legal cause of her death? the overwhelming evidence is, no. was eveline warrick's copd a legal cause of her death? mr. reilly talked to you about legal cause. i will not repeat that. the answer is, no, based on the overwhelming evidence. do not ignore the data. do not ignore the evidence. you know, mr. shields wants you to believe that 4663 a woman who is 181 pounds or 200 pounds, somewhere in that neighborhood was cachectic. well, that is another medical word that i had to get my dictionary out to understand. but a person who is cachectic is wasting away. and you remember he asked dr. shuman about it. do not you think she was cachectic? do not you think she was wasting away? and she said, no, there is no way that a woman who weighs 200 pounds is cachectic. it is not just dr. bishopric's opinion. the autopsy report does not describe mrs. warrick as frail or cachectic. the autopsy report says, in describing her abdomen, her stomach, her belly is what i'd call it, that the abdomen was soft to palpation, without masses, and protuberant, sticking out, secondary to obesity. and what was the diagnosis in the autopsy report? under accessory diagnosis, the first accessory diagnosis is moderate obesity. there is no way mrs. warrick was cachectic when she died february 7th, 2010. why did lung cancer not contribute or cause mrs. warrick's death? well, let us talk about dr. shuman's testimony. dr. shuman told you, based on the autopsy report, there was no cancer found in her lungs. they had -- she had ten nodules in her liver that were less than a half an inch in diameter. but the tumor and the liver was stable. they did not even know that the cancer had spread to her brain. they did not know that when they removed her brain. they did not know that when they looked at her brain without the benefit -- without the benefit of microscope. when they simply looked at it using the naked eye, they did not identify any cancer in mrs. warrick's brain. it was only when they made these slides to look under the microscope that they found what dr. bishopric called micrometastasis, metastasis that can only be seen under the high power of a microscope. and just as importantly, mrs. warrick had no symptoms of liver failure or brain dysfunction when she died. the plaintiffs want you to believe that because mrs. warrick had pneumonia some three weeks before she died when she went in to the hospital that somehow she died of lung cancer. now, i do not know how you make the leap from pneumonia that is resolved after you are in the hospital to death by lung cancer. i just do not see how you can do that. dr. bagnoli never said how mrs. warrick died from her lung cancer. and dr. shuman explained why the autopsy proves that she did not die from her lung cancer. remember, dr. shuman showed you the discharge summary from her hospitalization in january when she was sent home february 3rd, 2010. and remember, one of her diagnosis, one of the things that they monitored, that they found while she was in the hospital in january was atrial fibrillation with controlled ventricular response. she continued to have electrical problems with her heart while she was in the hospital in january. 11 but this is what the doctor said right before he sent her home: given her overall condition, she did quite well. she was somewhat slow to improve, but did gradually improve. she is doing much better at the time of discharge. her shortness of breath is significantly improved. her pancytopenia has resolved. do you remember when mr. shields was arguing that she was immunosuppressed? there is no question that when she went in on january 18th she was immunosuppressed. when she went home, her pancytopenia had resolved. her hemoglobin and her hematocrit has been stable, meaning she is not anemic, and she is now cleared for discharge home. they sent her home and told her to follow up with her doctors in one to two weeks. the doctors had sent her home from memorial hospital did not think she was going to die four days later. and, remember, how norma warrick was surprised? i asked her about the autopsy, why it came about that an autopsy was asked for in this case. and she was surprised at her mother's death. she was surprised because her mother had been getting better. she had this piece of paper, the pet scan that said that the cancer was gone from the lungs. she was getting better, not worse. and she said to her father, daddy, do not you want to know why momma died? that is the reason she convinced her father to ask for an autopsy. she was not frail. she was not cachectic. she did not die from her lung cancer or her copd. remember, we told you in the beginning that this case is all about eveline warrick. it is about the choices that mrs. warrick made, it is about the fact that she was morbidly obese, as her doctors called it, and that the obesity contributed to her high blood pressure. her high blood pressure contributed to her enlarged heart, her massive enlarged heart, as dr. shuman described it. and it was because of this enlarged heart that she had and was susceptible to and prone to these heart rhythm irregularities. and that is what caused her heart to stop suddenly in february of this year when she was found by the fire and rescue in v. fib, no pulse, not breathing, and she had been down for 20 minutes when they arrived. that is the chain of events that caused her death in february of this year. not any cigarettes that she smoked, remembering that she had quit nearly ten years prior to her death on thanksgiving day in 2000. now, when i started my closing, i told you i also wanted to highlight some testimony that we elicited on cross-examination from plaintiff's experts, dr. burns, dr. proctor, and dr. farone regarding the research that had been conducted at r.j. reynolds over the last 60 years. and you will remember that the plaintiffs introduced a number of documents, not just medical records, but company documents from what dr. proctor 22 described as tens of millions of pages, millions of documents. and we have already highlighted the documents that the plaintiffs listed in their closing, which you would think would be the most important documents that they would want to present to you to prove their case. the newest document from that list in plaintiff's closing was from 1972. well, here's all of the documents out of the tens of millions of pages that r.j. reynolds, that american tobacco company, and that brown & williamson tobacco company generated, that they brought to you, they brought you one from the 1920s. nothing from the '30s and '40s. nine documents from the '50s. three documents from the '60s. nine documents from the '70s. and three documents from the '80s. 25 documents out of tens of millions of pages. and the most recent one out of all of those that were just even commenced during the plaintiff's case was 1984, 26 years ago. and i think some of you were not even born 26 years ago. what about some of the reynolds employees who wrote these documents? you have heard dr. claude teague, dr. alan rodgman, dr. frank colby. did dr. proctor tell you that dr. colby's dead? did he tell you when dr. teague or dr. rodgman retired from reynolds, how many years ago, how many decades ago they retired? these were documents written in the '50s and '60s and '70s and these are people who are no longer working at r.j. reynolds. brown and williamson no longer exists. american tobacco company no longer exists. these documents were written at a different time. they were written long ago, and some of them were written as much as 50 to 70 years ago. but this is a case that is taking place in 2010. let me talk briefly about some of the things that dr. burns testified to on cross-examination. dr. burns told you that the council for tobacco research or ctr funded grants for outside researchers. he said that they funded many distinguished scientists from the top universities. remember, universities even here in the state of florida. that some of ctr's research was cofounded by public health groups like the american cancer society and the national cancer institute. that hundreds, hundreds of ctr articles were published in the peer-reviewed literature. that hundreds of ctr articles were published in the surgeon general's report. and more than 50 million americans have quit smoking. and dr. burns finally told you that 80 to 90 percent of the 50 million americans who quit did so cold turkey, without any aid or assistance. you know, we asked dr. burns about smokers, and whether -- he said many times that smokers are responsible for their own smoking behavior. that is dr. burns' belief. that is correct. 7 even if they are addicted, that smokers are still responsible for their own smoking behavior, correct? yes, that is correct. the fact that someone is addicted is a barrier for behavioral change, but it does not free them from the responsibility for their own behavior. and dr. burns talked about the 1988 surgeon general's report. you saw dr. koop on video clip. this is what dr. koop wrote: cigarette smoking is an addictive behavior and the individual smoker must decide whether or not to continue that behavior. who is decision is it? who is choice is it? even dr. koop tells you it is the individual smoker's choice and decision. let us talk about a couple of other things that dr. proctor admitted on cross-examination. he said if either you or a family member were diagnosed with copd or lung cancer and a doctor told you it was caused by smoking, that would be a powerful source of information on the risks of smoking? and he said, yes. he said yes, not knowing anything about eveline warrick or her history about her sister annie marie griffiths being diagnosed with copd and lung cancer. but he agreed that that should be a powerful source of information on the risks of smoking. he also said that some people treated cigarette warnings like they treated ads; they did not pay any attention to them. and mr. reilly has talked about the fact that the warning labels are not the only way that smokers learn about the dangers of smoking. remember last monday after dr. goldberg testified? i know dr. goldberg went home on friday, but you came in on monday morning, mr. spruance was here live, and so he testified, and then when mr. spruance finished testifying, judge boyer read to you and, remember, he is told you, when i read to you, this is the law that i'm giving you. when i talk to you, extemporaneously, i'm trying to explain it. but he read to you the law after dr. goldberg testified. and what he said was, congress has determined as of july 1, 1969 that cigarette warning labels were effective as a matter of law. the adequacy or the sufficiency of the warnings cannot be a basis for a liability in this case after july 1, 1969. and here are the warnings that eveline warrick saw. 1966, 1970, and the four rotating warnings beginning in 1985. these are the same warnings that exist on every pack of cigarettes today. these are the same warnings that eveline warrick saw every time she took a cigarette out of the pack. and you remember from my opening, we calculated based on a pack-and-a-half a day, 365 days a year, 30 cigarettes in a pack-and-a-half times 34 years with the number of warnings, mrs. warrick was warned 372,300 times. and she was more powerfully warned with her own personal family experiences, families and friends. 18 back to dr. proctor's testimony. he acknowledged that the surgeon general thanked philip morris and r.j. reynolds and others for the information they provided in that big green book, the larson, haag and silvette collections. and he also acknowledged, like dr. burns did, that rjr scientists research was cited in the 1964, 1979, 1981, 1989, and 2000 surgeon general's report. finally, with respect to dr. farone. you remember dr. farone. he is the former philip morris scientists who was fired. what did dr. farone admit on cross-examination? well, dr. farone had the most to say about r.j. reynolds research efforts. he talked about tar reduction. he talked about r.j. reynolds' conduct. let us look at some of the things that dr. farone admitted on videotape on cross-examination by mr. latham. first of all, dr. farone told you there is no current government standard for what constitutes a safer cigarette, nor has there ever been one. he also told you that reynolds has devoted historically a tremendous amount of financial resources and scientific talent to try to develop a safer cigarette. that they worked beginning in the 1950s to try to reduce the risks of cigarette smoking; and that they acted as reasonable, prudent cigarette manufacturer identifying and quantifying pah's and other carcinogens in smoke. reynolds also engaged in efforts to reduce the constituents in smoke and he described that as a reasonable approach to try to reduce the risks of smoking. he told you they used filtration, reconstituted tobacco, porous paper, filter ventilation, an expanded tobacco. and you saw all of those things when mr. jupe testified, the expanded tobacco in the glass jars, and the diagram of the cigarette -- the cigarette cone. reynolds was the first company to use reconstituted tobacco. and when you compare the cigarettes from the 1950s to the cigarettes of today, tar and nicotine yields dropped more than 70 percent. scientist at reynolds have published a lot of information about cigarette smoke chemistry over the years and they have been repeatedly recognized by the surgeon general's report dating back to 1964. dr. farone also said that in 1986 the cigarette companies disclosed all the ingredients used in their cigarettes to congress. and, importantly, the u.s. government has never told the cigarette companies to remove any ingredient from their products. and, finally, dr. farone talked about reynolds' product stewardship program that works to make sure that any product changes, including addition of new ingredients, does not increase the inherent risks of smoking. 3 you know, ladies and gentlemen, today is october 1, 2010. it is not 1953. it is not 1964. it is not 1966. it is not the 1970s. it is not 1984. that is the case that you heard the plaintiffs put on. the case you heard them put on was the engle findings case. remember, the engle findings do not answer the issues that you are here to decide. before you can apply the engle findings, remember -- and, you know, this sounds almost like the craziest thing you have to do. but you have to go back into that jury room and completely put the engle findings that they have hammered to you out of your minds. you have to decide the question of whether or not eveline warrick was an engle class member without consideration of a single engle finding. understanding that, remember, the engle jury heard no evidence about eveline warrick, and the findings that you will read and hear about do not even mention eveline warrick. the engle jury did not decide any issues specific to eveline warrick. it did not decide on whether she relied on anything that reynolds said or pm said -- philip morris said or failed to say. the engle jury did not decide that eveline warrick was injured by any conduct of r.j. reynolds or its predecessor companies or philip morris. and the engle findings do not establish that these defendants are liable to the estate of eveline warrick. philip morris and r.j. reynolds tried eveline warrick's case. we put on evidence about her cause of death. we put on evidence about mrs. warrick's awareness. we put on evidence so that you could decide the issues that the engle jury did not decide, issues that they never considered. and on behalf of r.j. reynolds and mr. latham, i want to thank you for your time and for all of your attention. thank you very much.