mr. hill: thank you, your honor. may it please the court: good morning, everybody. we have been together for a long time now, june 28th. in the weeks that followed, we have covered a lot of ground. sometimes it was slow sledding, but you stuck in there, you hung in there with us, you have paid careful attention to the evidence. you have asked thoughtful questions. and before i get too wrapped up in my closing argument, i want to make sure that i express my gratitude and appreciation on behalf of jerry weingart and the rest of us. what you are doing here is important. you are the only jury that is going to decide jerry weingart's case. there were 200 some-odd people that were first selected to be the panel. you all, the remaining eight, are the folks that were chosen for this job. we know that you have taken it seriously, and we appreciate in just a few short hours -- i imagine you all are raring to go, to get back there and get this case. in a few short hours when the lawyers are done talking, it is going to be placed at your feet for you to decide, and you are going to go back in that jury deliberation room and you are going to have two jobs. the first job is to answer the questions that are on the verdict form. the second job is to explain to each other why it is that you feel each question ought to be answered in a particular way. my job as jerry weingart's lawyer is to offer suggestions based on the evidence, the law that judge kelley read to you about what those answers ought to be. but before we get to the questions that you will have to answer, i want to talk to you about the things that you do not have to answer, about which there is no dispute, about which there is agreement. one of those things, obviously, claire weingart, for 50 years was a heavy, heavy smoker. medical records say she smoked a pack and a half to a pack a day for 50 years. folks that knew her and loved her say she smoked more than that. it is uncontested in this case that claire weingart's lung cancer and death was caused by smoking cigarettes, these defendants' product. she smoked them heavy for 50 years, smoked them for 20 years before the first warning label was ever put on a pack of cigarettes. day in, day out, morning, noon and night. 20, 40, 60 cigarettes a day. each time, sucking in the nicotine, bathing her brain in nicotine and coating her lungs in dozens and dozens carcinogens. there is no question in this case it was the defendants' product that caused claire weingart's death. throughout those 50 years, throughout that smoking history, these defendants lied, deceived, misrepresented and committed a fraud on the american public for 50 years. they meant to do it, they agreed to do it. it was intentional. they did it with the intention that folks like claire weingart would rely on their lies, rely on the misrepresentations, rely on their fraud. and why did they do it? they did it for money. so they could have a bigger bag of money to carry to the bank. you know, it was talked about in jury selection, it is a legal product; companies can do what companies do to sell more product. we are not talking about free enterprise. we are not talking about corporations doing an admirable and good job about selling their product. that is not what this case is about. this is about a corporation and corporations that put their bottom line over the safety of the american public, including claire weingart. the law does not allow folks to lie, deceive, misrepresent and conceal the truth at the expense of the health, safety and welfare of the american public, including claire weingart. in order to understand this case, we have to go back in time. we have to go back all the way -you cannot look at this case with your 2011 ideas and understanding. everyone knows today that cigarette smoking is deadly. everyone knows that cigarette smoking is addictive. you have to go back in time to understand what things were like for claire weingart, born in 1923. you have to go back in time to understand what her environment was, you have to go back in time before we looked at corporations sometimes with the jaundice eye that we view them now. back before when we expected more of corporations, back before we just did not disregard their lies and deceit. you have to go back to 1923 and beyond to understand what this case is really about. claire and jerry weingart, when they got married, 1943, you have to understand that during that time period, smoking was everywhere. it was pervasive. it would be abnormal not to smoke, much different than it is now. you have to understand the rise of the cigarette industry, how they exploited and created from whole cloth a brand new crop of smokers. young women, getting them hooke before they turn 25 because they knew even back then if you do not get them before 25, you have lost a customer for life. and claire weingart was a customer for life. for 50 years, these defendants profited off of her lungs. and when she died, they cut her loose and found the next replacement smoker, and they come to court saying, we have no responsibility, none. ignore our lies and our misrepresentation and our fraud. it is all claire weingart's fault. that is the defense in this case, the unified defense from these three defendants. we acknowledge that claire weingart has some responsibility, always have. we embrace that responsibility from the moment this lawsuit was filed. we acknowledged that claire weingart bears some responsibility for her death. should she have tried harder to quit? absolutely. could she have found the motivation? should she have found the motivation to try and try and try and try again until ultimately she was successful and quit smoking? absolutely. our position has always been that claire weingart has some fault, and there will be a place on the verdict form for you to assign a percentage of fault to her. but the reason that we are here is that these defendants deny any responsibility. zero. quite frankly, that is not what the evidence has shown for the past few weeks and that is not what the law requires. i'm going to walk you through some of the issues that you are going to have to determine in order to find in favor of the plaintiffs at the end of this case. you saw the ads that claire weingart would have been exposed to, the pervasive advertising, how it created this whole market, the seductive market teaching women, young women, how alluring and enticing, how glamorous smoking was. that was the environment that claire weingart would have lived in. that was what was available to her. the real question in this case is addiction. was claire weingart addicted to nicotine contained in cigarette and did it result in her death? and the answer to that question, most respectfully, is of course it did. because we have got to go back to 1959 and beyond about what these defendants knew about, not only the deadly nature of their product, but about the addictive nature of the product. because why do people smoke? if you did not understand it before, you understand it now. folks smoke for nicotine. folks smoked the amounts that claire weingart smoked and for the duration that claire weingart did to fuel their addiction. defendants have known it for 50 years and they know it today, and now you know it. so i want to walk through some of the documents, their own documents, that they never in a million years expected to see the light of day. the things that they were telling to just each other when they thought no one was looking. you see, character is defined by what you do when you think no one is looking. and look at the words, the actions of these defendants when they thought no one was looking. "why do people smoke," 1959, addiction. next. "one of the main reasons people smoke is to experience the physiological effects of nicotine on the human system. nicotine, to the best of our present knowledge, does not produce cancer. hence, in theory, one could achieve the major advantage of smoking without the hazard of cancer." in 1959 they are talking about the hazard of cancer. remember how long they denied that clear link between smoking and lung cancer? "the physiological requirements of the smoker with respect to nicotine can be met by the application of the optimum amount of nicotine to the extracted tobacco." way back then, they are designing and engineering cigarettes to be as indicative as possible. "a cigarette that does not deliver nicotine cannot satisfy the habituated smoker and cannot lead to habituation and would, therefore, almost certainly fail. health claims alone without flavor of nicotine cannot sell cigarettes. most smokers would rather quit than switch. no one has ever become a cigarette smoker by smoking cigarettes without nicotine." "in a sense, the tobacco industry may be thought of as being a specialized, highly ritualized and stylized segment of the pharmaceutical industry. product uniquely contain and deliver nicotine, a potent drug with a variety of physiological effects." "our friend, mr. teague, if as proposed above, nicotine is a sine qua non of smoking. and if we meekly accept the allegations of our critics and move toward reduction or elimination of nicotine from our products, then we shall eventually liquidate our business. without nicotine, the cigarette industry collapses. 1972, study means of enhancing satisfaction via synergists, alteration of ph or other means to minimize dose level and maximize desired effect. designing their cigarettes to be as addictive as possible." "without any question, the desire to smoke is based on the effect of nicotine on the body. one can describe it best as being both a relaxation and a stimulation; however, we cannot ever be comfortable selling a product which most of our customers would stop using if they could. that is to say, if the exit gate from our market should suddenly open, we could be out of business almost overnight." what does it mean to claire weingart? 50 plus years of smoking history. 50 years of smoking heavy two packs per day, 14,000 plus cigarettes a year, eight hits of nicotine per cigarette, 5.8 million doses of a highly addictive drug. if we were talking about alcohol or heroin or cocaine, it would be ludicrous to suggest to someone with that many of exposures over that period of time with that intensity would not be addicted. and the same is true in this case. the reason claire weingart smoked as much as she did at often as she did and at the expense of everything she held dear in her life was her addiction to nicotine contained in the cigarettes. the first question you are going to have to answer is was claire weingart addicted? you heard some testimony from dr. burns. next. dr. burns, it seems like a while ago, dr. burns was on the stand for three or four days. ivy league educated, wrote chapters in books that medical students still use on addiction, had his hand in every surgeon general report since 1975, whether as an author or senior reviewer. i would respectfully suggest that you can come to court for the next year and sit on juries day in and day out and not see an expert with the qualifications that dr. burns has. what did he tell you? that opinion is what, dr. burns, as to whether claire weingart was more likely than not addicted to nicotine contained in the cigarettes? answer: yes. it is my opinion that she was powerfully addicted to nicotine. you also heard from tonia werner, who was a psychiatrist, forensic psychiatrist, general psychiatrist who has screened thousands of patients for nicotine dependence. and she was the one that walked you through the dsm-iv and all of the diagnostic criteria that is frequently used in the psychiatric field. and what did she say? what is your opinion then with regards to whether or not claire weingart was addicted to nicotine and cigarettes? answer: yes. my opinion is that claire weingart clearly met the criteria for nicotine dependence. who else did you hear from? andrew schlein. you read his deposition. it was read to you. dr. schlein was claire weingart's primary care physician for five years. he treated her, he knew her, he talked with her about smoking, tried to convince her to stop, unsuccessfully. and dr. schlein testified that he would have diagnosed her, that he believe he did diagnose her with nicotine dependence. that is not a paid expert, that is not someone that was hand picked by anybody. that is someone who just happened to be treating claire weingart for five years up to the point she died. and dr. schlein told you that he believed she was suffering from nicotine dependence. you also heard it is the frontline providers like dr. schlein that typically deal with and address nicotine dependence and addiction. it is not psychiatrists generally that is the frontline providers, it is the primary healthcare physicians, the internal medical providers, folks just like dr. schlein are the ones that deal primarily with addiction cigarettes. what else have you heard? dr. dosovitz, who was the defense psychiatrist who you heard from yesterday. because it is so fresh in your mind, i do not think that i have to say a whole lot about dr. dosovitz. it is fair to say $60,000 later, the best expert that these defendants can bring you is someone who says, i do not know. he looked at whatever he looked at, he ignored what he wanted to ignore and discounted whatever he wanted to discount. he said, i do not believe this, i do not trust that, she hesitated, she was not sure when the cold hard facts just said it was not so. $60,000 later, dr. dosovitz comes in here and says, i just do not know, it is just unclear, the record is unclear, i just do not know. that is a familiar concept that you have heard a lot about over the last couple of weeks, the "i do not know." you know it could be harmful? it could not be harmful, we just do not know, we need to study it more. that is basically what dr. dosovitz had to say. you heard how one case, he admitted that smoking first thing in the morning, the eye opener would qualify someone under 2b for dependence and in this case, somehow he is got a different opinion, and it is apples and oranges, as if something smoking first thing in the morning is different in one case than it is in another. so you had to -you heard what dr. dosovitz had to say. at the end of the day, he did not tell you anything that changes really anything. he says, i do not know and that claire weingart could have quit. that is the best they could do is bring you someone who says to you "i do not know." they have got dr. spunberg who is a treating radiation oncologist. he was the one that treated her from january until she died in november for the radiation treatment. he is the one that wrote that note that said that claire had quit smoking. he thought she had, although he was not surprised or would not be surprised, to learn that she, in fact, had not quit, but he just did not have enough information to diagnose her one way or another. at the end of the day, not one expert has taken this stand, not one, and said that claire weingart was not addicted. so you have to ask yourself, what does the greater weight of the evidence show, the more persuasive convincing force and effect of the evidence? is the tip ever so slightly in anybody's favor? the answer to that, most respectfully, is clear, that claire weingart was addicted to nicotine contained in cigarettes. she was addicted to these defendants' products. next slide. what facts can you rely on to form the conclusion that claire weingart was addicted? heavy smoker for at least 20 years before the first warning label was put on a pack of cigarettes. dr. burns told you that when jerry came back from the war in '46, in the spring of '46, claire was 22 years old. at that point, she was already a heavy smoker. she did not start out being a heavy smoker. you have to work to that. so certainly, claire was an addicted smoker, according to dr. burns, at least since 146. an addicted smoker for 20 years before the first warning label got put on the first package of cigarettes. jerry told you she smoked even more in the years following world war ii, during the pregnancy with dennis, during the pregnancy with barbara and even in the years beyond, she smoked more. she smoked first thing in the morning. if we have proven anything to you in the course of these few weeks, it is got to be that claire weingart, first thing in the morning, before anything, before her eyes were even fully opened, reached for that cigarette first thing every morning. it was asked that question. agree, that first thing claire would do in the morning is smoke a cigarette, which is highly indicative of nicotine addiction. smoked if she woke up in the middle of the night. that comes from conrad kupferman. he was visiting with her. and when she woke up in the middle of the night, she would smoke. she chain smoked. contrary to what dr. dosovitz has to say, the record that is clear, virtually everyone that was asked about claire weingart was a chain smoker, depending on their definition, agreed she was, agreed that she was a chain smoker. she would light cigarettes off the end of another. she would light a cigarette, put it out, and within a minute or two, light up another one. that is highly indicative of addiction. she smoked so much, her house was permeated with cigarette smoke. smoked so much she stained the headliner of jerry's car. you have to think, how much does one have to smoke to stain the headliner of the car? that is constant, that is unrelenting, that is addiction-fueled smoking. smoked even though she developed a smoker's cough barricaded her hospital room door to smoke during melanoma treatment in 1980. you heard jerry testify about from claire of when diagnosed with the melanoma in 1980 and she was is at sloan kettering up in new york and she thought she was doing to die, she was concerned about whether she was going to survive and her addiction to cigarettes was so powerfully overwhelming, she had to literally barricade the door with the chair so she could smoke in the hospital room. we are not talking about 1940, we are not talking about 1950, we are talking about 1980. she is got the door barricaded so she can smoke. these defendants want you to believe that somehow that is not indicative of addiction. what does claire weingart say? it is hard. it is very heart to try to stop. i would like to, but it is hard. i cannot quit. claire weingart said a lot of things to a lot of people about her cigarette smoking. she would say those things, it is hard, it is very hard to stop. she would say, i cannot quit. she would say, i do not want to quit, i do not want to quit. claire weingart would say anything to get people off of her back because it was such a problem in her family situation, it caused such strain in her relationships. not only with just her family but with her friends and the people that knew her. she was constantly under assault by folks who were trying to help her. well-meaning, well-intentioned people trying to get claire to stop smoking. so she would say anything to get them off her back. if this woman was so strong willed, so independent, so detail oriented, so intelligent, for her to admit, i cannot stop, i'd like to stop, but i cannot, it is hard, imagine how difficult that must have been for claire weingart to acknowledge her own human frailty, to acknowledge that her compulsive addiction-fueled use of cigarettes was more than she could have overcome. and we are not suggesting and never have that claire weingart did not have a choice in this matter. of course she had a choice. it was not a free choice. it was a constrained choice, but claire weingart could have and should have tried to stop smoking. maybe she is not successful on the first try, maybe she is not on the second or the third or the fourth or fifth, but she had an obligation to try. so that is part of her responsibility. you know, dr. dosovitz acknowledged that the individual themself, the person that you are talking to, often knows best. an addicted smoker knows that they are an addicted smoke. and claire weingart, in conversations with her best friend, barbara goldblum, about when they were talking about claire weingart's cigarette use about -- was trying to get her to stop. what was claire's response? what did claire think about her cigarette use? she acknowledged, she referred to herself as addicted. smoking strained her relationship with her family. the evidence is overwhelming in that regard about all of the fights between mother and daughter, all the fights between karen weingart trying to get her to not smoke around the kids. in barbara kupferman's house, she had to go outside. the fights, the strained relationship, that is powerful addiction. important social activities were given up or reduced because of the substance abuse. this was primarily with the grandchildren. they were the love of her life, the thing she was -- held most precious and most dear were her grandkids. but her addiction was such that she had to step away and go outside and smoke and be without those kids. next. rate of 100 pack year of history smoke. next. diagnosed as nicotine dependent by her treating physician, dr. schlein. smoked after her diagnosis of lung cancer. and dr. dosovitz took the stand yesterday and said, well, i guess in the morning, he said, there was a dramatic drop in the amount she was smoking post diagnosis, and then after lunch he says that it was unclear. so it is hard to tell from dr. dosovitz what he thinks. but perhaps some of the most compelling testimony in this case was about claire and she is undergoing the chemotherapy and radiation and her hair is falling out and she is rushing to go for her treatments and she is smoking on the way. when it is done, the first thing she is doing when she leaves the door of that cancer center is lighting up another cigarette, and continued. she is terminal at this point. the doctors have done all they could; tried to save her. the cancer that started in her lungs spread to her brain, and she was bed bound in the final process of passing away. when the cancer spread to her brain and she was not able to light her own cigarettes, jerry had to light them for her. i'm sure he is not proud of that, but that tells you exactly the kind of powerful addiction that claire weingart suffered from. she is literally on her deathbed. she cannot move her arms with the force that she needs to, so jerry has to light cigarettes for her. the evidence is powerful, powerful addiction. next slide. so the question -- the first question you are going to have to answer was is claire weingart addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine? and if so, was such addiction a legal caution of her death? the evidence, quite frankly is overwhelming: she was addicted. what the defendants are going to do in this case or what they have tried to do and what they will continue to do is cut this fine line between addiction and her death, and suggest it is all claire weingart's fault. it does not matter if she was addicted or not; she chose to smoke, so it is all claire's fault. what you have got to understand in this case is that there can be more than one cause for claire weingart's death. so when we get to the instruction down there at the bottom, in order to be regarded as a legal cause of death, addiction need not be the only cause. an addiction may be a legal cause of death even though it operated in -bless you -- even though it operated in combination with the act of another, some natural cause or some other cause if the addiction contributes substantially producing such death. operated -- back up, i'm sorry. operated in combination with the act of another. like the lies, the deceit, the fraud, the intentional misrepresentation of the facts committed by these defendants for over 50 years. some natural cause or some other cause and that some other cause is claire weingart's responsibility. so addiction need not be the only cause. next page. so you are going to have to decide the extent of claire weingart's fault. you must consider the extent to which claire weingart's own negligence was a legal cause of her death. i instruct you that plaintiff has admitted claire weingart's acts or omissions related to the frequency and duration of her efforts to quit smoking constituted negligence and were a partial legal cause of her death. again, we admit that claire weingart has a responsibility in this case and you should assign her portion of responsibility for her conduct. however, if the evidence shows that claire weingart and one or more of the defendants were at fault and that fault of each contributed as a legal cause of claire weingart's death, you should decide and write on the verdict form what percentage of the total fault of claire weingart and each of the defendants, if any, was caused by each of them. so this is a comparative fault case. you have to weigh the conduct of the parties, what they knew, what they concealed, what they hid, how they profited at the expense of the health and safety and welfare of the public, including claire weingart, and claire weingart's responsibility and choices herself. on this issue of legal cause, this raises a thin line the defendants want to walk. do you have an opinion, dr. burns, within a reasonable degrees of medical probability as to the medical cause of claire weingart's primary lung cancer metastasized to her brain and ultimately to her death? yes. and that opinion is what, sir? the medical cause was her addiction, which necessitated the repetitive exposure to all of these carcinogens and -- all of these carcinogens and cigarettes smoke over a long enough interval to have led through all of these progressive changes to cause the normal cells to progress into a cancer. absent the addiction, she would not have sustained that repetitive exposure, so the addiction directly caused her lung cancer. is there a relationship, dr. burns, specifically with regard to claire weingart as to whether the exposure of 5.8 million and change hits of nicotine caused or contributed to causing her death? absolutely. it is the hits of nicotine that she is seeking. she is not looking for the carcinogens. she is not trying to get the carcinogens. they just come along as toxic baggage for what she is trying to get, which is the nicotine. absent the nicotine, nobody would smoke cigarettes because nobody would be addicted and nobody would compulsively expose themselves for a long period of time to the 60 or more carcinogens present in the cigarette smoke. this is a 30-year-old document from the tirc, or whatever it was called back then, about this very issue that we are talking about, this razor thin line that defendants want you to walk. "i'm told that the entire matter of addiction is the most potent weapon a prosecuting attorney can have in a lung cancer/cigarette case. we cannot defend continued smoking as free choice if the person was addicted." that argument was rejected 30 years ago by this very industry. and here they are with the same game plan, the same -- the same theory, that somehow they can defend this case on free choice in the face of someone who is so clearly addicted. one of the more powerful testimony that was given in this case, respectfully, came from jerry weingart himself, an 89-year-old world war ii veteran. and he was asked about the woman he spen 54 years with, who was with him day in and day out, the woman who was -- after he finished serving uncle sam, never spent one night away from her, not one night in all these years of marriage. he was asked by one of you all, what do you think the main reason that she could not stop smoking? jerry's answer, after some thoughtful deliberation, straightforward and right to the point, right to the heart of the case: the word, of course, is addiction. next slide. when you consider all of the evidence in this case and you have -- you are thinking about question one, the question you have to ask yourself is whether greater weight of the evidence tips in our favor, the more persuasive convincing force and effect about whether claire weingart was addicted, whether that addiction resulted in her death. i would suggest to you the answer to that question is yes. if you check no, your verdict is for the defendants. pin a blue ribbon on the conduct that they have engaged in and send them on their way because the verdict would be for them if you check no to that box. next slide. once you find addiction in this case and that the addiction was a legal cause, not the legal cause but a legal cause of claire weingart's death, the engle findings come in. and those are from the prior court and those are binding on you, binding on the defense and binding on everyone. the engle findings, smoking cigarettes causes lung cancer. nicotine in cigarettes is addicted. these defendants placed cigarettes on the market that were defective and unreasonably dangerous. these defendants concealed or omitted material information not otherwise known or available, knowing that the material was false or misleading or failed to disclose a material fact concerning or approving the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes or both. these defendants agreed to conceal or omit information regarding the health effects of cigarettes or their addictive nature with the intention that smokers and members of the public would rely on this information to their detriment. and these defendants were negligent. those are the engle findings that you must apply when you find that claire weingart was addicted to nicotine contained in the cigarettes and it was a legal cause of her depth. next slide. and then the next two questions are sort of lumped together. quite frankly, the analysis is the same. the first question deals with whether the negligence, the negligence that has been established by the engle findings of these defendants, whether that negligence, on behalf of each of the defendants, was a legal cause of claire weingart's death. so you have got to evaluate each of them individually. and you will do that not only for question two, but also question three about whether the defective and reasonably dangerous cigarette place on the market by defendants were a legal cause. you get the same instruction about legal cause in this instance that you did in the first question, question number one; that it need not be -- that the defect or the negligence need not be the only cause. a defect and product may be a legal cause of death even though it operates in combination with the act of another, some natural cause or some other cause that the defect in the product contributed substantially to producing such death. so let us talk about claire weingart's smoking history. this is a brand history timeline. she was born december 13, 1923. we have that photograph from 1940 or 1941 when claire would have been 16 or 17 years old, that jerry was able to say it was either 1940 or 1941. next. and then we have jerry coming back from the war in 1946, spring. claire would have been 22 years old. we will never know in this case when it was exactly that claire weingart started smoking. we do not know if she started smoking at 16 or 17 or if she did not start smoking until late 1945 or early 1946. that is one of the secrets that claire weingart took to her grave. but we do know what is uncontested, which is unrebutted, is when jerry gets back from the war in '46, she is a regular, committed heavy smoker. so we know that did not start overnight. so we know that claire at least as early as 22 years old was an addicted smoker. jerry remembers her early brands being camel and lucky strike, which are the defendant, reynolds, brands. he also remembers her smoking raleigh cigarettes. and jerry is not able to tell us when claire was smoking raleigh cigarettes, but we know from barbara kupferman, her daughter, she does not remember claire smoking raleigh cigarettes. so the reasonable inference is that was one of claire's earlier brands before barbara was born and before barbara was able to tell us what kind of cigarettes claire was smoking. so r.j. reynolds gets her early, gets her hooked in that critical time period before she turns 25 because they know if they miss that opportunity, that is a smoker they will not get. and then we have, sometime in the late '50s, early '60s. again, we do not have the precise date or exactly when the switch occurred but we know from barbara kupferman that from her first memory as a child, six, seven, eight years old, that her mother was smoking parliaments, a philip morris brand, and kent, a lorillard brand. i mean, the important thing about those two cigarettes is the way in which they were marketed, the way in which they were advertised. you have the parliament cigarette as a low tar cigarette. you will remember from dr. burns, and we will hear more about it later, but parliaments were advertising a low tar, healthier cigarette. kent was actually referred to as a safer cigarette, the health reassurance cigarette with this fancy filter that they put in. claire weingart's use of those two, both the philip morris parliament and the kent lorillard brand continued until around 1980 or so. it could have been a few years before, it could have been a few years after. claire was concerned about her smoking so she wanted to switch to a brand that she thought more healthy and was healthier. it would be the less nicotine, less tar, a light cigarette or a menthol cigarette. it tells you she is concerned about her smoking and she is trying to cut back or at least to change to a brand she perceived to have been healthier for her. so then we get two more philip morris brands, benson & hedges and virginia slims, and r.j. reynolds with the doral. so we have got r.j. reynolds getting her early, getting her at the end, and we have got philip morris and lorillard in the middle. she continued to smoke those up until the time she died on november 30, 1997. next slide. so you are going to have to answer question two and question three about whether there was negligence on the part of each of these defendants, if it was a legal cause of the death of claire weingart. and the answer to that question, most respectfully, based on this evidence and the law is yes to each defendant. same with regard to the defective and unreasonably dangerous cigarettes that these defendants put on the market. next. four and five deal with the concealment of material information and the agreement to conceal material information. and so both of these, i'm going to handle together, but you are going to have a very similar legal cause instruction about how it does not have to be the only cause that can operate in combination with the act of another; some other cause such as claire weingart's own admitted fault. but you will also get another instruction about her reasonable reliance. reliance may be actual reliance or reliance may be inferred. what does that mean? one way to prove reliance is to have someone come into court and say, you know, i saw an ad in 1982, i saw an ad in 1946, i saw this statement, i saw that statement, and i believed it to be true and i relied on it. that is one way to prove reliance. that is direct reliance. that option obviously is not available to us. claire weingart never had those discussions with any members of her family that anybody can recall, and so we do not have actual reliance in this case, we do not have her coming in here and telling us that she relied on any particular information. what we do know is that you can prove reliance by inference. you have the conduct of the defendants on one hand, the billions of dollars, and that is what a b, billions of dollars they spend advertising, sending out their truth squad, campaign of lie and deception; try this filter, it will keep you safe if you are worried about, it try this low tar cigarette. those are the messages that were being put out by these defendants. what do we know about claire? we know that she switched to a filtered cigarette, we know that she switched to a low tar cigarette. the only logical conclusion for why she did those things is she believed the message being sent by these defendants in the industry itself. smoke this filtered cigarette, it is safer for you, go to this low tar cigarette, it is safer for you, when they knew all along that neither of those two things were true. filters, when used by smokers, do not work. low tar cigarettes, when used by smokers, do not work. folks just smoke more of them. and so they knew that that was not true. they put that message out there, spent bills of dollars trying to convince folks just like claire weingart about their health claims, and she bought it because we know that she switched. next slide. so the thing that we have got to do is go back and figure out what they knew, what message they were sending. what the intentional lies were they were spreading intending for folks like claire weingart to rely on. 1953, studies of clinical data tend to confirm the relationship between heavy and prolonged tobacco smoking and incidents of lung cancer. in 1953 they knew that. next. so what do they do? we have the cancer scare of the early '50s. profits are dropping, people are not smoking and people are getting scared. and the defendants link arms to go to the plaza hotel in december of 1953 to present a unified front, a unified solution for how they are going to deal with all these folks not smoking their cigarettes and getting scared. did they invite the public health officials? did they invite the leading scientists at the time as to how to best address this problem? no. they brought a pr firm. that is the date upon which the agreement to conceal what they knew to be true about the addictive nature of their products and the deadly nature of their products began. and it was an agreement that lasted until after claire weingart died. next slide. before they linked arms together at that plaza hotel, they sent out the pr firm to go talk to some members to lorillard, the philip morris, the r.j. reynolds, all the folks that are here today and more, to talk to them about what they knew. one of the men said, "it is fortunate for us that cigarettes are a habit they cannot break. said another, boy, would not it be wonderful if our company were to produce a cancer free cigarette? what we would do and what we could do to the competition." 1953, they are talking about a cancer free cigarette, they are talking about habituated smokers, they are talking about folks knowing that they cannot quit smoking, that they have a difficult time quitting. next slide. so what do they decide to do? there is only one problem, conference and how to establish it, public assurance and how to create it. perhaps a long interim when scientific doubts must remain. and most important, how to free millions of americans from the guilty fear that is going to arise deep in their biological deaths regardless of any poo-pooing logic every time they light a cigarette. and then they have the frank statement what you all remember was put out in every major newspaper. and it was a unified front, the unified voice for the entire tobacco industry. what were they telling the american public, including claire weingart in 1954? we accept an interest in the people's health as a basic responsibility paramount to every other consideration in our business. you know because you have seen what happens next. they did not have their consumer's public -- the health of their consumer's as a paramount concern. they were concerned about their bottom line, more profits, bigger bag to carry the money to the bank. we believe the products we make are not injurious to health. we always have and always will cooperate closely with those whose task it is to safeguard the public health. it was a lie then, it is a lie now. this was robert dupuis, who was a scientist who appeared. "we have not found any things harmful. trust us, if we find anything harmful, we will take it out." next slide. this is 1957 where their patting each other on the back congratulating each other on what a great job they had done informing the tirc and forming this unified front with the purpose of agreeing to conceal and mislead the american public. he took a bold and courageous action in december of '53. the formation of the tobacco industry research committee was the result. "there is absolutely no question in my mind that if this committee had not been formed, the cigarette industry by now would have been in a deplorable condition. in other words, the tirc has been a successful defensive active operation." there is mr. pepples in 1976, looking back. "in most cases, however, the smoker of filtered cigarette was getting as much or more nicotine and tar as he would have gotten from a regular cigarette." he is acknowledging what the industry knew the whole time they were peddling these filtered cigarettes that folks are getting just as much nicotine and tar if they were not smoking a filtered cigarette. next. this is a kent document, a lorillard document, talking about the micronite filter advertised as a unique kent benefit, giving health reassurance to its growing franchise of older, better educated health concerned smokers. next. this is dr. rodgeman talking about how cigarette smoke contain as little as possible, preferably at the zero level of the polycystic hydrocarbon. "we know that cancer, carcinogens. we consider the zero level impossible to achieve." 1959, they know it is dangerous carcinogens in theii product and they know they cannot take it out. what do they do about it? as we all -- as we know all too often, the smoker that switches to hi-fi cigarettes, high filtration, winds up smoking more units. in order to provide himself with the same delivery which he had before -- in short, i do not believe the smoking pattern has changed much, even with cancer scares and filter cigarettes. that is 1961, acknowledging that the filtered cigarettes are not doing anything. folks are smoking more than they would have had the filters not been there. dr. wakeham, 1961, "carcinogens are found in practically every classic compound of smoke. present technology does not permit selective filtration of particulate smoke." he is confirming what the industry knew. "there are cancer causing agents in our product. we cannot selectively filter them, we cannot get them out." contrary to all of the public statements we make about we do not know if it there is anything harmful in there, but boy, if there is, we will get it out. the industry knew it was a lie. they knew they could not do it. 1962, obviously the amount of evidence accumulate to indict cigarette smoke as a health hazard is overwhelming. the evidence challenging such an indictment is scant. we must in the newer future provide some answers that give a smoker a psychological crutch or a self rationale to continue smoking. so deep in the recesses of their brain when all their life, all the messages that are being put out by the public health organization at the time, the time, the newsweek articles, reader's digest articles, the family members, when they are all saying, smoking is going to kill you, you have got to stop, it is to provide smokers like claire weingart a psychological crutch so she can continue to smoke and continue to provide profits for these defendants. next page. do you want to blow that up? this is a lorillard document from 1964 talking about kent was marketed as a, quote/unquote, safer cigarette. not a safer cigarette, a quote/unquote safer cigarette for the smoker who was smoking about smoking and health. do you want to go ahead and play that, please? video recording: well, obviously a filter takes out certain tar and nicotine. i do not think the industry admits there are any bad elements. if there are bad elements through our laboratories, through the surgeon general, through the ama, through acts of god and what we hope is we may find them. if they are found, they will be removed. at this point, we do not know. mr. hill: three years after that '61 article saying -- that '61 document saying there is carcinogens in there, we cannot take them out. they are still spreading their lies, their deception, providing the public with the psychological crutch to keep spending intending for folks like claire weingart to rely on. the illusion of filtration is as important as the fact of filtration. 1967, they know it is not working. "our basic position in the cigarette controversy is subject to the charge and maybe subject to a finding that we are making false or misleading statements to promote the sale of cigarettes." they got that one right. that is true. most important story -- the most important type of story which casts doubt in the cause and effect theory of disease and smoking. next. mr. cullman, ten years after that initial memorandum, 1961 from his own company saying, we cannot selectively filter out the carcinogens we know are in our product. he is still continuing to tell the american public that there are not any bad elements, and we will take them out once we find them. next. more slapping on the back and congratulating themselves for the great job they have done in deceiving the american public. "for nearly 20 years while the strategy was brilliantly conceived and executed over the next couple of years creating doubt about the health charge without actually denying it." and this is the just one example of the ways in which every time there was an anti-smoking message that came out, every time the surgeon general would say something on the subject of health and smoking about how it bad it was, did they link arm with the public officials like they promised to do in 1954? no. they attacked the science and surgeon general. "the number one health problem is not cigarette smoking but is the extent to which the public health officials may knowingly mislead the american public." that is their corporation with the public health officials back in 1972. 1984, r.j. reynolds, "can we have an open debate about smoking? we do not know -- excuse me we do not say there are no questions about smoking, just the opposite. we say there are lots of questions. but as of yet, no simple answer. like any controversy, this one has more than one side. we hope the debate will be in open. in 1984. dr. burns told you in 1957, there was -- there was a consensus in the medical community, at least at that point, that cigarette smoking caused lung cancer. and for 30 years after that, these defendants continued to deny the health risk associated with smoking; that is, the deadly combination between their product and lung cancer. go ahead and play that, would you, please. video recording: cigarette smoking may hazardous to your health. it may not be. we just do not know. it may be or it may not be, we do not know. we do not know what causes the illness that have been contributed to the cigarette smoking. i'm saying the science to date and over $100 million of our industry indicates that there is no causal link. i am not denying the fact that cigarette smoking could be a risk factor involved with some people. yeah, we know that addict runs through the (inaudible). it would be hard (inaudible). mr. hill: what happens in 1994? all of the ceos of these tobacco -- of the tobacco industry, the big players in the united states, including philip morris, r.j. reynolds, lorillard and r.j. reynolds successors, are the companies that they bought, all went to congress in 1994, raised their right hand to swear to tell the truth and were asked point blank about whether cigarettes were addicted. each and every one of them, despite the overwhelming evidence to the contrary, despite all they knew from their internal documents dating back to 1959 where they said smoking was addictive, raised their right hand and swore to tell the truth and said no, no, no. that is three years before claire weingart died. next. so what is this -- what is the link between all of this reprehensible conduct, between all of the bad acts of these corporate defendants, these tobacco defendants? the advertising is one link. "so pervasive is the cigarette advertising, it is virtually impossible for americans at almost any age to avoid cigarette advertising," 1967. next. ftc staff report may of 1981, "cigarettes are the most heavily advertised product in america. estimated six major cigarette companies spent $1 billion in 1980 to sell their product. the national commission on smoking public report in 1978 that the tobacco industry spent more on advertising cigarettes in one day than the national clearinghouse in smoking and health, the government's primary agency working this area spen in one year. they spent more in one day than the folks trying to get the message out about how dangerous cigarettes spent in a year. next. this is the graph showing cigarette consumption from the sort of the initial stages, the mass production of the cigarette. the creation of the market for the modern cigarette. what do we know happens in 1953 and 1954? well, there is a sharp dropoff. there is a sharp dropoff as you all know because the word was getting out that cigarette smoke causes cancer. there was that study with the mouse where they painted the back of that mouse and there were messages being put out. the article in reader's digest, december of 1953 talking about the link between cigarette smoking and cancer. and the message was getting out there. folks were understanding and folks were changing their habits. they were not smoking as much, and the folks that they were targeting in the youth were not smoking. so what happened? there was a precipitous drop in their profits about how many cigarettes they were smoking and this bottoms out, 1953, 1954. because it is at that point that they are no longer as a unified voice saying cigarette smoking is dangerous. cigarette smoking causes lung cancer. you have the campaign of doubt, of fraud, of misrepresentation by this industry through their mouthpiece, the tirc, denying publicly what they knew to be true internally. you have them denying that cigarette smoke causes lung cancer. folks were getting the message. folks were getting it, the information that was put out by the tobacco companies, because look what happens to the consumption of cigarettes in the years that follow? the next slide. big factor that had to do with the rise of filtered cigarettes. cancer scare comes out and start making a bunch of filtered cigarettes, and people start using them. '52, '53, you see the sharp rise of filter use. people just like claire weingart switching from unfiltered cigarettes to filtered cigarettes believing the lies and misrepresentation that the tobacco companies were putting out there. smoke this filtered cigarette, it is safer. and we know it was a successful campaign. we know that folks just like claire weingart relied on that information. if it did not matter to claire weingart, it did not matter to anybody. next. so i would respectfully suggest that when you answer question four and five, that you check yes to teach of those defendants. deputy clerk: counsel, you have used one hour mr. hill: thank you very much, mr. white. judge, if you wanted to take a morning break, i've probably got 20 or 30 minutes. the court: are you okay going? keep going? why do not you continue. mr. hill: thank you, judge. here's where we get to percentages of fault. giving up the fault, who is responsible? we know that claire weingart is partially responsible so you are going to have to put a number on her responsibility. and that job is your job. you guys and gals are the ones who are going to have to decide the extent of claire weingart's responsibility and you should give her a number. it is got to be more than zero. i'm telling you it is got to be more than zero. you have to give her a number. when you weigh what she did and wha the defendants did, her choice was her decision versus what the tobacco industry knew, what these defendants did. you have got to sort it out to figure out who is responsible for what. i would suggest to you that for claire's responsibility, you ought to give her 35 percent comparative fault. that means she is 35 percent responsible for what happened to her. she was not the main cause, she was not the only cause. these defendants, with their lies and deception with addiction, all contributed to claire weingart's death. but you have to give her a percentage, and i suggest 35 percent. you can give her less, you can give her more, it is a suggestion. r.j. reynolds tobacco company, they got her early and they got her late. the percentage that you ought to assign to them is twenty percent. philip morris usa, the major brand in the middle, the one that jerry testified to, the one that barbara kupferman testified to was the primary brand of claire weingart's parliaments cigarettes. philip morris usa deserves 25 percent responsibility for what happened to claire weingart. lorillard tobacco company, the kent cigarette, the safer cigarette, the health conscious cigarette, the micronite filter, they are responsible for twenty percent. next slide. then we get to the damages. if you check no to all of these questions before, no to one, no to two, no to three, no to four and no to five, again you are pinning a blue ribbon to philip morris and lorillard and r.j reynolds and sending them on their way. if you answer yes to any of the questions, you get to determine the damages in this case. you heard judge kelley explain there is no fixed standard, there is no yard stick, there is nothing that tells you the amount of money to award for pain and suffering for the loss of a spouse, of a woman that jerry, again, spent every night of his life with ever since he got back from the war, his soulmate, his true love, his first love. you have to put a price on the pain and suffering that he felt then, and the pain and suffering that he feels now. you have got to think about things like jerry having to administer morphine to claire as she was on her death bed. you have to think about the vigil he stood by her at her bedside as she was experiencing the slow and agonizing death caused by lung cancer that spread to her brain and killed her. you have to consider the grieving process that he went through. the grieving process that even dr. dosovitz acknowledged yesterday continues he told you that. he said mr. weingart still griefs for her. even dr. dosovitz can acknowledge that. best friend, claire's best friend, barbara goldblum, testified that jerry is still grieving for claire. there is not a day that does not go by that he does not mention her. doris druce or any other woman can never replace the hole that fills jerry, has filled jerry and will continue to fill jerry until he is no longer with us. i thought about these numbers. and again, it is your job to figure out what the loss of a spouse of 54 years is worth. the only thing we can do is suggest numbers to you. i'd suggest in the past, the facts of this case, $2.5 million in the past; $500,000 in the future, for a total of $3 million. that is for every day that jerry has spent since claire's death in 1997 up until today and to the harm that he is going to continue to suffer in the future. you all can give more or give less. it is just our suggestion. next slide. then you will turn to punitive damages. under the circumstances of this case, please state whether you find by clear and convincing evidence that punitive damages are warranted against each defendant. in all of the things that i've been talking about now for the better part of an hour deal not only with the compensatory damages but the punitive damage. so the questions you have to ask yourself is whether these defendants engaged in conduct causing injury -- conduct causing injury, the death of claire weingart was so gross and flagrant as to show a reckless disregard of human life or the safety of persons exposed to the effects of such conduct, whether conduct showed an entire lack of care that the defendants must have been consciously indifferent to the consequences or the conduct shows such an entire lack of care that the defendant must have wantonly or recklessly disregarded the safety and welfare of the public or the conduct showed such reckless indifference to the rights of others as to the equivalent to the intentional violation of those rights. when corporations lie to the american public, conceal the dangerous nature of their product, provide folks with the psychological crutch to get them to keep smoking, sell them on gimmicks like filters and low tars, keep them from quitting smoking, engineer their product to be as indicative as possible, knowing that it is killing people, that deserves the imposition of punitive damages. that deserves -- that conduct is the worst that corporate america has to offer. so i would suggesl to you that when you target children, target children as smokers, that deserves the imposition of punitive damages. when you treat your existing customers and your new customers as replacement smokers for the smokers that you are killing, that warrants the imposition of punitive damages. so i suggest to you that when you get to question eight, you check yes for all of those defendants. this will not be the only time i get to talk with you. i get to talk with you later this afternoon after the defendants have spoken. so i'll save the remaining time that i have with you for that. i appreciate it. mr. hill: thank you, sir. may it please the court: mr. reilly suggested that i reserve an hour for rebuttal. the bad news is that i have actually an hour and a half reserved. the good news is i will not use nearly that much time. mr. reilly: i stand corrected. mr. hill: the problem with rebuttal is, i do not know what you are thinking. i do not know what elements you are concerned about. i do not know what arguments you are considering. i do not know what is a big deal to you, what you hear and it is just -you know, it is like water off a duck's back, i do not know. and so this case is no different. we do not know what you are thinking until the very end. and so the problem with rebuttal is, if i could ask, is this important, is this important, we could make it go a lot faster, but i do not have that ability. so if i'm covering something that you heard one of these defendant lawyers say that you know does not make any sense, i apologize for having to talk about it. but obviously, my closing argument was about an hour. i think, collectively, they were an hour and 45 minutes. so i'm not going to go point by point by point. i want to start with something. mr. engram said during his closing argument about cigarettes being a legal product. you will not hear an instruction from judge kelley that it is any defense to any of the claims being brought against these defendants that cigarettes were and are legal. it is not a legal defense whatsoever. number two, mr. engram wanted to talk about acetaminophen and the claims and what they mean. well, when products are defective, and they hurt and kill people, although they are legal, they are still legally responsible for that harm. when folding cribs collapse and kill children, the manufacturer of those -mr. reilly: objection, your honor. the court: hold on. (sidebar conference.) mr. reilly: it is improper argument to compare any other product to the folding crib and crushing children, and it is improper argument. mr. hill: he opened the door. it is a legal product drum he is been beating all afternoon. mr. engram himself brought in other product liability cases. so it is only fair that i be presented with an opportunity to argue that a legal product does not make it -- the manufacturer is not responsible for the harm caused. the court: i think you have made that point. you countered with the exact example he used. it is a slippery slope and dangerous road when you talk about other products. i'm going to sustain the objection from here on out. (sidebar conference concluded.) mr. hill: thank you, your honor. the fact that it was a legal product does not make one bit of difference in this case. both mr. engram and mr. reid both made a point about brand usage. mr. engram's point was that, well, all we have are the memories of a 90-year-old man going back 60 some-odd years about what his wife smoked and when she smoked it. you had an opportunity to talk to jerry and get to know him and figure out what he is all about. and certainly, if she smoked enough cigarettes of r.j. reynolds back in the day, such that he still remembers it, what does that tell you about the length of time and the intensity for which she smoked r.j. reynolds cigarettes, the camels and the lucky strikes, which you will remember were the monster brands in the 1930s and 1940s. they dominated the market. and so for mr. weingart as an 89-year-old man, still remember to this day, tells you that it was the substantial use -- substantial amount of r.j. reynolds she smoked as a 22-year-old or 19-year-old or 18-year-old or however old she was when we started smoking. similar argument by mr. reid about the kent cigarettes, that she may have smoked or allegedly smoked or whatever which way he wanted to qualify it. you all got to meet barbara kupferman. it is exactly what she said about kent cigarettes, about being able to describe the box. there really is not any question in this case. there is no question, there is no controversy about the length of time she smoked kent cigarettes. but the arguments that they are really making, but they cannot make because of the lockstep nature in which they have joined hands in the defense of this claim, mr. reilly, philip morris; mr. reid, lorillard; mr. engram, r.j. reynolds; what mr. reic and mr. engram are really saying, she did not smoke enough of our cigarettes to get sick. we did not cause her lung cancer. well, the three manufacturers of the cigarettes that she smoked are sitting right here. there is no evidence she smoked a cigarette, not even one, of anybody other than their companies that they are representing. so what does it tell you? when they tell you, well, she did not really smoke enough of my cigarettes, what they are really doing is pointing the finger at each other. when mr. engram tells you, well, the brand, it was not that much, it was not substantial, you have to prove this and that, what he is really saying is that she really smoked the other guy's cigarettes more. but of course, they cannot come out and make that argument to you directly because of the way in which they have joined hands in the defense of this case. there is a comment about -- i did not ask mr. weingart what he thought about claire's responsibility. well, he was there for the asking. these lawyers certainly have no shyness about asking questions of folks, including mr. weingart. so if they thought that was a question or an answer that would be helpful to them, you know they would have asked it, but they did not. and so there is a reason for it. and quite frankly, mr. weingart, from the moment this lawsuit was filed, we acknowledged on his behalf the responsibility for claire weingart. there was talk about the teague document where he made some edits to modify the conclusion. the fact remains his conclusion was still -- the evidence is scant in support, it is overwhelming that cigarettes cause lung cancer. and then mr. reid noted that there were not that many lorillard company documents introduced. true. there were three or four that were lorillard specifically, but what we do know is that lorillard was there from day one when they got together and hired hill & knowlton, a company mountainized in this information to perpetuate fraud to the american public that they did close to 50 years. they were there right every step of the way. when the tirc is saying something, they are saying something on behalf of all the defendants, including lorillard. there was an issue that we did not show you ads from kent about it being quote/unquote a safer cigarette. that is true. we did not need to. their own company document says it was a safer cigarette a quote/unquote safer cigarette. mr. reid, with all due respect, and i mean that sincerely about mr. reid, i do respect him, but for him to come before you and suggest the reason that claire weingart started smoking kent cigarettes in 1957 was because of the reader's digest article, there is absolutely no proof whatsoever that that occurred, is interesting. the fact that i'm ticking off is good for you guys. getting to mr. reilly, there is one place where the law comes from. one person tells you what the law is. lawyers argue, lawyers can suggest, lawyers make argument. there is one place that comes from and that is from judge kelley. and mr. reilly made a lot of statements about what our obligations are, what we have to prove. one of them was to prove that why claire weingart started smoking. you will review the verdict form and you will review the jury instructions of what the law is and you are not going to see that. what -- i'm not going to go through each and every question that mr. reilly thinks we have to answer, because i'm relying on you, when you get back into the jury room deliberation room to read the questions you have to answer or read the jury instructions. those are the questions we have to -- answer -those are the questions that we have the burden of proof on, the greater weight of the evidence, the tipping of the scales ever so slightly in our favor. addiction, i apologize for having to come back and talk about addiction. i'm sitting over there in the corner and i'm waiting. perhaps you were too, i do not know. i was waiting for someone on the defense side to address all the facts about what we knew about claire weingart. not to cherrypick on those occasions where she said, i do not want to stop, but to talk to claire weingart as a whole and what the evidence is. i was waiting for them to come up here with an explanation for why when she thinks she is going to die, she is worried about dying, her melanoma problem, of course she made that promise that sometimes folks make, when they are at rock bottom, and then we are scared and when they are vulnerable. they make that promise to themselves. if i get through this, if i survive this, i'm going to do x. i'm going to be a better dad. i'm going to love my wife more. i'm going to do whatever. claire weingart's promise to herself was, if i get through this, i'm going to stop smoking. if that does not express a desire to stop smoking, i do not know what was. but she did not. not that we know of anyway. the depression lasted for about a year and her smoking history never changed. and for that, she is responsible. that is part of that 35 percent responsibility that she has in this case. i was waiting for one of them to address all of times where she said, i cannot stop. i've tried to stop. it is hard. you did not hear it from them. you did not hear it from them and you did not hear it from their one witness they called in the case, dr. dosovitz. how does that fit into the entire picture of the whole deal? you cannot take a fact here and take a fact there and stick your head in the sand and say the picture is cloudy. that is not how these cases work. that is certainly not what the evidence is in this particular case. what is addiction other than a compelled use to do the thing that you are addicted to? to use dr. dosovitz's analysis, although he was asked what his definition was and he did not give you a definition, but in reviewing his testimony, one of the themes that he used was a tear in the fabric of someone's life, that their use of a particular product or a substance, known addictive substance like nicotine was a tear in the fabric of her life. certainly, with all of the issues that smoking brought upon claire weingart, i do not know that it can reasonably be disagreed with that smoking for claire was certainly a tear in the fabric of her life. you heard a lot about what dr. dosovitz said. i just remind you about all of the facts that he ignored, that he rejected and he said he did not believe or he said the witnesses were -- he just did not believe them. that is not his job as an expert. that is your job as a jury to figure out, the believability of witnesses. that includes dr. dosovitz. you can fill books with the information that he neglected to consider. let us talk about quit attempts. quit attempts have nothing to do with addiction. no expert told you it did, what quit attempts do? they have to do with comparative fault. someone can be addicted their entire life, never quit, it does not change the fact that they were addicted. it changed the degree with which they are responsible for their actions. and again, claire is responsible for not trying to quit more. you know, we will never know really if claire tried to quit before her diagnosis. she knew in those times that she went without cigarettes, whether it was the eight hours of sleep that she got at night or perhaps a little less with a young child. when she woke up in the morning, the first thing she is doing is popping open a cigarette. very first thing. claire weingart knew every single morning how much she needed that cigarette. claire weingart knew what it was like to go a couple of hours for whatever reason without cigarettes, and the sort of hopeless despair that she felt, how in the world in her mind can she quit something for the rest of her life when she has difficulty putting it down for a couple of hours. she should have tried harder, and for that, you need to find her responsible, and i'm sure that point is clear. but the defense wants, again, wants to walk this line between addiction and the cause of her death. what they are separately asking you to believe is that claire weingart chose to commit suicide by cigarette. that was her free choice, her voluntary choice, that she just wanted to smoke herself to death. that is the story that you are being told by these defendants. and i would suggest there is absolutely nothing in the record to suggest that. she loved her family. she loved her grandkids. she loved jerry. certainly she is not going to commit suicide by cigarette, absent the addiction that compelled her use of nicotine. i want to talk a little bit -- can you pull up the engle findings for me, jeff? let us start with number six. when you find that claire weingart was addicted and that her addiction led to her death, these findings apply: as much as these defendants do not like the engle findings, as much as they wish they were not here, they are. and they are binding. number six, these defendants were negligent. number three, these defendants sold -- excuse me, placed cigarettes on the market that were defective and unreasonably dangerous. those two facts, those two conclusions are undisputed. it cannot be disputed. so when you get to question three -- excuse me, question two and three, the real question is really whether the use of the defendants' cigarette was a legal cause of claire weingart's death. you know that they were defective, you know that they were negligent, and you know she smoked them. that is how the engle findings assist in establishing liability in these cases. you have the individual smoker, in this case, claire weingart. you have the testimony about the brand usage, which we have, and you have the defendants that manufactured those defective and those negligent cigarettes. the control, causation and responsibility, the law is, again, what judge kelley tells you and not a simplification or argument by counsel. if he wants to talk about control and causation and responsibility, i'm happy to. the question really in this case is who controlled the information, who knew what and when? who controlled the level of nicotine in their product? who artificially manipulated the addictive nature of their product? who cut the tobacco a certain way so it would be as addictive as possible? who added -- who changed the ph balance? who had control of that to make that product as addictive as possible? what was the cause of claire weingart's death? i'm happy to talk about that. the cause of claire weingart's death was her addiction to the defendants' products. fair and simple. responsibility. the responsibility is a shared responsibility. responsibility belongs on claire weingart, but also these defendants for the products they manufactured and the harm they have caused, not just to claire weingart, but the folks whose conduct, this type of conduct involved. so you need to -- there was a question about the conduct. i'm not going to read the punitive damage instruction to you. you have it. it is always a difficult time for a lawyer in this position, so i'm not going to -- i'm sure i'm going to hear clapping in a minute. the last thing i want to leave you with is, you are the only jury that is going to decide this case. you are jerry weingart's only day in court. when this case is over, mr. bass and i will pack up our bags and head back to the office. i might stop off and get a haircut. this is mr. weingart's only day in court. what you are doing is important. it is important to jerry, it is important to a lot of folks. so i just appreciate your time and your attention, and i know that i'm going to let you take care of the facts and be good stewards of justice. that is all we are looking for. thank you very much.