mr. reid: yes, thank you, your honor. may it please the court, members of the jury. again, we all thank you for your time. thank you for giving up your families and those things that are precious to you to hear and decide this case. when we began this, we talked about your role, and your role of course, you are the judges of the facts. and if we did not have a jury, the court would be judging the facts, but you all are here to decide those facts, which way, it is going to be totally up to you regarding the facts. for that, we thank you. thank you for your attention. i want to also join in mr. reilly's argument and embrace that argument, because i think he covered a lot of things, obviously, that i would have covered and you will be happy to know that i will not, i promise, it is not going to take a whole lot of time. i respect your time. i want to talk to you very briefly about brand history. according to one witness, i think barbara kupferman, she said kent was smoked and that is the only lorillard brand that we are dealing with. kent was smoked sometime in the timespan after her -- i think when she was looking back, about 50 years, she remembered that her mother may have smoked kent and another brand or other brands. mr. weingart, of course, did not remember, and there is nothing wrong with that. it is just, it is perfectly normal. mr. weingart did not remember any lorillard brands whatsoever. now, i also want to talk to you just briefly about what was touched on and that had to do with the burden of proof in the engle findings. mr. reilly talked to you about those. and the court will instruct you and has instructed you those findings do not mean that any of defendants are in any way responsible or liable to mr. weingart. you have heard those findings, and you will be able to apply them if you feel they are even applicable to this case. that kent cigarettes were not ventilated; they had no ventilated -- ventilation in the filter -- they had no ventilation in the filter? are you aware of that? at that time, that was correct. so what does that tell us? that tells us that the ftc, federal trade commission, results were very much accurate. and we will take a look at those results in a minute, because remember, what dr. wynder said way back when and what the companies began to do, all the companies began to develop filters. what he said was, if we can filter away forty percent of the tars and nicotine, that we will be below a certain amount and will see a drop in cancer. that is what dr. wynder said. and that is what these companies began to do. so if we could look at the power slide number three, please. so here we are in 1967. this is a report on the content of smoke of 59 cigarettes, november 20, 1967. you see that the tars are 17.4 below what dr. wynder suggested. so this is what lorillard and the other companies began to do. they dropped it down to where the eminent scientists said would be the point where cancer rates would drop. and they did that. they did that. there was -- and they did it at the request of persons such as dr. wynder, they did it at the request of the public health community. so i think that at that point, you know, there appears to be a genuine interest infiltration and it was an interest infiltration and it showed, as does this, that those -- those numbers are correct numbers. there is no ventilation holes. there is no fudging going on. dr. burns also talked to you a little bit about what is called declining risk. i do not know if you remember that term, "declining risk." it is basically a fancy way of saying, well, if you stop smoking at a certain point, your chances of not ever getting cancer better, and he said, well, of course that is true. what he said was, if claire weingart had stopped smoking by 1980, by 1980, she would not, in all likelihood, ever have developed cancer. okay, so 1980. and then if we work backwards a little bit or -- or working at certain points, if in 1962 or thereabouts, jerry weingart quit smoking, obviously that is before 1980, if she had quit at that point, she would not have developed cancer. in 1964, when the surgeon general's report came out and she and mr. weingart discussed the findings and the findings were that smokers have a better chance and are going to develop lung cancer if they continue to smoke, they discuss that. if she stopped then, we see she would not have developed cancer. in 1966, we know that is a critical year, because that is the year that the warnings came on the packs. and she did not make an attempt at that point, either. when her father passed away in 1972, she made no attempt, either. all of those are dates when, had she stopped, she would not have developed lung cancer. this is a case where, as mr. weingart said, as he said, candidly, his wife wanted to smoke. and this is a case of what this is about. this is a case about her choice, her personal belief and choice as an adult to continue smoking. so i'm going to sit down now. and on behalf of lorillard, a company in north carolina who has been around for 250 years, i would like to thank you very much for your attention and i'll take a stage left now. mr. engram: thank you, your honor. ladies and gentlemen, i want to join mr. hill and mr. reilly and mr. reid in thanking you for your service on this jury. you paid close attention. you have asked very helpful questions of some of the witnesses in this case. we appreciate that. i have not had a whole lot to say in this trial. i think maybe some of you would think that is a good thing. but there are a couple of reasons for that. one is that i agree with most of what mr. reilly and mr. reid have said and done in this case. and i told you in the beginning during my opening that i would respect your time and i have tried to do that by not going over things that they have already addressed. and there is another reason, and that is, since the plaintiffs have the burden of proof in this case, there has not been a lot of specific testimony about the brands they claim claire weingart smoked that were made by r.j. reynolds oi the company that they purchased in 2004. i'll talk about that a little bit in a minute. like mr. hill, i want to emphasize what this case is about. it is about claire weingart. it is not about smokers in general. it is not about some lucky strike ad in 1928 when claire weingart was four years old. it is not about deciding whether cigarettes should be banned, because as a society, we have already made that decision. cigarettes are a legal product. and you remember the last line of questioning that i posed to dr. burns on cross-examination, and he agreed with me on that point. i asked him about how long he had been studying cigarettes and smoking and health, and throughout that period of time, cigarettes have been a legal product. and he believes that they should remain a legal product. he believes that adults should have the choice to smoke. and he specifically said, it should not be illegal to smoke cigarettes. we spent a lot of time talking about the fact that nicotine does not prevent anyone from trying to quit smoking. that it is up to each smoker to decide to quit, if to quit, and when to quit. and there is been dispute in this case that nicotine is a very important reason why people smoke cigarettes. there is been no dispute about that, and it is something that is been known for a long period of time. again, with dr. burns, you may remember that i showed him an article from 1963, an article that is in evidence, and you will have with you in the jury room if you should wish to look at it, from the american journal of psychiatry. this article is entitled, "the addictive aspects in heavy cigarette smoking." and you remember this was the article that was jointly funded by grants from the american cancer society and the tobacco industry research committee. i also point out with dr. burns that in this 1963 article, there was an even older article that talked about the role of nicotine. and that was from 1945. that article, "the role of nicotine and the cigarette habit" was published in science, in the journal of science, and it was authored by, among, others, larson and haag. you remember i came -- i do not have the books anymore, but we made copies of those -- the big green books and the blue book and the red book and the yellow book and they will be back with you in the jury room if you wish to see them. but larson and haag were two of the authors of those four volumes of books, the first of which was provided to the surgeon general's committee in l961, and was used by the surgeon general in preparing the first surgeon general's report in 1964. and they are in evidence just to give you an idea of the sheer volume of information that was provided to the surgeon general and that was funded by the tobacco industry research committee. i want to go back though to this case being about claire weingart and the engle findings. i had a demonstrative about what the engle jury heard. you have heard a lot about the findings. the judge read them to you. they are in the jury instructions, but you will know that the engle jury heard no evidence about claire weingart. the findings do not mention her specifically. and they do not establish that addiction to nicotine in cigarettes was a legal cause of her lung cancer and death. that is what this jury is here to decide. that is what you, ladies and gentlemen, are here to decide. if the engle case had resolved claire weingart's claim, we would not have been here for the last three weeks. you have also heard mr. hill talk about claire weingart accepting responsibility in this case. but you know, he did not say much either throughout this trial or today in his closing argument about why claire weingart is responsible. mr. bass in his opening was a little more specific. he said in his opening, it was because she did not quit after the 1966 and the 1970 and the 1985 warnings. he said it was because claire weingart never quit and he also said it was because no one ever saw her try to quit. but it is interesting -- i find it interesting, maybe you do, maybe you do not, mr. hill never asked mr. weingart whether he felt his wife was responsible for her smoking and her lung cancer and death. now, we did talk about the verdict form and the allocation of fault. i will not repeat what mr. reilly went into on that. but i find it interesting that the plaintiff suggests to you that you allocate 35 percent fault to mrs. weingart. ask this question: was claire weingart only responsible for 35 percent of the decisions she made with respect to her smoking? was claire weingart only responsible for 35 percent of the decisions she made with respect to her smoking? it was her decision to ignore the warnings, they have admitted that. it was her decision to ignore the fact that her father, a heavy smoker, who died of lung cancer in 1972, she ignored that and chose not to quit. it was her decision to continue smoking after having skin cancer in 1980. and it was her decision to never even try to stop smoking. and that, they have admitted. what did reynolds and philip morris and lorillard do? they manufactured and sold a legal product with known health risks. i said in my opening statement, demand proof. that is the major reason the plaintiffs get to put their evidence on first, get to make the first opening statement and they get to make an initial closing argument and their rebuttal closing argument, because they have the burden of proof to prove the facts by the greater weight of the evidence. you know, hazy memories do not cut it. overexaggeration on figures do not cut it. do you remember when dr. burns put that chart up and mr. hill tried to suggest that reynolds spent millions of dollars on advertising? but they did not tell you that those figures included all the advertising expenses for the seven non-tobacco companies that reynolds owned up until 1980. you were shown these ads from 1928 and 1932 when mrs. weingart would have been four or eight years old. but you knew, you knew there was no evidence that she saw those, and you knew she does not become a regular smoker until her husband came home in 1946 after the war. demand proof on the brands that mrs. weingart smoked, because i think that what the plaintiff has to prove in this case, with respect to each brand that they mentioned, that each particular brand was a substantial contributing factor in her getting lung cancer and death. let me give you an analogy. tylenol, painkiller, fever reducer, comes with an alcohol warning. it says, do not drink more than three alcoholic drinks if you are going to take tylenol. well, it can -- and the reason is that it can cause liver damage and the warning says that too. what if a person bought tylenol and then later bought a generic form of acetaminophen, which is the generic name for tylenol made by a different company. cvs sells their own brand of acetaminophen, walgreens sells their own brand of acetaminophen. and a person who takes tylenol, and the walgreens acetaminophen, and the cvs acetaminophen, drinks and gets liver damage and decides to sue the makers of tylenol and cvs and walgreens, if you sue them, the plaintiff has the burden of proving in order to recover from each individual defendant how much, how long and when it was they took the tylenol, they took the walgreens acetaminophen, they took the cvs acetaminophen. and all you have in this case with claire weingart is to have people simply say, i saw her smoke camels or lucky strike or raleigh, or i saw her smoke -- she switched to doral and benson & hedges and virginia slims. it is their claim, it is their burden of proof, and we do not have evidence in this case with respect to her brand usage. we do not know exactly when mrs. weingart started smoking. we do not know how much she smoke each brand. we do not know how long she smoked any particular brand, and we do not even know whether she smoked one cigarette of any particular brand or more than that. you remember i asked mr. weingart -- i did not ask him many questions, but this is what i asked him: "you testified earlier that your wife smoked camels, parliaments, lucky strike" -- and it says rally, but it is raleigh, spelled like the state capital of north carolina. "yes, i did" was his answer. "question: i want to talk with you about the camel, lucky strike and raleigh usage. you do not remember what years she smoked camels, do you? "i do not. "and you do not know, you do not remember whether your wife smoked a lot or just a little of the camel cigarettes?" his answer was, "she smoked excessively. i do not know which brand at what time and place." in fact, you have no memory at all regarding whether mrs. weingart smoked the camel cigarette in her lifetime or a pack a day for years?" his answer was: "she smoked excessively all brands." and he repeats that. "she smoked all brands, sir." i repeat, "she smoked all brands." next slide. and then my next question of mr. weingart was with respect to the question that had been asked in his deposition of april last year: "do you have any memory whatsoever about the extent of her camels?" and his answer was, "i do not remember." and he says, "that is what i'm saying today." i asked this last question: "similarly, you do not have any memory about the extent of your wife's use of lucky strike cigarettes or raleigh cigarettes?" "no, i do not, sir." they have the burden of proving that in this case, and they have not done that. they did not do it with mr. weingart. they did not do it with mrs. weingart's daughter, barbara kupferman. she specifically testified she never saw her mother smoke camels, luck strikes or raleighs. and that is her trial testimony here before you, ladies and gentlemen. you know, what did barbara kupferman say abou dorals made by r.j. reynolds? she said at some point in time she made this transition from kent and parliament to these other three additional brands. like her father, she did not know how much, she did not know how long, there is just no testimony on that point. and it is the plaintiff’s burden of proving those facts. i want to talk briefly about the research and some of the things just to remind you of what dr. burns said. dr. burns said that the ctr funded many distinguished scientists who did very good work and that they were scientists of great integrity. he also agreed that the surgeon general specifically referred to the 1961 larson haag and silvette, the big green book, the green encyclopedia, and described it as a major source that aided them, the surgeon general's committee, in their literature search of everything that had been published. dr. burns also admitted that ctr funded research at harvard and yale as well as florida four universities here in the state of florida. you might remember the demonstrative where i showed noble prize-winning researchers. well, dr. burns agreed that ctr funded noble prize-winning researchers. he also agreed that hundreds of peer review articles were published in peer review journals and that ctr studies are cited over 600 times in the surgeon general's reports. ladies and gentlemen, you cannot call that a record of fraud and concealment. i want to talk about a few of the documents that the plaintiffs have introduced into evidence from r.j. reynolds. i'm going to do these chronologically. let us start with dr. teague's 1953 memo. this is the memo that is the survey of cancer research. at the back of this memo, it is in evidence, you will see the bibliography, the references to the statements in the body of the memo, and there are 78 separate studies discussed in dr. teague's memo from 1953 that were publicly available. dr. rodgman's memo from 1959, 2141, the optimum composition of tobacco and its smoke. remember, dr. rodgman was somebody that dr. burn described as a very distinguished scientist. a giant figure in the area of identifying the chemistry of tobacco smoke. here is his testimony in trial the other week before you. he certainly is, he is a very distinguished scientist. and that, in fact, reynolds' scientists invented the technologies and techniques that were used to identify the constituents of cigarette smoke. and his words, in describing dr. rodgman, he referred to him as a giant figure in chemistry. he also acknowledged that the carcinogens and chemicals cited by dr. rodgman in his 1953 report were publicly known and available, and that they were available to the surgeon general and published in the surgeon general's 1964 report. dr. rodgman's 1962 memo was also talked about. this is the one that came in two different versions. the first version from -- was plaintiff's exhibit pt2164, and it had this paragraph with three sentences summarizing the evidence today. it was six pages long. it had numerous draft or edit marks on it. you can see words are marked out and evidence had been made -and dr. burns did not dispute that. he called it a draft. but let us look at these two documents side by side. the final document, the paragraphs -- there are now two paragraphs on the evidence to date. and rather than just simply reading the first two sentences that he read to you on direct, remember that i had him read the entire sentence on the evidence to date when i cross-examined him. let us talk about dr. teague's 1972 memo; 1920. dr. teague wrote about reducing tar, the tar in nicotine ratio. what he wanted to do was produce a cigarette that delivered nicotine but without the harmful components or by-products of actually burning the tobacco in the cigarette. if you go to page 9, mr. hill used part of this document in his closing today, but he did not use recommendation number four by dr. teague. that was the study, design and evaluate new or improved systems for delivery of nicotine which will provide the minimum satisfying amount of nicotine in attractive form, free of allegedly harmful combustion products. the importance of this is that this led to the effort to develop the premiere cigarette at r.j. reynolds, a cigarette that heated and did not burn the tobacco. and you will have a copy of the premiere book that i showed dr. burns that was published by r.j. reynolds regarding its efforts to deliver a cigarette that would provide nicotine without the harmful carcinogens. and when premiere failed in the market, when people did not like its sulfer taste, reynolds developed eclipse, another type of heated tobacco cigarette. you know, this was not just something that dr. teague recommended. the surgeon general wrote in the 1981 surgeon general's report that changing the tar and nicotine ratio was a potential approach for making a safer cigarette. that is exactly what r.j. reynolds set out to do with premiere and eclipse. i want to end by talking about plaintiff’s request, if you find mr. weingart is entitled to punitive damages for his wife's choices that led to her lung cancer and death. and i do not think that you will agree with mr. hill, because the documents that you have been shown do not show a substantial, direct impact on mrs. weingart. i'd ask also, when you consider the evidence, to remember that the plaintiffs have this much higher burden of proof of clear and convincing evidence as defined to you by judge kelley. i do not get another chance to talk to you before you retire to deliberate. and again, that is because the plaintiffs have the burden of proof. but i ask you to do this when mr. hill closes: listen to what he asks or tells you and ask yourself what would mr. reilly or mr. reid or mr. engram have to say about what mr. hill is going to argue in his last part of his closing? just like you have done in this case all along, like you have asked those questions of the witnesses who testified, ask, does -- how does this -- how on earth does this apply to claire weingart, and demand proof. i want to end with one bit of testimony from mr. weingart that i do not believe was discussed by mr. hill or even mr. reilly or mr. reid. i really think this testimony sums up what this case is about, because it tells you what mr. weingart knew about his wife and just how strongly she wanted to smoke cigarettes. he was asked -- and that was by mr. hill on direct, he was asked last wednesday about what his wife's reaction was when he asked her and confronted her about her smoking. "what was her response every single time you confronted claire about her smoking?" and mr. weingart's response was: "there were times when she said, no, she wanted to smoke and there is nothing that i could do to stop her." ladies and gentlemen, those are the words of a woman who was one hundred percent in control and responsible for her decisions to smoke. her decisions to smoke and to never even try to quit. on behalf of the 4,000 men and women at r.j. reynolds, i appreciate your service on this jury and your attention to my argument. thank you.