closing argument mr. bayuk: may it please the court, counsel, mr. and mrs. wilcox. ladies and 5282 gentlemen, good afternoon. hope you all had a nice lunch. probably the last time i'll be standing up here talking to you. you may be happy about that. i'm going to talk to you for a little bit, and then ms. henninger is going to come and talk to you for a little bit more to give you our closing arguments. but there is really nowhere else i could start but to thank you for your attention in this case. the case has gone on almost a month. we are in the middle of the fourth week. it is been a long case. you all have worked long hours, many days 8:00 to 6:00. close to it. so i know it is been hard on you. thank you very much for your attention. you had to be very patient in this case. and i know sometimes you had to be a little too patient. actually, when you boil it down, it is a pretty simple case. it is a pretty simple case about very specific legal issues, all directed to mr. wilcox. mr. cleston wilcox. i submit to you this case could have been tried in about a week. we could have been here a much shorter time, but the case dragged on. why did it do that? let me give you an 5283 example. mr. sales: objection, your honor, to counsel's argument with respect to the length of the trial. it is argument. the court: sustained. mr. bayuk: let me give you an example of why the case took so long. you heard from dr. proctor. dr. proctor was the first witness the plaintiff called, came from california. he was on the stand for the better part of three days, and he came and talked to you and told you how much money he had made, how many thousands of dollars he had made just in the first two weeks of august. and he took the stand and he testified that he made an effort, he deliberately ignored learning anything about the decedent in the case. he ignored learning about mr. wilcox. he knew there were depositions available. he knew there were family members available to talk to, and he chose to ignore finding out anything about mr. wilcox, and instead came and talked to you all about generic issues, about generic conduct, about historical conduct and smokers other than mr. wilcox. 5284 and we asked about it on cross-examination. and he said he is not a biographer of mr. wilcox. in other words, he comes in and tells you about things, and he has no idea and has made no effort to learn whether they have any impact on mr. wilcox. and you heard a lot about that in the plaintiff's closing arguments, the first part of it you heard this morning. you saw a lot of documents. you heard a lot more about history. you heard about other smokers. but you did not hear much about mr. wilcox or whether any of the things that they showed, the documents they showed through time had any impact on mr. wilcox. and so i want to talk to you about the evidence that is been presented here that will help you answer the questions that you all have to decide. because you all have to decide questions that are very specific to mr. wilcox. very specific. very specific legal issues. and all of the claims relate to one smoker, and that is mr. wilcox. and so you do not need to take my word for it. baron, can i have the elmo. it is not just 5285 me saying this is about mr. wilcox. you can see just by looking at the verdict form -- you are going to get this when you go back to deliberate. i've highlighted it. get out of your way. every question on the verdict form has mr. wilcox's name on it except for the last question. every claim in the case relates to mr. wilcox. mr. gustafson said in his opening statement -- or excuse me, in his closing argument that, showing you documents, you have to decide whether you are going to accept what reynolds did, whether that was wrong. whether, looking at the documents, was it wrong for reynolds to do that. there is no question on the verdict form about that. there is no question about these documents that you have seen. i'm not going to waste your time talking about the documents, because that was a prior trial. that case was tried almost 20 years ago. that jury, the engle jury, heard nothing about mr. wilcox. that is why you all are here. if they had heard it, the engle jury heard anything about him, 5286 you all would not be here and you -- mr. sales: objection. no basis in the record for those statements of counsel. mr. bayuk: this is argument, your honor. the court: overruled. mr. bayuk: you all would not be here, certainly not for four weeks. we have seen every claim relates to mr. wilcox. there is some jury instructions -- you all are going to have copies of these when you go back to the jury room. this is what judge lindsey read to you this morning. i wanted to point a few of these out to you to aid us as we walk through the evidence and to aid you when you all go back to the jury room and think about the evidence in the case. the first one i want to show you all is on the third page -- you are going to have page numbers at the bottom of the set you get. i want to show you first what is on page 3 of the instructions. pretty simple instruction, but it means quite a bit. see if i can zoom in here. i do not know how to zoom in here, but this reminds you that the plaintiff bears the burden 5287 of proof on every issue in the case. it should be no surprise to you all. you have been told this. you were told this before opening statement. judge lindsey read it to you this morning. the plaintiff is the one bringing the case. they bear the burden. they bear the burden of proof. they have to bring you evidence to prove their claims. another instruction that is important is on page 32 of the instructions you are going to take back to the jury room with you, and this tells you what the evidence is in the case. ms. henninger: the black knob. mr. bayuk: it tells you the evidence is the sworn testimony of witnesses, the exhibits and the facts that were admitted or agreed to by the parties. and it goes on to tell you, you should and you can use reason and common sense. you can draw inferences, but you should not guess about things that were not covered here. you should make the plaintiff bring you evidence. the plaintiff cannot meet their burden by arguing things, by asking you to rely on argument, by asking you to connect the dots 5288 for them for evidence they did not bring. while i'm up here, i want to show you one more instruction. this is going to be very important, because there are a lot of witnesses in this case. a lot of witnesses. this is on page 33 of your instructions. and this tells you how to assess those witnesses. fact witnesses, expert witnesses, it tells you that you all are the triers of fact. you judge the credibility of the witnesses. you judge their demeanor. you judge their opportunity to know things. and then for experts, you judge their credibility. you can accept or reject any part of their testimony. so you have to decide what you thought of the people that came to the witness stand and testified to you. that is what you do back in the jury room. these are very important instructions. not to say the other instructions are not important. but these are things that are going to help you walk through the evidence in the case. and so what we have is a very specific framework of how to approach your job in the 5289 case. we know that every claim relates to mr. wilcox. we know that the plaintiff has the burden on every claim. and we know they have to meet that burden by bringing you evidence. not argument, not rhetoric, not unreasonable inferences, but evidence. and so with that in mind, i want to talk to you about what the evidence actually is in this case that is going to help you answer the questions you are here to decide. but the first thing i want to do is, you know, based on -- can i switch that, please? the first thing i want to do is talk to you about some of the things that dr. proctor testified about. mr. gustafson talked about in his closing today some issues based on this generic evidence that, although they made an issue out of it, although dr. proctor said these things, these are the admissions he gave us. these are the admissions he gave us. we resolved three days of testimony on issues -- you heard mr. gustafson talk about r.j. reynolds designed cigarettes for addiction, they engineered cigarettes to enhance addiction, they add things to boost 5290 addiction. what did their own experts say about these things? cigarettes were inhalable decades before reynolds ever made a cigarette. mr. gustafson said inhalability was a secret. dr. proctor admitted on cross-examination that is not true. we saw in opening statement. saw on dr. proctor's cross-examination something called florida health notes 1906, saying that basically the surgeon general of florida telling the public that they know you inhale cigarettes. you saw documents back into the 1800s about inhalability. this is no secret. cigarette inhalability was not a secret. cigarettes were always dangerous and addictive before r.j. reynolds ever made a cigarette. a lot of testimony in this case about camels coming out in 1913. dr. proctor told you long before camels, long before reynolds ever made a cigarette, cigarettes were addictive and dangerous and inhalable. back in the 1800s, talking about smoker's cancer, mouth cancers, throat cancers, other dangers of smoking, as well as the addictiveness of 5291 smoking. this is not a secret. this comes from their witness. there is less nicotine in cigarette tobacco than in natural tobacco. dr. proctor talked to you, you can go to a field anywhere they grow tobacco, pick it out of the ground, roll it up and smoke it. that cigarette, that roll-your-own is going to have more nicotine in it than a manufactured cigarette. by the same token, this concept of additives -- you heard in closing, in the plaintiff's closing, ammonia, levulinic acid, a lot of talk about rat brains. well, what did dr. proctor say about those things? he said none of those things impact the cigarettes in any way to change the dangers of them or the addictiveness of them. they had nothing to do with mr. wilcox. and so the plaintiff puts these things in front of you, this generic evidence, and it does not help you answer the questions you are here to decide. the bottom line, cigarettes are dangerous and addictive by nature. reynolds did not design them or make them that way. they were 5292 that way before reynolds ever came around. that is what their experts said. another issue they talked about, advertising. you got an instruction this morning, that is actually on page 19 of your instructions, advertising is legal. you cannot hold reynolds liable because they advertise. reynolds advertised, like other companies advertised. it is a legal activity. more importantly, for the claims, because we are focusing on mr. wilcox, there is no evidence he began smoking because of advertising. you all know, every witness that came that knew him did not know him when he was a youth, when he was young. the first witness in the case who knows him is mrs. wilcox. she met him in 1945 when he was 21 years old. so nobody knows anything about him before that point. nobody came in and said he began smoking because of advertising. there is no evidence that he continued smoking because of advertising or that he chose any brands based on advertising. there is simply no evidence in the case. this is the type of specific evidence that 5293 the plaintiff would have to bring you to carry their burden, and they have not done it. so they brought you generic evidence that does not help you on any of the claims in the case. no witness told you about any ad that mr. wilcox ever saw. that is the bottom line. you all took notes during the trial. there was no evidence of that. and that is the specific evidence they need. another slide on that. you saw this, i think, in the plaintiff's closing today, some of these salem ads. there is a lot of discussions about salems became kind of a big part of the trial, you know, when and whether he switched to salem or salem lights. you look at all of the evidence, i think it kind of uniformly establishes that to the extent if he switched to salem, when he did, it would have been sometime in the 1970s. you all heard dr. proctor say after 1971, every cigarette ad contained a warning. surgeon general's warning: cigarette smoking is dangerous to your health. every ad that he would have seen, if he saw any, for salem, that 5294 would have been the health message on it. there is a lot of talk about whether he thought filters and lights or salems were healthier or safer or better for him. you have all these ads in evidence. when you go back to the jury room, if you want to look, see if you can find an ad that says those things. all of the ads that he could have seen said it is dangerous to your health. that is the health message. ms. henninger is going to talk to you more about that when she gets up here. then you heard from dr. strauss. dr. strauss was the witness we ended our case on. we read his deposition designations. he told you that no tobacco company ever marketed filters and lights as safe or safer. he said that in the short excerpts that we read yesterday. then we get to plaintiff's youth marketing case. and, again, i just told you this, there is no evidence of what mr. wilcox did when he was a youth. you have medical records saying he started smoking at age eight. that is the extent of the evidence you have. they showed you a reynolds document from 5295 1927 when he was three years old. no evidence that he saw that. nobody knew him at that time. nobody can say when he became a regular smoker. nobody can say why he started smoking or what brand he smoked or whether it was a roll-your-own brand or a manufactured brand. no evidence of seeing any advertising. the first evidence we have about him is at age 21. that is the evidence in the case. that is the evidence that you have to use to decide his claims. not about generic smokers or impact on the public or anything like that. mr. wilcox's specific claims. and then filters. this was talked about in plaintiff's closing. but what did dr. proctor tell you about this on cross-examination? first, there was no conspiracy to market filtered cigarettes as safer. anything -- they talked about the conspiracy, the arms of the conspiracy. it did not involve concealing the risks of filtered cigarettes. dr. proctor admitted that. then dr. proctor told you that there is no evidence that r.j. reynolds concealed information about whether filtered cigarettes 5296 are safer. and then he told you the flip side of that. he had seen evidence. dr. proctor had seen documents where reynolds actually believed that filters were safer. and most importantly, again from dr. strauss -- dr. strauss is someone we took his deposition before trial. and then he did not show up at trial, so we had to play his deposition. had to go depose him, read his deposition -- mr. sales: objection, your honor. the court: sustained. mr. bayuk: i had to get these admissions from him. i had to get the -- mr. sales: objection. mr. bayuk: these are admissions he made in the deposition. the court: overruled. mr. bayuk: i had to get these admissions out of him that he is reviewed the science on this, he is reviewed the science, the epidemiology studying whether filters and light cigarettes are actually safer. actually pose less risk to smokers in terms of lung cancer than smoking full-flavored cigarettes like 5297 camels. and he admitted it. he said the evidence that you showed me actually supports that, and i do not know anything else. that is what the public health community recommendations were based on when they told people to switch to filtered and lights. ms. henninger is going to talk to you about that a little bit more when she gets up. but these issues, these are things that the plaintiff has put in front of you that do not help you answer the questions in this case. we need to look at the evidence specific to mr. wilcox. there is no questions about this on the verdict form. the questions are about him. and so i want to talk to you about the evidence that is going to help you. they spent three and a half weeks reproving the engle findings. they have the engle findings if they prove class membership. they have those findings, and what they chose to do with their time was to bring evidence to simply reprove them instead of bringing evidence as to whether they would be connected to mr. wilcox. and that does not meet their 5298 burden of proof. that does not meet their burden of proof. they need to bring you guys evidence, specific evidence about mr. wilcox. their case by the numbers, they spent eight days, 13 witnesses, and i do not even know if that counts dr. villa, who came twice. 50 hours of testimony, 184 exhibits. and how much of that -- you all have this in your notes. how much of that, what evidence did they bring you to show that anything r.j. reynolds said or did had an impact on mr. wilcox? it is a pretty simple answer. you are going to have all the evidence back in the jury room. you are going to have it all back there. you are going to have your notes, you are going to have the evidence. their burden in this case is to link up conduct to mr. wilcox, not to prove conduct in general. that is what this trial is about. and they have not carried their burden on that issue. by the same token, what evidence did they bring you that r.j. reynolds or any other tobacco company caused mr. wilcox's death? 5299 nothing. again, you have all the evidence. you will have it back there. they did not bring you any evidence. you will not find any back there. you will not find anything showing any connection between reynolds causing harm or death to mr. wilcox. that is just a fact. what is the evidence? what is the evidence? first place i want to start is i have a board, it is very important evidence for you in the case, and it came directly from mr. robert wilcox. obviously, there are a few different wilcoxes in the case. i do not mean any disrespect if i refer to somebody as lieutenant or bob or mr. wilcox, meaning the smoker. it could get a little confusing. so i do not mean any disrespect to anybody, to try to keep it clear. so these came from mr. bob wilcox, the plaintiff in the case. he admitted these. judge lindsey told you about these in the instructions before opening statement. when mr. wilcox was on the witness stand and talking to ms. henninger, he admitted these during his cross-examination. and then judge lindsey read 5300 these to you -- the instructions, this morning. you are going to have these when you go back to the jury room. mr. wilcox admitted that his father, the smoker, cleston wilcox, could have tried harder to quit smoking. he could have tried longer to quit smoking. and because of that, because of that fault that he admits on behalf of his father, mr. wilcox was a legal cause of his own death. we are here about what caused mr. wilcox's death. and the plaintiff in the case, the person that is driving the case, admits that mr. wilcox himself was the cause of his death. this is an admission that is going to help you answer questions. this is a specific admission relating directly mr. wilcox. it is going to help you answer questions about class membership and the other issues in the case. but we have more admissions. and so what else did mr. wilcox, the plaintiff, bob wilcox, testify to on the stand? and this puts back into perspective where i began, talking about why dr. proctor was here so long, why there is all this generic evidence 5301 in the case. how is any of it connected to mr. wilcox? remember dr. proctor chose to ignore the evidence about mr. wilcox. but this is what plaintiff bob wilcox told us. and he is the one bringing the concealment claim. he is the one bringing the conspiracy claim, and he knows he needs to have evidence to prove those claims. and this is the evidence we got on the stand during trial. he admitted there is no evidence mr. wilcox ever heard, read or saw any statements by tobacco company. there is no evidence that mr. wilcox ever saw any specific cigarette advertisements. no evidence he ever relied on any statement by a tobacco company about the dangers or addictiveness of smoking. no evidence he ever questioned the risks of smoking. and no evidence that he was ever confused about the dangers or addictiveness of smoking. simply put, there is no evidence, by plaintiff's own admission, to meet the claims in the case, to meet the concealment and the conspiracy claims in the case. this tells you all you need to know. i 5302 do not think you are going to get to this part of the verdict form. i think these are questions 3 and 4 on the verdict form. i do not think you will get there. but if you do, all you need to know is this. coming from the person who is bringing the claims. ryan, can i have the projector again, please? and so what else do we know? ms. henninger showed you this in opening. we told you these were the five fundamental facts that you need to know -- i'm sorry. sorry about that. thank you for letting me know. the five fundamental facts that you need to know about mr. wilcox's case. because these will, in addition to these admissions we showed you on the boards, these will answer every question that you have to answer. mr. wilcox did not start or continue smoking because of anything r.j. reynolds said or did. we see the plaintiff's admission. this is undisputed. we see what plaintiff admitted about this. number two, mr. wilcox understood the dangers of smoking for decades and never 5303 questioned the risks. that is undisputed. you have your notes, you will have the evidence. try to find evidence that he was confused. there is none. mr. wilcox admitted it on the stand. number three, mr. wilcox did not make a serious effort to quit until 1992 when he was able to quit the first day he tried. you heard the evidence about this both from dr. herkov and dr. abramson. there is going to be no dispute about this. you are going to see dr. herkov says, a serious quit attempt is stopping smoking for a day. and mr. wilcox never did that. their own expert will say mr. wilcox never made a serious or genuine attempt to quit smoking before he quit the first day he tried in 1992. it is undisputed. number four, plaintiff cannot prove that mr. wilcox died from a primary lung cancer caused by smoking. ms. henninger is going to talk to you a lot about that. when we walk through the evidence on that point, i think you will see that there has been a failure to carry the burden of proof on that issue, a failure to prove that mr. wilcox had a cancer that started in his lung and that was caused by smoking and 5304 caused his death. and then finally, number five, plaintiff admits that mr. wilcox was a legal cause of his own death. it is the same thing we showed on the board. ladies and gentlemen, you would not admit that the smoker was the legal cause of their own death if they were controlled by nicotine or they were confused about the dangers, why would that person be at fault? why would you admit fault for causing your own death if that was the case? but that is not the case. that is why they admitted fault. we are going to talk more about that. but we have more specific evidence than this. we have statements, you have heard them from the witness stand, of things that mr. wilcox said or descriptions of how he was and descriptions of how he viewed his smoking. and these are undisputed. every witness who knew anything about this admitted to these things. undisputed, uncontroverted in the record. things like, mind your own business, and do not ever question me again. that is what the plaintiff says his father would have said if someone questioned his smoking. that is 5305 clear and unequivocal. he did what he wanted to do. he made choices about what he wanted to do. things were done his way. he lived his life the way he wanted. now, the plaintiff comes in and says mr. wilcox was a nicotine addict. he was controlled by nicotine. he was confused about things. other people influenced him. does that sound like mr. wilcox? this is the evidence in the case. ladies and gentlemen, the only person who was in control of mr. wilcox was mr. wilcox. nobody could question his smoking, not mrs. wilcox, not either of his sons, not his friends, not doctors who would tell him to quit, and he would leave the doctor. he is the one who was in the driver's seat. he is the one who made the decisions about his smoking, and he did not let other people dictate his behavior. and when you go back to deliberate, there is no contrary evidence to this. there is none. he did not want to have anybody tell him he should not smoke. it does not get any more clear than that. nobody could tell him about his smoking. nobody could dictate what he was 5306 going to do about his smoking. you have heard, and we are going to discuss it in some detail, when he quit in '92, that is the first time he let anyone do anything about his smoking. he told his wife, throw the cigarettes out now. throw the ashtrays out now. i'm quitting smoking. that is the first time. before that, these are the statements you have. this is what he thought about his smoking. and so when you are going to come into court and you are going to ask for $10 million and you are going to ask for 5 percent fault or ten percent fault, you have to take a step back and not rewrite history. you have to look at what the person was like. you have to look at what every witness in the case said about him. this is the specific evidence that helps you answer the questions you are going to decide, not generic documents, not things that are unconnected to mr. wilcox, not things that are just based on argument. you have got to base your decision on evidence. they have to carry their burden based on evidence. and so the verdict form question 1, this 5307 is the class membership question, first question you are going to get. was cleston wilcox addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine; and, if so, was such addiction a legal cause of his lung cancer and death? we are going to talk about what this entails. you all may remember from opening, there are three hurdles, there is three components of this issue. there is addiction, there is addiction causation, and there is medical causation. i'm going to talk to you about the first two things, addiction and addiction causation. ms. henninger is going to get up and talk to you about medical causation and the rest of the verdict form. but it is important to remember, and this is an instruction you have at page 9, that the engle findings they talked about cannot be considered in any way when determining whether mr. wilcox was a class member. in other words, you all have to put those out of your mind when you are determining whether he was addicted, whether addiction caused his death, and whether he had a primary 5308 lung cancer caused by smoking. you cannot consider them, you are instructed on page 9 of your jury instructions. and so the hurdles i talked about. three components to class membership, addiction, addiction causation, medical causation. the plaintiff has to meet their burden, they have a burden to bring you evidence to prove each one of these things to get into the class. and i submit to you, as we walk through it, you are going to see that they failed to carry the burden. and the burden is important because, it was explained to you in jury selection, the plaintiff is the one with the burden. the defense does not have a burden. so if the plaintiff does not carry the burden, we never have to get up from the table. we never have to get up to cross-examine witnesses. we do not have to bring you evidence. but we have done that. we have done that because that is what we have in the case. we have brought you this evidence. not only has the plaintiff failed on their burden, we have brought you evidence to show why they cannot meet their 5309 burden. and that is what you are going to have in the jury room. and so, you know, i showed you the instruction that you cannot rely on guesswork, you cannot rely on speculation. and mr. gustafson when he was talking to you, you know, he said something, and i wrote it down in my notes, about, you know, before the subpoenas went out, before lawsuit, what the doctors were trying to do, what the doctors were trying to do for mr. wilcox to save him. dr. lamelas and dr. tershakovec, one of the surgeons, and the pathologist, dr. riemer and dr. milian. did you hear from any of those witnesses in the case? dr. villa came to the stand and told you he knew those people. they are in miami. mr. barnhart like to cross-examine people about how many people they flew over in the airplane. well, they did not have to fly anyone in the airplane for the people that treated mr. wilcox in miami. why did not they bring them? why did not you hear from these people? they are local. they are the ones who know about mr. wilcox. it is the plaintiff's case. why did not you hear from those treaters? 5310 think about that when you think about whether the plaintiff carried their burden of proof in the case, whether they brought you sufficient evidence. so i'm going to talk to you about addiction first. plaintiff must prove mr. wilcox was addicted to nicotine, addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine. and what was the evidence on that? you heard a lot of fact witness testimony on that. you heard both sons, you heard some family friends come in and tell you that in their opinion, mr. wilcox smoked cigarettes for a long time, and while they are not medical doctors, they thought he was addicted. that is the evidence the plaintiff brought you. but the plaintiff realized that is not enough to carry their burden, and this is what mr. wilcox told you on the stand. he admitted this to you on cross-examination, that he too believed his father was addicted to nicotine, but he conceded, the plaintiff in the case, that addiction is a medical diagnosis, it requires expertise. it is not a lay opinion that you have aunt deborah or cousin joe come 5311 in and that carries the burden. they know they needed expertise. so what the fact witness said is not enough for you to carry their burden on this claim. that is why they brought you additional evidence. that is why they brought you some experts. they brought you a treater and an expert. we are going to talk about that. the first thing they could look to, though, was the medical records. you heard 1500 pages, i think, of medical records in the case, or maybe more. you can look through every single one of those medical records when you get back in the jury room, and you will not find a single page where there is any diagnosis of addiction, any mention of addiction. and you heard about a lot of treaters. dr. la rocha, family doctor, who prescribed the patch for mr. wilcox. dr. caruso, who treated mr. wilcox in the hospital in 1988 or '89. a nurse who documented agitation because he wanted a cigarette. you saw those medical records, and you did not see anywhere where anyone diagnosed him as addicted. 5312 maybe the clearest example is dr. barrio. dr. barrio did come talk to you all. he came live. and we saw some of his medical records. dr. barrio testified that back in 1993, he was diagnosing patients as addicted, and yet he never diagnosed mr. wilcox as addicted back at the time. the first time that dr. barrio testified mr. wilcox was addicted was 20 years after the fact when he was being paid $500 an hour. he testified he did not do it at the time. this is the first time he did it, when he found out there was a lawsuit and he came to court. that is the first time. and this goes back to the instruction i asked you all to pay attention to, the believability of witnesses, the credibility of witnesses. because what did dr. barrio know about mr. wilcox? well, there is a lot he did not know. he did not know when mr. wilcox became a regular smoker, when he smoked his first cigarette of the day. let us pause on that point. mr. gustafson said, we brought you experts who knew these things. and dr. barrio is one of them. he knew that mr. wilcox smoked the 5313 first thing of the day. there is no evidence of that. he did not know because he had no knowledge of that. it is simply not anywhere in the record. it is not in the evidence. he did not know if mr. wilcox avoided going places if he could not smoke, if he ever experienced withdrawal symptoms, if he ever wanted to quit smoking, if he ever tried to quit smoking, if he ever failed to quit smoking. he did not know any of that. instead, he uses some test that is based on how much you smoke and how long you smoke. and no one ever said that is any kind of validated test. if the plaintiff thought that was a validated test, they would not have brought you dr. herkov. dr. herkov was their addiction expert they brought from the university of florida, from gainesville. let me point out this yellow box. the only thing dr. barrio knew was that mr. wilcox did quit smoking. that is when he quit, in '93. that is the only thing he knew. so they brought you dr. herkov. dr. herkov, ph.d., psychologist. and dr. herkov, he came down and gave some 5314 interesting lectures to you all on the brain and different cells and the synaptic connections and neurotransmitters, but then on cross-examination, it became pretty clear what kind of expert dr. herkov was. and he was a nice man, but he is not a medical doctor. so immediately you got to think back to the plaintiff's admission that i showed you on the stand, that he considers, to meet his burden in this case, he considers addiction to be a medical diagnosis. not a lay diagnosis, not a psychological diagnosis, a medical diagnosis. dr. herkov is not a doctor. he cannot prescribe any medications. he has no certifications in addiction. he is never counseled anyone on quitting smoking. he is never treated anyone for nicotine addiction. he is never treated a smoker in his career. look at the admission in the box. "in 22 years of practice, you have never treated any patient for any issue related to smoking?" "that is correct." that is the expert they brought you on 5315 nicotine addiction, someone has never treated anyone, ever? this goes back to the instruction on credibility of witnesses. this is the type of thing you all have to assess when you decide what evidence you are going to credit and what evidence you are not going to credit. but, you know, dr. herkov, he was up there for a little bit. he talked about nicotine addiction. he made some admissions on behalf of the plaintiff, and he told you on direct, he told you when mr. sales was talking to him, he thought that mr. wilcox was addicted, and he said because he had trouble quitting and he had withdrawal symptoms, he had failed quit attempts, he had these brain changes, he had a relapse, he had cues, and all of those things led him to believe, led dr. herkov to believe that mr. wilcox was addicted. but what did he admit on cross-examination? nonaddicted smokers can have difficulty in quitting. that is not a function of addiction. difficulty quitting. 5316 nonaddicted smokers relapse and return to smoking. that is not a function of addiction. nonaddicted smokers can smoke and relapse because of cues, cues in their environment that trigger them to want to smoke. that is not a function of addiction. it happens in nonaddicted smokers. withdrawal symptoms. dr. herkov admitted to you that nonaddicted smokers can have withdrawal symptoms like irritability, agitation, and so on. all the things he talked about on direct, he says that is not a function of addiction. it is a function of smoking. this is their expert on nicotine addiction. and then he says this increase in brain receptors -- this is maybe the clearest admission yet -- it has nothing to do with nicotine addiction. it is a function of nicotine in the brain. it has nothing to do with addiction. this is what the expert they brought told you about people who smoke. addicted and not addicted. this is what he based his opinion 5317 on. and he said, all of these things i'm talking about happen in people who are not addicted. so you have to assess how you are going to weigh this evidence. you have to assess how you are going to assess his testimony. and then there was this issue with the dsm-5, and you were shown both of these books. this issue kind of took on a life of its own in this trial. dr. herkov took the stand and talked to you about a gray book, he called it dsm-iv, published in 2000, dsm-iv-tr, and he presented his opinions based on that. and mr. sales asked him some questions. you have heard of this thing called the dsm-5. you would never use that. you would not use that to diagnose addiction. you would not use that in your practice. and then on cross-examination, what did he admit? he admitted it is the first thing that he used in the case. in the plaintiff's closing today, they put up this score sheet, his handwritten paper that 5318 he used to assess mr. wilcox, and the very first column on there was the dsm-5. and they tried to hide it from you. why would they do that? why would they try to not tell you about it on direct and let me bring it out on cross-examination? and then we had to go through this process of impeachment, and you all became familiar with that watching the trial, where witnesses give depositions, and then they come and testify -- mr. sales: excuse me, your honor. there is an instruction the court gave the jury about speculating on the basis for court rulings with respect to objections. the court: overruled. mr. bayuk: this is discussing impeachment. so then they come to trial and testify and they say something different than they said in deposition. you show them their deposition and then they look at the inconsistent statement. we had to do that a few times with dr. herkov. and one of the things we had to talk to him about was the fact that he uses the 5319 dsm-5 in his practice, that he agrees the dsm-5 correlates with nicotine addiction, and that it does show when you have six or more criteria. he admitted those through the impeachment. he would not admit them to you on the stand. but we showed him his prior testimony. we read it correctly. and then mr. sales on the redirect, after he got done with dr. herkov on direct exam, impugning the disparaging in the dsm-5, took up your time going through a dsm-5 analysis after they tried to hide it from you. why would they do that? why would they do that? so that is another thing you have to think about when you weigh this evidence, when you weigh dr. herkov's testimony. now, dr. abramson came. in contrast to dr. herkov's qualifications, dr. abramson is a medical doctor. he practices 20 miles up the road in aventura. he is treated thousands of smokers. he is found half of them to be addicted. he is come into court in these cases and found a smoker to be addicted. he told you that. and he told you and he explained to you how he applies this. he applies it in his 5320 practice. it is the state of the art, it is the standard. and he walked you through, step by step, the criteria. and the interesting thing was, mr. sales cross-examined him, and there was a lot of discussion about money made and scripts and videotapes and testimony, but there was no cross-examination on the foundation for the addiction claim. there was no cross-examination about the criteria. questioning him, why did you give him this, why did not you give him that? did not you see this evidence? there was no challenge to the addiction claim. and it is really no surprise. because unlike dr. herkov, dr. abramson is a board-certified addiction psychiatrist. he is a specialist in treating addiction and has treated thousands of smokers over the course of his career. no challenge to his opinion about addiction. he found that mr. wilcox did not meet the criteria for nicotine addiction. he did not have a severe tobacco use disorder. he did not have an addiction. he had no impairment in his daily life, no impairment or 5321 distress. he controlled his smoking. there was discussion during the plaintiff's closing that mr. wilcox, there were no times when he could go without a cigarette, that he was not wanting a cigarette or having a craving. you have heard about these two periods, after the 1974 heart attack and 1989 surgery for the abdominal aortic aneurysm. he is in the hospital for 7 to 14 days, and the witnesses are asked, did he say anything about wanting a cigarette? did he say anything about i wish i could smoke? did you notice any personality changes? did you notice anything differently about him? and uniformly the testimony was, no, there was none of that. these are sustained periods of time when dr. herkov says withdrawal symptoms would be peaking. and there is no evidence at those times. there is no evidence. and so these are the things you have to consider when you think about whether the plaintiff met their burden of proof on this issue of addiction. and finally, you know, and we are going to 5322 talk more about this in some detail, but there is this issue of the quitting in 1992. and dr. abramson explained it to you. there is really a contrast between what happened before '92 and what happened in 1992. and we will talk a little bit more about that when we talk about the next section, which is addiction causation. but first i want to address this issue that was brought up in the plaintiff's closing argument, this issue of depression and whether this was a withdrawal symptom. this is the type of thing i'm talking about where the plaintiff put this evidence in front of you and it was not connected to smoking. but it was argued that it was, it was argued that this is because of smoking, when in reality, the evidence we got from the stand was mr. wilcox went and saw treaters for this issue. he went and saw a psychologist and some psychiatrists. and nobody ever found out what was causing his issue. his depression. dr. abramson reviewed all of his medical records and said, this was a man who at times had depression and anxiety with no connection to smoking. and so that is the evidence you 5323 have, that is the evidence you are going to bring back in the jury room, that there is no connection to smoking. you never heard from anyone who treated him for depression or why was he experiencing it. in fact, the only thing you did hear was that he was having all kinds of medical problems, fainting, going to the emergency room. at this time, he was having depression. that is what the evidence is in the case. second hurdle of class membership, addiction causation. this looks at if the person is addicted, if mr. wilcox is addicted, did the addiction play such a role, such a significant role in his smoking that you could say not just the smoking caused his cancer and death, but that the addiction caused his cancer and death. it is a distinction. and it is spelled out in the first question on the verdict form. did the addiction cause the death? judge lindsey read you an instruction on it. this is actually in the jury instructions you are going to get on page 7 about legal cause. addiction had to be a but-for cause. but for the addiction, the 5324 death would not have occurred. now, the plaintiff talked about alternative causes or other causes that factor into it. respectfully, you do not have any evidence of that. this is an issue about what controlled mr. wilcox. why did he smoke. even if he is addicted, why did he smoke if you assume that he had a cancer caused by smoking. if you assume that -- and ms. henninger is going to talk about that -- even assuming he did, what drove him to smoke. was it addiction? or was it the other evidence that you have seen about how he approached his smoking? the choices he made about his smoking. whether he let other people dictate his smoking behaviors. that is the evidence you have to consider. and when you think about this issue, i mean, a big issue is, can addicted smokers quit. because if you can quit in time to avoid your death, if you are going to die of a smoking-related disease, then how can addiction be the cause? if you can control your smoking, and you decide when you are going to be motivated and persistent in quitting, the 5325 addiction cannot cause the death. that is common sense. the instructions tell you, you can use common sense. more importantly -- this is an issue the plaintiff has the burden on as well, and i submit to you the only person who talked about addiction causation was dr. abramson. dr. abramson told you even if he was addicted, these are the reasons why addiction did not cause his death. the plaintiff, when they got up to cross him, did not ask him a single question about that as it related to mr. wilcox. the plaintiff in their case put on no evidence of this. you all have taken notes. please, when you go back to the jury room, look at your notepads. look to see who in the plaintiff's case said this. who gave this opinion for them. no one. you will not find it. the only time you heard it was during the plaintiff's closing argument. and mr. sales may get up here after me, because he is going to do rebuttal, and he may say, this is common sense, if you are addicted, look at the documents, it is common sense that 5326 if you are addicted, that causes your smoking, that caused your lung cancer. but the plaintiff has the burden on this case. now they are asking you for $10 million. ten million dollars, and they want you to do the work for them. they want you to link the dots for them, when they brought no one to tell you this. as i said, please do not believe me, check your pads. see if you wrote down any evidence of this in what you recorded paying attention to the trial, because there is none. i think you will find that there is none. so what do we know from the experts? any smoker can quit. addicted smokers can quitted. anyone can quit. there was a discussion during the plaintiff's closing, addiction prevents quitting, addiction makes it harder. but that is not the evidence. that is not the evidence in the case. the plaintiff's experts, along with dr. abramson, admit any smoker can quit. dr. herkov says people who would be highly addicted, highly dependent, those people quit. not there is some smokers who cannot quit. 5327 there is no evidence of that. every smoker can quit. but the key is you actually have to stop. you actually have to stop smoking to quit. and that is a key issue in this case. that is a key issue on the evidence you all have before you in the case. because we have this issue. we have this issue of 1992 and what happened in 1992. dr. abramson explained this to you. all of the things he looks for in his practice when he is trying to motivate people or assessing whether they actually want to quit smoking and whether they are ready to make a motivated and persistent effort, all of these things. and none of them mr. wilcox did before 1992. we had a lot of evidence about his heart attack in '74. before then, there is zero evidence you have that mr. wilcox was ever even interested in quitting. there is evidence he knew smoking was dangerous and addictive, there is evidence he knew about the '64 surgeon general's report and its connection to smoking and lung cancer, but no evidence he did anything about it. 5328 his wife quit two times, including in 1965 for good for health reasons for their son, for the plaintiff. mr. wilcox, no evidence he was even interested in quitting. and yet you have the same descriptions of him about how he viewed his smoking, do not question it, do not talk to me about it, he did what he wanted to do. and you have 1974, you have -- you start to see descriptions from the witnesses that he is making attempts. and you heard about the aqua filter and nicotine gum and hypnosis and cold turkey and smoking half cigarettes and cutting down. you hear all these things, but every witness in the case told you, and the plaintiff confirmed, and mrs. wilcox confirmed, he never quit smoking. he never even changed his smoking behavior at all. even for an hour. he never changed the normal amount he was smoking. he smoked on nicotine gum. he was too strong-minded to go to hypnosis. he never changed his smoking behavior. mr. wilcox, this is his admission from the stand: "question: at no time did he ever stop smoking except for 1992? "answer: that is correct. yes, ma'am." and then dr. herkov, i said he admitted on cross-examination, to make a serious and genuine quit attempt, you have to stop smoking for a day. dr. abramson agreed with that. there is no dispute. this is undisputed in the case. it is also undisputed that mr. wilcox never did this. he never did this before 1992. he only made one serious and genuine attempt, and that is when he quit. that shows you who was in control of the smoking when he was ready to be committed to quitting. that is undisputed evidence. there is discussion -- there was evidence during the case and a reference during plaintiff's closing to tapering, adjusting the amounts that mr. wilcox was smoking. you are going to have the medical records, you are going to have thousands of pages, and there are different amounts in the medical records. but the plaintiff has latched onto this like it is evidence of a struggle to go up and down with a cigarette amount. constant trying to quit. these are records that i just picked out, 5330 four from the same day from the same hospitalization. this is during the aortic aneurysm. four from the same day. the one on the bottom left, he smokes three-quarters of a pack a day. to the right of that, he smokes one to two packs a day. above that, he smokes one pack a day. and to the left of that, he is a nonsmoker. so this is what you have to think about when you are going to look at the medical records and see was he really trying to taper the amount he was smoking? are the medical records accurate among all the people he saw in terms of the amount he was smoking? and can you base a decision that he was trying to quit on that? when you have four people seeing him in the same day with all different amounts, including that he never smoked. so that is the evidence you have to keep in mind. you have to think about whether that helps the plaintiff meet their burden of proof. this is what dr. abramson described as contrast between 1974 and '92, and then after '92. everything changed in '92. threw his cigarettes away, told his wife to get rid of 5331 them. he threw away the ashtrays for the first time. he stopped smoking for the first time. and he did all that before he ever was with the patch. he did all that before he ever knew the patch was going to work for him. dr. abramson said that illustrates more clearly than anything the commitment he had at this time, that you never saw before. you had a lot of people come to the witness stand and say, i talked to mr. wilcox. mr. wilcox said, i cannot quit smoking. i cannot quit. what did mr. abernathy say? we are going to look at that. in fact, we will look at it right now. this deposition was read to you. "when he announced that he was going to quit, it was like they won the lottery. it was a big announcement. apparently it was a big deal that he actually decided to go ahead and try." to go ahead and try. this was the difference between what was happening then and what was happening previously. he was committed to it. his friends knew it. his friends knew there was a change. he was actually going to try to quit. 5332 you know what happened the first time he tried, that there was this big announcement? he did. he did quit. that is the difference. that shows that he was in control. that shows you whether addiction was driving him or whether he was making the decisions about it. so what did mr. wilcox do in 1992 to quit? what did he do that he had never done before? he stopped smoking. kind of -- their expert admits it, our expert admits it. to quit, you have to stop. and that was the first time he did it. i've talked to you about this already. he threw away the cigarettes, the ashtrays. he stopped saying, i cannot quit, and he said, i'm going to quit. i'm quitting now. and you know what the evidence is after that? there is zero evidence that after he said that and after he quit, he ever said, i cannot quit, again. there is no evidence of that. nobody said that. after he decided he could do it and he did it, he never said, i cannot quit. even when he resumed smoking after hurricane andrew, if you credit what mr. bob wilcox said, because of the 5333 stress, because of the stress of it, he resumed smoking five cigarettes a day, he never complained about his smoking. he never said, i cannot quit, ever. you have no evidence of that. that is the type of evidence that plaintiff has to bring you to meet their burden on whether addiction played such a role that it could say it caused his lung cancer. and they do not have that evidence. they have not carried their burden of proof. go back -- you have heard this evidence. you know, if you are looking for reasons, why was 1992 different? you have heard this consistently from the witness stand. mr. wilcox got a personalized health warning in 1974 with his heart attack. there is a dispute in the record about whether he did anything to quit after that. according to one place where his wife testified, the doctor told him to quit, and he did nothing to do that. he made no effort to quit. but what happened in 1992? his brother passed away from lung cancer. his brother was 5334 a smoker. and nobody ties it to that is why mr. wilcox decided to get serious and motivated and persistent at this time. you can use your common sense. the events, the dates correlate. you can use your common sense about it. so what prevented mr. wilcox from quitting? was it addiction? did addiction prevent him from quitting? well, we know the experts say addiction does not prevent people from quitting. the only thing we have evidence of is mr. wilcox, and that is no criticism of mr. wilcox. i'm not here to criticize him or cast blame on him or say anything derogatory about him or anyone in the family. we have not done that at all during this trial, and we will not do that. you cannot rewrite history. you know what you saw about mr. wilcox, the descriptions you saw of him, he was the one who was driving his smoking decisions. there is no evidence of anything else. in fact, the evidence of him is he would not let anyone else do that. that is the evidence you all have in the case. why was he different? why was he different than the other people, the other men 5335 in his generation, other people during the time he was smoking? we know, dr. proctor told you, people were quitting by the millions over time. 17.6 million in those ten years, '55 to '65. 30 million people in just the 15-year period after the 1964 surgeon general report. quitting by the millions. you saw this chart, because there was a lot of discussion about mr. wilcox's specific birth cohort, his five-year cohort when he was born, tracking the men. mr. gustafson said again in closing today, it would have been unusual for him to not have been a smoker. eighty percent of people smoked. and then mr. gustafson said it would have been really unusual for him to have quit. does that -- does the chart say that? did dr. proctor show that? it would have been unusual for him not to have quit. dr. proctor told you four out of five men in his birth cohort quit smoking and quit smoking for good. he would have been unusual to not know that. and he would have been unusual to not do that at a time that would have prevented his lung cancer and death, if you assume he had 5336 lung cancer. i'm going to show you the admission from dr. barrio on that, that if he had quit smoking by 1978, he would not have had an excess risk of lung cancer above that of a nonsmoker. he would have reduced his risk down to that of a nonsmoker. he had the ability to quit and prevent his death. what did dr. proctor tell you? people who were quitting during this time, millions of people who were quitting smoked more than mr. wilcox. the men, on average, smoked a pack and a half a day, 30 cigarettes a day in the 1960s and '70s. heavy smokers, addicted smokers were quitting by the millions. why was mr. wilcox different? why was he different? what is the evidence of that? addiction does not prevent quitting. you heard from everyone, 60 million people quit, most of them would have been addicted. 30 million quit before 1970. and they showed you the document in their closing about the psychological crutch. and we talked to dr. proctor about this. why do not you pay attention to quitting, 5337 dr. proctor? why do not you see if what you are coming to talk about had an impact on people? all these people quit during the time when you see these internal documents. this is why i say it is generic evidence. this is why i say the plaintiff has to bring you a connection to mr. wilcox, and they have not done that. they have not done that. that is what they need to bring to carry their burden. try to think about this as a football fan, you know, how you get your mind around this number, 60 million people. a lot of people. there was a discussion about people filling up the courtroom. i want to talk about a football stadium. smokers would fill sun life stadium about 750 times over a sellout every day, every sunday going back about a hundred years, back to 1920. quitting by the millions. quitting by the millions of addicted smokers. why was mr. wilcox different? every smoker you heard from in the case quit smoking. every one. why was mr. wilcox different? these give you the answers. these give you the answers. these are unrebutted, unrefuted descriptions of him and his personality. 5338 dr. herkov told you what an important role personality plays in smoking. and no one could do anything to talk to him about his behavior. he always had the ability to quit, more specific to his smoking. he was the king of the castle, he made his own decisions, he was in the driver's seat. now they want to come in and say addiction controlled him, he was a helpless nicotine addict. that is not how he was in life. these are the descriptions of how he was in life. these are what people said about him, and no one said anything different. this is the evidence. and it is no surprise, because that is the evidence, that the plaintiff admits fault. the plaintiff admits that he could have quit and prevented his death. the plaintiff admits that he was a cause of his own death. why would you do that if you had no control? why would you do that if you were misled? you would not do that. why would you ever take blame if you had no blame? that is what the plaintiff's admission means. it means he had the ability to quit, it means he had the 5339 keys to be successful, he had the responsibility to quit, and he could have prevented his own death. it is not a question of that he could quit. we know he could quit when he got serious about it. that is what the evidence is. so the plaintiff has failed to carry their burden on addiction causation. then dr. barrio -- this is what i referenced earlier, he could have quit at a time and prevented his own death four years after his heart attack at a time when mrs. wilcox was saying he did not do anything in response to the doctor's advice. he could have quit. he could have thrown away his cigarettes. he could have gotten rid of the ashtrays. he could have asked his family for help. he could have sought professional advice. but he did not. he did not. and so i submit to you, ladies and gentlemen, there has been a fundamental failure of the plaintiff to bring you the evidence that you need in the case. ms. henninger is going to get up and talk 5340 to you. i want to thank you for your time. it is been a privilege to work in front of you for the last three and a half weeks. thanks so much. closing argument ms. henninger: thank you. may it please the court, lieutenant wilcox, mrs. wilcox, ladies and gentlemen of the jury. well, once again, i find myself, what, 2:30, after lunch, everybody's tired, tired of hearing from the lawyers. i appreciate your time and attention. this has been a long time. everyone has thanked you. both sides truly, truly thank you for your time and attention, and we just ask you to hang on just a little bit more, because we are almost there. and i promise that -- i have a lot to get through -- i'm going to try to do it without getting, you know, too fast. i tend to talk very fast, as you guys might have figured out. these ladies have. and then you will get a 5343 chance to deliberate after mr. sales gets to talk with you. but thank you very much, each and every one of you. we started this, gosh, a little bit over three weeks ago, and you guys have given it great attention, and i appreciate you giving up your personal lives to be here with us. so thank you. i want to pick up where mr. bayuk left off. you remember he showed you the hurdles and he talked to you about the first two hurdles, addiction and addiction causation, and he promised you that i would get up and talk about medical causation. that is where i'm going to start. this is the last thing we are going to talk about with regard to whether or not mr. wilcox was a member of the engle class. if you look on the instructions when you get them and take them back into the jury room, on page 6 of the instructions, it is going to say that plaintiff must prove that mr. wilcox had cancer that originated in his lungs that was legally caused by smoking. and you guys know by now, you have heard it for three weeks straight, originated in his 5344 lungs means primary lung cancer. it means that the cancer started in the lungs versus started somewhere else and metastasized or grew or spread to the lungs. that is what the plaintiff has to prove, and that is what we submit they have failed to prove. they have not met their burden of proof on that issue. let us talk about why. you have seen this before. we have talked about it with experts. i showed it in opening statement. but one of the reasons, just one of the reasons why plaintiff did not meet their burden of proof and has not in this case, because they cannot bring you all the evidence that is necessary. they cannot bring you everything necessary to prove that mr. wilcox had a cancer that started in his lungs. there are 1700 or so pages of medical records, 15-, 1700, but a lot of them have nothing to do with the cancer and the surgery in 1993. you will have those available to you. so we have missing records. importantly, we do not have radiology. we do not have the actual films. we have some reports. we do not have the actual pathology. 5345 and we are going to talk about why that is so important here in a minute. there are no mris. they were not available back then. and we do not have -- in the pathology reports that we do have, we do not have the benefit of a description of the cells provided by the pathologist at the time so that we can see, are they producing glands like adenocarcinomas do, or mucin, et cetera. we just have a diagnosis, adenocarcinoma. there is no staining that was done on the tissue taken from mr. wilcox's lung, and there were stains available in 1993. you heard dr. villa talk about it as well as dr. bennett. there were stains that were available that could help, not definitive, but could help determine whether or not this was a primary lung cancer, and they were not done. and importantly, there was no autopsy, and we are going to talk about why that was important. because dr. bennett talked about it, dr. barrio talked about it, and dr. villa talked about it. so we will talk about that as well as we go through this issue. so let us start first with dr. bennett and 5346 what he told you i believe just two days ago or maybe just yesterday, i forget, my days are running together. but recall dr. bennett was the only board-certified forensic pathologist and medical examiner that came into this courtroom and talked to you. and why is that important? because he is the only witness who has special training and board certification in determining the cause of a person's death. that is what he is trained to do is to determine the cause of death. and what he did is he looked at all of the medical records and he said, first of all, his opinion is that mr. wilcox had a cancer of unknown primary. that was his opinion. that he could not tell you where it started, but he can tell you in his opinion it did not start in the lungs. now, i want to stop for a second. you remember the chart or the things that mr. barnhart wrote down that were supposedly from the mayo clinic website, and there is some symptoms, and he said, are these signs or symptoms of an unknown primary cancer? 5347 do you remember that thing that they flipped up there? well, as dr. bennett explained, none of those were specific findings, they could be for any cancer, any ailment, and half of them the treating physicians did not even look for in this case, there is no record showing that they looked for in this case. so we do not know whether they existed or not. it has nothing to do with the conclusion that this is an unknown primary cancer according to dr. bennett. he also talked about how the pathological diagnosis was not specific to mr. wilcox's lungs. how the presentation -- remember the boards and the chest figures that he showed you -- how that was more consistent with a cancer that spread to the lung rather than one that started in the lung. he talked about how there were some workup done following his cancer, following the ct scans that showed the cancer in the lungs, and how that was insufficient to establish a primary lung cancer. and there were other cat scans that looked 5348 for primary sites, and they even saw some potential primary sites, but they were not investigated any further. and the fact of the matter is that the ct scans that were taken, taken of his abdomen, his brain, the bone scan, all of those things could have missed the primary site just like the ct scans in this case missed the extent of disease in mr. wilcox's lungs. there is no dispute, whether or not you believe this is a primary lung cancer or a cancer that metastasized to the lung, there is no dispute that the ct scans done before the surgery did not tell the doctors the extent of the disease present in mr. wilcox's lungs. there was significant nodal involvement. there was more than one nodule located in the lung. all of that was missed on the cat scans because the cat scans were done without contrast. that was all explained to you. nobody disagreed. so let us talk a little bit more about the experts we brought. first of all, we had dr. bennett, a specialist in the cause of death. less than 200 doctors in the united 5349 states that have those qualifications. and then we brought to you dr. brooks, who is a board-certified pulmonologist and critical care specialist. and he talked to you -- remember, we had to bring him out of turn because he had to be somewhere, he had to treat some patients -- but he told you that in the 25 years of practice in diagnosing thousands of patients with lung cancer, he is never seen a primary lung cancer that presented or looked like this. those were the opinions of dr. brooks and dr. bennett. now, clearly, plaintiffs brought some experts, as well, we are going to talk about them. but one thing all the experts in this case agree on, both the plaintiffs and the defense experts, are these facts: cancer can spread to the lung, and, in fact, it does spread to the lung. the lung is one of the most common places for metastatic cancer to go to. and if you see a tumor in the lung, it is more likely to be from somewhere else than primary to the lung, because lung cancers -- or 5350 cancers that start -- let me back up. tumors in the lung, just by ratio, odds, are more likely to be from somewhere else than primary to the lung. everybody agreed on that. they also agreed that multiple nodules in both lobes of the lung would be consistent with a metastatic process versus a primary cancer. there were thousands of patients who had what was known as a cancer of unknown primary in the year 1993, the year mr. wilcox was diagnosed with cancer. and cancers of unknown primary are usually poorly differentiated adenocarcinomas, just like the type that the pathologist diagnosed mr. wilcox with in this case. now, i want to look at the pathology reports in this case. you have seen them a thousand times. you probably feel like you are semi pathologists at this point because we have been over them ad nauseam with a variety of witnesses. but the first pathology report was from the biopsy, and what that found was that it was a cancer and it was consistent with adenocarcinoma. 5351 everybody says, not a definitive diagnosis. but when they looked at the pathology from the lung, when they actually took out the lung following the pneumonectomy, they had the ability to look at it with more detail, and they found that it was a poorly differentiated cancer or adenocarcinoma, and they found that it was subpleural adenocarcinomas in each lobe. now, i want to stop here and just remind you briefly, yesterday, how i had to walk you through with dr. bennett the pathology reports, and we talked about the gross and the microscopic. and dr. barrio told you that the microscopic portion of the pathology report was the most important for a clinician or a treating physician such as himself. and in that microscopic diagnosis is where dr. riemer, the pathologist, says that he had nodules, cancer, in both lobes of his lung. and how did he know that, because he marked them with a roman numeral i and a roman numeral ii as dr. bennett explained on the stand. but what is really important about these 5352 two pathology reports is that neither of them, neither of them, they may say "adenocarcinoma," but they do not say "lung cancer." they do not say any of the synonyms that mr. gustafson showed in his closing statement for lung cancer. in fact, you heard from every doctor that testified in this case that adenocarcinomas are the most common cancers in the human body and can arise almost anywhere. now, i want to talk about the fact that mr. wilcox had cancer in both lobes of his lung. and you heard about this operative report, and then we also talked about the pathology report. and i want to stop, because both of these, both of these reports talk about how there was cancer in both the lower lobe and the upper lobe of mr. wilcox's left lung. now, i thought i heard mr. gustafson say something about the operative report today in his closing statements, something along the lines of maybe we should not rely on this because it was written what, 18 months or so after the surgery. and then he wanted to show you the handwritten note that was scribbled out that had two lines and he wanted you to ignore 5353 this very detailed report where the surgeon describes, dr. lamelas describes, exactly what he did. and i was really, really puzzled about that because dr. lamelas is the surgeon who throughout this case plaintiffs are urging you to rely on for the opinion that he had a primary lung cancer, but yet he is telling you, do not pay attention to this operative report because it was written so long after. just pay attention to the three lines that he scribbled right after the surgery. then there was also some comment made that dr. lamelas clearly would not have seen cancer in both lobes of his lung, because if he did, it would have been a contraindication to take the lung out. he would have been committing malpractice is what dr. villa said and mr. gustafson. well, you may ask yourself why this record was written so long after mr. wilcox's death. you may ask yourself, remember, dr. barrio also wrote records months after mr. wilcox's death. could it be because they knew that they should not have taken out the lung because he 5354 had cancer in both lobes? mr. sales: objection. order in limine. the court: sustained. mr. sales: move to strike. the court: granted. ms. henninger: now, i want to talk a little bit more about this specifically, and we are going to get to how dr. villa talks about how he comes one week and says that there is nothing, it is all just in one lobe, and then the next week he comes and he says that it is in the upper and the lower lobe. well, let us look at some more things, and we will get to that in a minute, but i want to talk about some of the ct scans that were done prior to the time that mr. wilcox actually had his surgery. do you remember he had the abdominal ct and the brain ct? and clearly, dr. bennett came in here and he told you the cancer of unknown primary, does not necessarily know where it started, but when going through the cat scans and available material in this case, he specifically said, look, they did an abdominal ct right before surgery in 1993 and they found 5355 that the prostate was mildly enlarged. okay. well, they also did that prostate stain of mr. wilcox's tissue, and that did not come back with any kind of answer. it just was inconclusive. so clearly, 69-year-old man, maybe his enlarged prostate is not so abnormal. but what makes it a little bit quizzical is the fact that, what, four years earlier mr. wilcox had an abdominal ct that had a normal prostate. so what you have is the fact that he has a normal prostate and then a slightly enlarged prostate. but they could have examined that, they could have biopsied it, they could have done some kind of just examination, but that was not done. not saying the prostate was the primary source of his cancer, but it is just something to think about in assessing whether or not the plaintiff has met their burden of proof. the same with this scalp lesion noted on the brain cat scan. remember, they saw something on the cat scan that was not supposed to be there on the outside of mr. wilcox's scalp. dr. barrio then saw it in person, five 5356 days before mr. wilcox passed away. it was so important to him, he described it as angry when he was sitting in that stand right there, that he said, i'd recommend a biopsy. and he did that, he said you need a biopsy, and he put two exclamation points after it. he did that at the time that mr. wilcox was in dire straits. he thought it was important. he wanted to investigate it. it never was investigated. again, not saying that this is the primary source of the cancer, but something to consider when assessing whether or not plaintiff has met their burden of proof. now, i want to talk a little bit about dr. barrio who came in here because he was the self-proclaimed captain of mr. wilcox's ship because there was not an oncologist that took care of mr. wilcox, you heard about that. and dr. barrio came in and testified that -- he admitted, first of all, that he was not the treating physician for mr. wilcox's cancer, that he did not ever, when he was treating him or any time, review the pathology slides. he never talked to dr. riemer, the 5357 pathologist, about what he saw in the pathology. never talked to him about how the lungs looked. never talked to him about the microscopic diagnosis. he never talked to dr. lamelas after the surgery. and that is going to be very important, as you are going to hear in a second. and he never got together with any of these other doctors that were involved in the care and treatment of mr. wilcox and agreed after the surgery that this was a primary lung cancer. he told me on cross-examination that never happened. now, mr. gustafson says, you know, you have got to put yourself back in the position of these treating physicians in 1993. that is very important to do. and you know what, i agree with him on one point there. because in 1993, when dr. barrio was treating mr. wilcox, he had no idea that there was more than one nodule in the lung. none. and he admitted it was not until he was getting ready for this litigation that he found that information out. so the self-proclaimed captain of the ship did not have all of the information. now, he also seemed to have a little bit 5358 of confusion when he was on the stand. and you recall mr. bayuk read to you the credibility of the witness instruction. that is going to be on page, i think, 33. you have to assess whether or not the witness was frank, whether their memory was good, whether they had the ability to remember, did they know the facts? well, this slide says it all. because on the left-hand side were all the things that he told mr. gustafson, and on the right-hand side are the counter opposites of what he told me. for example, he said -- he called himself the captain of the ship when talking to mr. gustafson. and then i said, well, hey, is not it true you were not even the treating physician for his cancer? and he admitted that. he admitted to me that he never reviewed medical records from prior hospitalizations before may 1989. just told mr. gustafson right before that that he had. he never got together with mr. wilcox's physicians after the surgery and agreed that mr. wilcox had a primary lung cancer. remember, there was some kind of an 5359 insinuation that all of the treating physicians got together after the surgery and said, yeah, this is still a primary lung cancer. and i asked him, and he said, that never happened. i never talked to dr. riemer. i never talked to dr. lamelas. he did not know he had more than one nodule. and then one interesting thing was he told mr. gustafson on direct examination, yeah, i could have been the one that prescribed that nicotine patch that he was wearing in the hospital. and then on cross-examination, i said, well, is not it true you did not even know what the habitrol patch was? and he said, yeah, i do not remember what the heck habitrol is. so that is the treating physician they brought you in this case. someone who did not remember anything about the care and treatment of mr. wilcox, and he tried to get ready so he could come in here and testify about it, but the facts are that he had more information sitting in this courtroom than he did when he was treating mr. wilcox. 5360 that is what they want you to base your opinion and all of the conclusions in this case that he had a primary lung cancer. and that is insufficient. they cannot meet their burden of proof. now, there is one person who talked to dr. lamelas after the surgery, and that is lieutenant wilcox. and you will recall in his deposition, which was january of this year, he said twice he said that surgeon told him that both lungs were covered in cancer and they had to take out the worst one. now, that answer was never changed by any errata sheet or anything like that. but he said on the stand, that does not make sense to me; in all fairness, he says, that did not make sense to him. well, it probably did not make sense to him because he sat in a courtroom while dr. villa testified a couple days earlier that cancer in both lungs means metastatic cancer. now, i want to make something very clear here. dr. bennett's opinion about an unknown primary cancer has nothing to do with whether or not there was cancer in the right lung at 5361 all. in fact, he said he does not know what is in the right lung. but the fact of the matter is, if there was cancer in both lungs, like mr. wilcox, lieutenant wilcox reported dr. lamelas saying, if, in fact, there was cancer in both lungs and they took out the worst one, to use his words, that that is definitive proof that there is a metastatic cancer to the lungs. why, because even dr. villa agrees that if you have bilateral presentation, remember that word, it would be a metastatic or more consistent with a metastatic cancer. now, they brought dr. villa back, i got to see him twice, a nice man, came in here twice, both on a monday. i enjoy talking to him. and i'm actually really glad he came back yesterday because when he did, he changed his opinion, and he told me something new that he did not tell me a week before. and it is very important information. because on monday, august 18, when he was first here, his opinion was that the cancer was only in mr. wilcox's lower lobe, that there were two tumors -- remember, he kind of said 5362 they were kind of hiding behind each other, they were really close. that was his opinion, monday, august 18. well, on august 25, a week later, yesterday, he came in here to -- what he did is he came in here to reinterpret what mr. -- lieutenant wilcox heard dr. lamelas say. he was not there, he did not talk to dr. lamelas, but he was going to interpret it. and what he said in trying to interpret that is he said the cancer was in mr. wilcox's upper and lower lobes. that is important. that is consistent with a metastatic cancer to the lung versus a primary lung cancer. now, one more point about dr. villa, who is generally a nice guy. i mean, i have no problems with him and you know that we have actually had cases together because we talked about that on cross-examination. and i enjoy talking with him because he is had cases that he is reviewed, engle cases like this one, where the smoker's diagnosis was adenocarcinoma, just like this case. adenocarcinoma. but in those cases he had the pathology to review. and this is why it is so important that we 5363 have this pathology available to us in this case. because once he reviewed that pathology, he looked at it and said, you know what, i do not agree that this is an adenocarcinoma. this is something else. it is a type of lung cancer, not caused by smoking. you heard the bac. and when he said that, he said that because he could look at the pathology. and then i asked him, i said, hey, dr. villa, if you did not have the pathology in that case but you just had the report that said adenocarcinoma, you would have told us that smoking caused his lung cancer in that case. he said, yeah, you are right, i probably would have. that is why it is critical that we have the pathology to review. you heard dr. villa. he trusts himself above all others. every pathologist has a subjective interpretation. that is why they need to bring you the pathology in order to meet their burden of proof. now, everybody agrees, and i think even mr. gustafson said this this morning, that the cause of mr. wilcox's death was complications from surgery. all -- every medical doctor that 5364 came in here to talk about the cancer agreed that mr. wilcox died because of the surgery. and the experts also discuss whether or not mr. wilcox would not have died when he did if not for the surgery. in other words, the surgery and the complications that followed are what caused mr. wilcox's death. now, you will recall dr. bennett's testimony about autopsies. he is a medical examiner, so of course he is familiar with autopsies. you would expect him to want to rely on autopsies. but what is important is the two medical experts brought to you by plaintiff also thought an autopsy would be important in this case. in fact, dr. barrio said -- i said: "question: correct me if i'm wrong, you would have recommended an autopsy in mr. wilcox's case?" and he said: "answer: yes." and i said: "question: that would give the family some closure." and he said: "answer: correct." and i said: 5365 "question: the reason you would recommend an autopsy is so you can determine the person's cause of death?" and he said: "answer: correct." and dr. villa testified when he came that first monday, he testified that autopsies are so important that they should be a requirement to bring a civil lawsuit. autopsy's also something, a piece of information you do not have available to you in this case. so, for these reasons -- mr. bayuk started out with addiction and addiction causation, and i just ended with the third hurdle -- plaintiff failed to prove that mr. wilcox was a class member. they failed to prove that mr. wilcox was addicted under medically diagnostic criteria. plaintiff failed to prove that addiction to nicotine was the legal cause of mr. wilcox's death. and plaintiff failed to prove that mr. wilcox died of a primary lung cancer and that it was caused by smoking. plaintiff spent two weeks reproving the engle findings, but failed to prove mr. wilcox 5366 was a class member. mr. sales: objection. same objection that was made previously during the break. the court: sustained. mr. sales: move to strike. the court: granted. ms. henninger: now, you remember in opening statements, i showed those chains to you guys to try to explain legal causation and causation in general. and this is the chain between whether or not mr. wilcox was addicted and addiction causing his death. and there is an important reason why this chain will remain broken at the end of this case and is broken. they cannot provide the links. this is something that mr. bayuk talked to you about, and it is the fact that plaintiff, lieutenant wilcox admits that mr. wilcox was a legal cause of his death. if i can have the elmo, please. and for these reasons, when you get to -- for these reasons, when you get to the first question on the verdict form, "was cleston wilcox addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine; and, if so, was such addiction a legal cause of his lung 5367 cancer and death," that is the question as to whether or not mr. wilcox is a member of the engle class. and i submit to you that based on the evidence in this case, you should check this no. you check it no, case is over. your verdict is for r.j. reynolds tobacco company. but i cannot stop, assuming that you are going to do that, right? i have to do my job and assume that maybe, just for argument's sake, i think you are going to stop there, i think the evidence stops there. but in case you do not and you disagree, i need to go on. so i'm going to talk about the rest of the verdict form. i want to make clear -- mr. gustafson said something earlier about it would be inconsistent because i'm going to say it is not a primary lung cancer, but if it is a primary lung cancer, he is not addicted, but if he is addicted. that is just the way i have to go through the verdict form, quite honestly. because the defense position is mr. wilcox is not a member of this engle class. but i would not be doing my job if i did not talk about 5368 the rest of the verdict form. so let us try to do that here. if i can get -- thank you, please. okay. there is a question 2. clearly, i'm not going from 1 to 3 to 4. there is a question 2 that relates to comparative fault, and i'm going to come back to that. i wanted to talk about questions 3 and 4 before addressing question number 2. all right? i will not leave 2 alone. questions 3 and 4 are: "did cleston wilcox reasonably rely to his detriment on any statement made by r.j. reynolds tobacco company that concealed or omitted material facts not otherwise known or available to cleston wilcox regarding the health effects of cigarettes or their addictive nature; and, if so, was such reliance a legal cause of cleston wilcox's lung cancer and death?" all right. that is number 3. they kind of sound similar, so i'm going to read number 4 to you just in case. you will have this back with you. "did cleston wilcox reasonably rely to his detriment on a statement made in furtherance of 5369 an agreement between and among r.j. reynolds tobacco company and other tobacco companies and organizations to conceal or omit material facts not already known or available to cleston wilcox regarding the health effects of cigarettes or their addictive nature; and, if so, was such reliance a legal cause of his lung cancer and death?" that is what i'm going to walk through right now. i'm going to start, again, with the chain that i showed you in opening statement. and you will recall, again, this was going to explain to you, or hopefully help explain to you, how the chain will remain broken because the plaintiff cannot provide any link between any fraudulent concealment or agreement to fraudulently conceal in mr. wilcox's death. now, i want to stop here and just address, there were a lot of documents shown to you throughout this trial, lots of internal company documents. r.j. reynolds tobacco company's documents, b&w, american tobacco, lorillard, philip morris. you name it, you saw internal documents. tobacco institute, et cetera. but the issue is not what is in those 5370 documents. the issue is whether or not the tobacco companies, specifically r.j. reynolds, or others, concealed information from mr. wilcox regarding the health effects or addictiveness of smoking that caused his death. they have to connect the chain. and they cannot, because you cannot conceal something already known. and you have heard abundant evidence in this case that mr. wilcox knew the dangers of cigarette smoking. he knew that they could be addictive and hard to quit. you heard that there was public information out there. i'm going to have to show you some newspaper articles just to refresh your recollection. but there was also evidence specific to mr. wilcox that he knew. never confused. so the chain remains broken because you cannot conceal something that is already known. now, i want to talk about one of the jury instructions in this on page 10. this is really important because this is one that, you know, you heard from mr. gustafson, if you find he is a class member, if you answered yes on question number 1, the engle findings apply. 5371 but as judge lindsey told you this morning, that the findings that i just read to you do not establish that r.j. reynolds tobacco company is liable to the plaintiff in this case, nor do they establish whether mr. wilcox was injured by r.j. reynolds' conduct or the degree, if any, to which reynolds' conduct was a legal cause of mr. wilcox's lung cancer and death. so the findings do not connect that chain for you. the findings do not establish liability. the findings are what the findings are. you heard the instructions; they say what they say. but you cannot use them to establish liability. they have to connect the dots. now, the dangers of smoking were not a secret. you heard dr. proctor came in here, and he talked about what was available in the public knowledge. and just generally, there was a lot of information available to the public about the dangers and addictiveness of smoking throughout time. and while he did not have anything specific to mr. wilcox, there was evidence in this case that i'm going to get to about what he specifically knew. 5372 but remember dr. proctor told you that for hundreds of years, people have known that smoking can be life threatening. for hundreds of years, people have written and talked about how tobacco can be addictive and bad for you. addiction -- "addicted to smoking" shows uncommonly starting in the 1850s. smokers' cancer was listed as an official cause of death more than 100 years ago. schools have taught about the dangers, and not just recently, not just recently, schools have been teaching about the dangers and difficulty quitting for over a hundred years. you heard about the -- you probably never want to see another reader's digest in your life. you saw lots of reader's digest in this case, but they are important, because as dr. proctor told you, they are important sources of information that the public health community, the surgeon general and the american cancer society said gave an important -- they were an important part of the information that the american public had about the dangers of smoking. one in four households had this. they were very anti-tobacco. no tobacco 5373 advertising in these things. starting in 1924, they started publishing articles about the dangers and addictiveness of smoking. this is the one from 1924, the very first one, the very year that mr. wilcox was born. and the conclusion is "tobacco is injurious to the human body. its use sometimes induces cancer." now, i can promise you right now, we are not going to look at every one of the reader's digest we went through during dr. proctor's examination, but they are in evidence. school textbooks, 1928, illinois, where mr. wilcox went to school, "heavier users of tobacco show a death rate fifty percent higher than abstainers." and then in 1932, "the average life is shortened as much as seven years by the use of tobacco. the lungs also suffer directly from the effects of tobacco smoke if it is inhaled." textbooks, reader's digest. there were reader's digest continued, textbooks continued, magazines articles continued, newspaper articles continued. you saw all of that during dr. proctor's cross-examination. 5374 one thing i did want to talk a little bit about were the newspaper articles that were available to mr. wilcox. and one such newspaper that was available to him were the stars and stripes. now, stars and stripes started in 1940 to publish articles about the dangers of smoking. and that is the newspaper -- you remember dr. proctor testified that that is the newspaper that servicemen received while they were overseas serving our country at war. and i found it interesting that mr. barnhart asked both lieutenant wilcox and mrs. wilcox if they remember mr. wilcox reading the stars and stripes. clearly, they said no. but there is a really good reason why they said no. because mrs. wilcox, while she was married to him, never went overseas with him. and lieutenant wilcox was never born while mr. wilcox served in the military. so, dr. proctor told you that this was a newspaper, the only english paper that servicemen received overseas. lieutenant wilcox and mrs. wilcox tell you that mr. wilcox was an avid reader of the 5375 newspaper. this would be the only newspaper he would have gotten when he was serving our country overseas. and these newspapers carried the same articles that were in the united states newspapers. in fact, here's one from st. louis, the very same article from st. louis which, coincidentally, is where mr. wilcox is from, also talks about -- appears in the stars and stripes. this is in 1940s. talks about cancerous tar, cigarettes cause disease. now, these continue throughout the '50s and the '60s. and the reader's digest continued. last reader's digest i'm going to show you, but i'm showing it to you because it had a very powerful title. dr. proctor talked about how powerful this title was. "if you buy a carton of cigarettes, you are buying a carton of cancer." he said it was a powerful message, and it was. that was 1952. now, canastas pajamas. i think you guys never want to hear about canastas pajamas again. some of us did not know what they were, including dr. proctor. but we do know that inside the edition with the canastas pajamas on 5376 the front cover, you found dr. wynder's 1953 mouse skin-painting studies. you saw graphic pictures of it. you recall dr. proctor telling you that this was -- first dr. wynder did epidemiology studies in the 1950s. that was the first kind of link to smoking and cancer. then this. and this was the first animal study. this received enormous publicity, and it also lead to enormous quitting rates. dr. proctor told you that. the publicity around these types of studies led to awareness of the american public of the dangers of smoking and led to quitting, and he said definitely. now, i want to talk about something that mr. gustafson said during his closing statement. i think i heard him, and i wrote it down, he said that the question on the concealment or fraudulent concealment claim, the question is whether the false controversy, the fraudulent concealment was a substantial contributing factor in mr. wilcox's death. he told you that was the question you were here to answer. and then the first thing he 5377 showed you or talked about was dr. teague's survey of the cancer research, a 1953 document. that was r.j. reynolds -- you may remember dr. proctor talked to you about it. because i asked him, i said, okay, this survey of cancer research, that was not secret, was it? i mean, what dr. teague did -- remember dr. proctor told you he lived in winston-salem where reynolds is, he went to wake forest medical school library, he looked at articles, publicly available articles, and he summarized them in a memo that he provided to r.j. reynolds. he did not conclude that smoking caused cancer. he summarized publicly available literature. that is what dr. proctor told you. and that is the concealment they are talking about, summarizing publicly available literature. they also showed you a 1956 document about winstons versus camels and the levels of pahs, et cetera. and you will recall that dr. proctor said that, you know, he did not know if those were even the dangerous levels of pah. but the important part is that there is nothing 5378 specific in any of those articles or documents that would have changed the fact that mr. wilcox knew smoking was dangerous, knew that it was difficult to quit. the public health campaign worked. you recall in 1957 there were some congressional hearings where you had some of the public health officials, the surgeon general and the director of national cancer institute talking about the excellent job that the tv press and radio have done covering and informing the public about the dangers of cigarette smoke. that all followed the wynder and graham studies, the mouse skin-painting studies, et cetera. it led to a very significant event, as you will recall dr. proctor talking about it, was the 1964 surgeon general's report. this was the first report by the surgeon general that concluded that smoking caused lung cancer in men. now, what is really important about this, not only did it get widespread publicity, but the fact of matter is, mrs. wilcox told you that her and mr. wilcox discussed this report. they discussed it and they discussed the 5379 findings. and the conclusions were that smoking caused lung cancer in men. they knew it at the time in 1964. widespread publicity. i'm not going to go through all of this. we spent days doing it. i was crossing dr. proctor on it. but it made it in the newspapers, miami news, miami herald. and what happened was people started quitting, and they started these smoking cessation clinics or groups that you could go join, like alcoholics anonymous. they publicized that and there were articles written about that. and they were in the miami news and the miami herald, and the evidence is that mr. wilcox never went to one of those. never tried any of the steps that they outlined in the newspapers. never went to one of those groups. now, the florida equivalent. the florida surgeon general, florida health notes, in 1965, the year after the surgeon general's report, concluded that nearly all floridians have heard about the surgeon general's report on smoking and health, which was released in 1964. we know mr. wilcox heard about it because 5380 him and mrs. wilcox talked about it. but nearly all floridians heard about it as well. now, after this, in 1966, you heard that warnings went on the packs of cigarettes. and the first warning is up there. "caution: cigarette smoking may be hazardous to your health." the fact that the warning went on the pack was news. it was on tv news, it was in newspapers. but, importantly, then you had some public health officials also starting to publicize the fact that warnings were on the packs of cigarettes. you remember the tv commercials that we showed with dr. proctor where they said there is a warning on the pack, there was beeping lights and the train going through, and it advised people to pay attention to those warnings. so there is warnings on the packs, warnings in the news, and publications or public service announcements by public health agencies telling people, there is warnings, you should quit.now, before i leave this, 1966, first warning label. not only did they talk about the 1964 surgeon general's report; mrs. wilcox also testified that when she saw 5381 that warning label on the pack of cigarettes, she talked to her husband about it. 1964 they did that, and 1966. now, 1968, daniel horn, who was in charge of trying to get all the information out to the american public, made this statement: "you could stand on a rooftop and shout, smoking is dangerous at the top of your lungs, and you would not be telling anyone anything they did not already know." 1968. and this public information continues. the '70s and '80s, there is still articles about how to quit smoking, you know, smoking cessation clinics, et cetera. and, again, no evidence that mr. wilcox went to any of these or tried any of these methods. and we know that the information got out to people. and how do we know that? because people started quitting. millions of people quit. and nothing about what dr. proctor talked to you about or what mr. gustafson talked to you about in his closing statement about this false controversy or counter messages stopped people from smoking -- i mean 5382 stopped people from quitting smoking. millions, millions of americans quit. mr. wilcox could have done the same. and how do we know that? well, the proof is in this birth cohort. mr. bayuk showed you this. it is very important to keep in mind, yes, eighty percent of his generation smoked, but three out of four of those individuals had quit by 1990. those men -- these are all men, same five-year birth window, they were all exposed to the same information, the same advertising, the same counter messages that mr. gustafson and dr. proctor liked to talk about, the same false controversy. they had all the same exposures, but yet they quit, and mr. wilcox did not. now, before i leave this, i just want to make the point that mr. sales asked dr. proctor when he got back up on direct examination, redirect, he said, well, could not that be explained by the fact that some of these guys are dying. dr. proctor told you no, this controls for that. so these are men just like mr. wilcox, 5383 living men, exposed to the same information, quitting, and quitting in great numbers. now, let us talk about mr. wilcox. there is some general information out there. we know it was out there. but let us talk about what he knew, because the fact of the matter, like mr. bayuk pointed out to you, every single question on the verdict form has his name on it. and that is what we need to really focus on in this case. and the fact is that mr. wilcox did not die because the dangers of smoking were unknown to him. we are going to talk about some of the specifics. everyone agrees, there is not been any disagreement that mr. wilcox knew and understood the dangers and addictiveness of smoking. no one came in here and told you he was confused. not a single person. not one. mr. wilcox never questioned the dangers of smoking. you did not hear a witness say, you know, he did not know smoking would cause lung cancer to him. mr. wilcox never doubted the dangers of smoking. he was never confused about the 5384 dangers of smoking. and the dangers of smoking were not a secret to mr. wilcox. no dispute. mr. gustafson likes to say undisputed evidence. this is undisputed evidence. why is it undisputed? because throughout his lifetime, starting in 1947, mr. wilcox received warnings and information about the dangers of smoking. he was told from every source possible, from his friends, his family members, from his doctors. recall in 1947 [sic] mrs. wilcox quit smoking when she was pregnant because her doctor told her to for her baby's health. now, in all fairness, she is not sure if she told mr. wilcox that, but he knew that she quit. mr. and mrs. wilcox clearly discussed the '64 surgeon general's report. we talked about that. mrs. wilcox in 1965 quit smoking for good. in 1966, they discussed the pack warning labels. and in 1974, you have heard about the heart attack, and his doctors told him he needed to stop smoking. that was a personalized warning from his doctors to mr. wilcox, stop smoking, it is harming your 5385 health. and then that very same year, his wife told him that she wished he would quit smoking so he could live a longer life. and in 1983, mr. wilcox told his son michael that he needed to quit because it was bad for his health. and, again, during any of these discussions, conversations, mr. wilcox never said, but smoking's not bad for me. he never questioned it was bad for him. he understood it. one of the reasons why he may have understood it is because of the very cigarette warning labels. the cigarette warning label, portion of that slide in the middle, that is in evidence. it is akm001319. those are all the warning labels that appear on packs of cigarettes. you saw -- dr. proctor and i talked about that. they started in 1966. they changed in 1970. starting in 1971, they were not advertising. and then in 1985, that is when we had those rotated warnings that change every couple of months. and the warnings that are on there now say that smoking causes lung cancer, 5386 heart disease, emphysema, may complicate pregnancy. they also talk about quitting smoking now greatly reduces the risk to your health. these warnings would have been on every pack of cigarettes that mr. wilcox picked up from 1966 until he stopped smoking in 1992 or whenever that happened. every pack of cigarettes had that warning. now, i want to point out to you that on page 18, judge lindsey read to you an instruction about these warnings that i did not want to leave without talking about. the instruction is on page 18. "the warning labels placed on cigarette packs and advertisements by r.j. reynolds tobacco company complied with federal law, and reynolds had no obligation to place additional warnings on its cigarette packs and advertisements after july 1, 1969." and the plaintiff does not claim that reynolds should have given additional or different warnings on its cigarette packs or advertisements after 1969. so to the extent that there is any confusion as to whether or not 5387 we should have said anything different on our cigarette packs, that instruction says it all. again, mr. wilcox never disputed those warnings. so, i want to go to some other instructions that relate to questions 3 and 4, that i think are pretty important to keep in mind. i'm going to start with instruction number -- page number 12, and this is -- the first one is: "on plaintiff's claim for fraudulent concealment against r.j. reynolds tobacco company, the issues for your determination are whether mr. wilcox reasonably relied to his detriment on any statement made by r.j. reynolds tobacco company that concealed or omitted material facts not otherwise known or available to mr. wilcox regarding the health effects of cigarettes or their addictive nature; and, if so, whether such reliance was a legal cause of his lung cancer and death." this instruction is what i'm referring to when i say that you cannot conceal something that they already know because you cannot conceal or omit material facts not otherwise 5388 known or available to mr. wilcox. that is important, because we know he knew the dangers of smoking. on page 14 it talks about how reliance has to be reasonable. you need to have reasonable reliance. and reasonable reliance on a statement that concealed or omission of material facts was a legal cause of mr. wilcox's lung cancer and death if it directly and in natural and continuous sequence produced or contributed substantially to producing such lung cancer and death so that it can be reasonably be said that but for reasonable reliance on the concealment or omission of that fact, the lung cancer and death would not have occurred. in other words, is there anything in any of those documents that, had mr. wilcox known, but for, he would not have developed his lung cancer. i submit to you the answer to that is no. he knew smoking was dangerous. he knew smoking was addictive. he knew what he needed -- all the information he needed to know about the dangers and addictiveness of smoking. he heard from a 5389 variety of sources, as we discussed. there is one other instruction on here, which is on page 13, that i think is important, and it is very short. "a material fact is one that is of such importance that mr. wilcox would not have acted as he did but for the concealment or omission of that fact." so you have to ask yourself, whatever they are claiming was concealed from him, whatever information the tobacco companies had in those secret documents they like to talk about, was it of such importance that mr. wilcox would not have acted as he did but for the concealment or omission of that fact. plaintiff has not met their burden of proving that to you with regard to any of the material that they have showed you. because what they want you to do is infer reliance. they want you to infer based on their argument. they want you to connect the dots for them. mr. sales: excuse me, objection. reynolds versus martin, first dca. the court: overruled. ms. henninger: we heard from dr. proctor. 5390 he provided generic testimony. he did not know anything about mr. wilcox. he could not tell you what he knew or what he did not know. he knew his name. he knew the brands of cigarettes he smoked. he knew the year he was born. but he did not know anything specific to mr. wilcox. they spent time and talked to him about what generally was available to smokers. we talked in general terms, but we never talked with dr. proctor, who was here to talk about the information environment, as to what mr. wilcox knew or believed. and so they want you to connect the dots for them. they want you to take dr. proctor's generic testimony and connect it to mr. wilcox without any evidence that it does connect. they tried to supply it by argument, by rhetoric. but there is no connection. now, you cannot infer any connection either, because the simple fact remains that mr. wilcox knew the dangers of smoking. generic testimony about tobacco industry conduct that has nothing to do with mr. wilcox does not answer the questions you have on your 5391 verdict form. that does not help you. that case was tried. that was the engle case. you are here to listen to the evidence related to mr. wilcox, and they did not provide you with any evidence about concealment or how that concealment affected mr. wilcox. but they brought you some generic testimony, and it was pretty expensive generic testimony, because dr. proctor came in here and told you that provides this testimony case after case after case. and, in fact, the 13 days before he was here, he made $62,400 testifying in cases just like this one in south florida where he knows nothing about the smokers. he provides the same testimony case after case. and he gets paid a lot of money to do it. and what is interesting is he says, "i'm a professor of the historical record, and i know what public awareness is and public knowledge and how the information environment affected smokers." but when i asked him about how some of the information affected smokers and made them quit smoking, remember what he told me? 5392 he said, "well, you know what, that is not my principal area of focus." he wants to come in here and tell you about how the tobacco companies' internal company documents affected people, ones that they never saw, but when you ask him about how the information about the health risks caused people to quit smoking by the millions, he says, "that is not my area of focus." he does not answer the question. and then when he does answer the question, sometimes you have to listen to the right tone that dr. proctor provides. do you remember the question, i showed him some depositions when we were impeaching him, and i said, "you said that is right." and he said, "well, yeah, i said that is right, but it did not capture my tone because sometimes that is right is that is right, and sometimes it is that right." and i said, "okay. so it did not capture your tone?" and he said, "yeah, that is right." so it just depends on dr. proctor's tone and what he wants to relay. but he knew 5393 nothing about mr. wilcox. but when you look at the evidence specifically related to mr. wilcox, you will see that there is no evidence that r.j. reynolds caused mr. wilcox to start smoking. no evidence that r.j. reynolds caused mr. wilcox to continue smoking instead of quitting. no evidence that r.j. reynolds caused mr. wilcox to change his smoking behavior. no evidence that reynolds withheld any information that would have affected his decision to start smoking. no evidence that r.j. reynolds withheld information that would have affected mr. wilcox's decision to continue smoking. mr. wilcox, in short, you have heard it earlier, did what he wanted to do. dr. proctor spent a lot of time talking about internal company documents of a variety of tobacco companies, from the tobacco institute, ctr, et cetera. he talked to you, showed you a bunch of cigarette advertising. but the fact of the matter is that there is absolutely zero evidence in this case that mr. wilcox saw any of these ads or heard anything about the ctr or tirc or even 5394 r.j. reynolds tobacco company. mr. gustafson talked today about the open debate campaign from r.j. reynolds in the '80s. there is no evidence in this case that mr. wilcox ever saw that. so let us talk about the very first thing that they showed you when they were talking about this conspiracy to conceal information. they talked about how it all started with the publication of the frank statement after that meeting at the plaza hotel. and they talked on and on about where that was published, et cetera, and how this was important advertisement that reynolds and other tobacco companies put out where they made various promises. and then the first thing i told you when i stood up in opening statement was, you know, that is interesting because mr. wilcox could not have seen it. and dr. proctor confirmed it. because he was not living in the united states at the time, and the only newspaper he had access to did not take advertising. no evidence connecting what they want to show you to mr. wilcox. and that is a perfect example. 5395 now, there is something to keep in mind about this conspiracy claim because it is important when we are assessing the facts in this case to remember that dr. proctor told you, in his opinion, this conspiracy began in 1953 at the plaza hotel. now, there is no claim that there was any conspiracy to withhold information or hide anything from any smokers, including mr. wilcox, before 1953. and that is important with regard to when mr. wilcox became a smoker. because you will note from the evidence in this case, no witness saw mr. wilcox smoke until 1945. no witness knows why mr. wilcox started to smoke. there is no evidence that mr. wilcox smoked r.j. reynolds cigarettes until he was 21 years old. and there is no evidence that mr. wilcox started smoking because of anything r.j. reynolds said or did. why do i bring this out? because if you get to questions 3 and 4 on the verdict form, anything that happened before 1953 or 1945 we do not have information about. we do not have any information about why mr. wilcox started to smoke, how much he smoked, or the brands of 5396 cigarettes he smoked. but what we do know about his smoking before 1945 is that two of plaintiff's witnesses, their addiction expert and mrs. wilcox, testified that in their opinion, he was addicted, and if he was addicted, he was addicted before 1945. during this period that we know nothing about what he was smoking, what brands he was smoking, how much he was smoking, but if he was addicted in their opinion, it was before 1945. so we are going to talk about advertising a little bit. and generic evidence about advertising has nothing to do with mr. wilcox. there is zero evidence that r.j. reynolds' advertising affected mr. wilcox's decisions to start smoking, continue smoking, the brand that he chose, or his quitting efforts. so let us talk about some of the specific ads that you saw. we are going to get to those later. but one of the things mentioned were filter and light cigarettes. do you remember dr. strauss said that no tobacco company ever said filtered and light cigarettes were safer or safe, that if 5397 mr. wilcox heard that, he heard that from the public health community, and that they base their recommendations on the time of scientific studies that showed that low-tar cigarettes were safer. and keep in mind, mr. wilcox smoked unfiltered camel cigarettes for 20 years after filters were released. so let us talk about the evidence about why mr. wilcox, specific to mr. wilcox, why he smoked filtered cigarettes and why he smoked low-tar cigarettes. first let us look at the filter ads that were shown to you. now, the ads that were introduced in evidence are all salem ads and r.j. reynolds ads, but this was shown to you with dr. proctor, some filter ads. now, you were shown the ads and you were talked to about how the ads made filters look safer. they talked about modern filter technology. you will recall that testimony by dr. proctor. but what is the evidence in this case about why mr. wilcox started smoking filters? joe wasilewski came in here and told you exactly why mr. wilcox started smoking filters. you recall the story. he sat there and he 5398 testified that nephew dave came down from chicago, and he was smoking kools, and he told mr. wilcox that kools were smoother and they were not as harsh as unfiltered camels and that the filter filtered out the nicotine. dave told mr. wilcox that, not advertising, dave told him that. he gave him one of his kool cigarettes. and mr. wilcox started smoking kools after that. that is the only evidence you have, ladies and gentlemen, as to why mr. wilcox started smoking filtered cigarettes. that is what is in this case specific to mr. wilcox. what about low-tar cigarettes? well, you will have all of them. all of the salem lights ads are in evidence. you can look at them if you want. but i will tell you what, i've looked through them, just like everybody else has looked through them. you were shown a bunch of them. but the theme of these ads are salem spirit, you have got what it takes. and i looked through them. see where in here, any of these ads, see where it says that they are safer because they are lower in tar or 5399 nicotine. look at them, because they do not say that. where was mr. wilcox getting that message? it was not from salem lights ads, it was from the public health community. (thereupon, the videoclip was played and transcribed as follows:) james earl jones: a few moments of silence for people who are still smoking. now, if you are still smoking, here is the next thing to think about. just how bad is your cigarette? it matters quite a lot. you see, bad as they all are, some are worse. there are 118 different kinds and brands of cigarettes. short ones, long ones, longer than longs, cotton filters, air filters, activated charcoal filters, and some with no filters at all. you can buy yourself all kinds of trouble with up to 31 milligrams of tar, up to 2.2 milligrams of nicotine. the least you can do, and goodness knows it is not much, is get a low tar and nicotine cigarette and cut down. you have got a tar and nicotine list. send for it. it is free. get to know your enemy before you strike a match. 5400 (thereupon, the video ended.) ms. henninger: proof that mr. wilcox was receiving this information from the public health community came from two witnesses that came into court and talked to you. that was his son michael and joe wasilewski. you remember both of them told similar stories how mr. wilcox would tell them, "i only smoke the cigarette halfway down. i do that because all of the bad stuff is in the other end of the cigarette." his son michael told him that and joe wasilewski told you that. well, where did he get that information? well, the public health community told him that. remember, these five ways to reduce the risks of smoking. if you smoke, this american cancer society brochure. talked about it with dr. proctor. we went through all five steps, i'm not going to do it here, but let us look at number one: "choose a cigarette with less tar and nicotine." and then number two: "surprise, do not smoke your cigarette all the way down. the most tar and nicotine is found in the last few puffs." 5401 sounds a lot like the message that mr. wilcox was telling joe wasilewski and his son michael, and it was a message coming from the public health community, not the tobacco companies. then we had diana huckstep, his niece, that came down here and said that uncle red heard that low-tar cigarettes were safer from something on the news. well, the question is, where did he learn that on the news? the tobacco companies were not advertising. it was after 1971 when salem cigarettes came out, salem lights. there were not any ads on tv. what was on the news that told him that low-tar cigarettes were safer? (thereupon, the videoclip was played and transcribed as follows:) narrator: a cancer expert said today that the new low-tar and low-nicotine cigarettes are safer than regular cigarettes, although people who smoke these cigarettes still have far higher death rates than people who do not smoke at all. this news comes at a time when americans are smoking more cigarettes, more 5402 than 600 billion of them last year. brian ross has more on the story. mr. brian ross: low-tar and nicotine cigarettes now account for 11 percent of all the cigarettes smoked in the country. as sales have grown, it is believed that such brands are less likely to cause lung cancer and heart disease. the american cancer society says today's report is the first solid proof that low tar and nicotine cigarettes are safer. dr. hammond: tar and nicotine is being further reduced. and it is far better that people do not smoke, but if they are going to smoke, as many people are just plainly going to do, then they are better off smoking the cigarettes with low-tar and nicotine than with higher-tar and nicotine. i'm hoping that people who never smoke anything but the low-tar and nicotine cigarettes, by the time they reach 40, 50, 60, that they will not have the death rate of cigarette smokers of my generation. mr. brian ross: the cancer society report is based on a 12-year study of tens of 5403 thousands of smokers. low-tar and nicotine cigarette users had a 26 percent less chance of lung cancer and a 14 percent less chance of heart disease than those who smoked high-tar and nicotine cigarettes. but the study also found that smokers of low-tar and nicotine cigarettes had a death rate much higher than those who do not smoke at all. brian ross, nbc -- (thereupon, the video ended.) ms. henninger: you remember that. that was dr. hammond, who was talking about an american cancer society study that showed that lower-tar cigarettes were safer, and it was publicized and it was on the news. that is the news that his niece talked about when he learned that low-tar cigarettes were safer. now, i want to end back at the chain that i showed about this fraudulent concealment. and i'm going to show you, again, just this board, and i apologize, if i put it up, hopefully you can still see the screen. and i'm not going to go through all this because i'm starting to have to talk fast, i'm running out of time a little bit. 5404 but you remember, i had mr. wilcox, lieutenant wilcox was on the stand, and i asked him, "as personal representative of your father's estate, you understand that you are bringing claims for fraudulent concealment and conspiracy to conceal, and i want to ask you, do you have any evidence of these things?" and he said no to each and every one of them. and because of that, ladies and gentlemen, the chain remains broken. they cannot connect the concealment or the conspiracy to conceal from the fraud to mr. wilcox's death. and if i may have the elmo, please. and for that reason, on question 3, i submit that you should answer no, and for question 4, the answer is no. now, i told you i would come back to question number 2, and that is what i'm going to right now is talk about comparative fault. if i can have the slides back. thank you. and the question on number 2 is the percentage of fault that you would assign mr. wilcox versus r.j. reynolds tobacco 5405 company. and i want to briefly point you to an instruction on page number 11 because it is very important. and what it says essentially is that the assignment of fault -- sorry. the assignment of fault relates only to actions that were a legal cause of mr. wilcox's death. and reynolds cannot be assigned fault for actions that were not a legal cause of mr. wilcox's death. so if there is some kind of evidence that does not connect to mr. wilcox and did not cause his death, reynolds cannot be at fault for it. the plaintiff has to prove to you each and every one of the percentage points that they want to assign r.j. reynolds in this case. you remember when we started, we do not start out at 50/50. we start out at zero. to get us above zero, they have to meet their burden of proving that to you, and they have not done it in this case for the reasons i'm going to talk about. now, mr. wilcox made a choice to start and continue to smoke and not to go more than 24 hours without stopping smoking. 5406 and -- oops, i went too fast, did not i? and he also, as the personal representative of his estate, lieutenant wilcox has admitted he has not tried hard enough or long enough to quit. and what does that mean? it means he chose to start smoking, he knew that smoking was dangerous, and he continued to smoke. we know he was not confused about smoking. he was responsible for his own quitting of smoking and he was able to quit earlier and he could have quit earlier. as dr. barrio said, had he quit four years after his heart attack, he could have prevented his cancer in his lung, if it was lung cancer. he could have prevented it. is there anything that is different about mr. wilcox than the 60 million other americans who quit smoking? the answer is no with the exception of the bottom one. mr. wilcox smoked for over 50 years without making a serious effort to quit. that is the difference between him and the 60 million americans who did quit. and you will recall lieutenant wilcox's testimony. before 1992, your father never went for more than a day without smoking in any 5407 effort to quit? and he said, yeah, that is right. now, all these quit attempts that the plaintiffs talk about, the chewing of the gum or the cutting down of cigarettes, he continued to smoke. he never went 24 hours without smoking a cigarette. and as mr. bayuk talked to you about earlier, to be a serious quit attempt, you have to try to quit smoking, you have to put the cigarettes down, and you have to do so for more than 24 hours. the fact of the matter is that mr. wilcox did not do that until 1992, and when he did it in 1992, he quit smoking. so again, on page number 11, a very important instruction. plaintiff has the burden to prove each and every percentage point of r.j. reynolds' fault. mr. sales: excuse me, your honor. that is not in the instructions. i object. "each and every percentage point," the part highlighted. ms. henninger: let me read to you what is in the instructions -- the court: overruled. ms. henninger: -- to be clear. 5408 so again, mr. barnhart and mr. gustafson have some differences of opinion as to how much fault they want to assign reynolds, be it ninety percent or 95 percent, but they have the burden of proving each and every one of them to you. so they have not met their burden to you of proving one because the fact is, mr. wilcox knew the dangers and he did not quit. and i tried to prepare a little animation. i'm going to apologize right now because i'm going to have to talk really fast to get through it, but this is why we say that mr. wilcox was a hundred percent responsible. first, he could have quit and prevented his own death. plaintiff admits that mr. wilcox could have tried harder and longer to quit. mr. wilcox did not try to quit in 1947 when mrs. wilcox quit. also, in 1964 with the surgeon general's report, they discussed it, he did not try to quit. same with 1965 when mrs. wilcox quit. 1966, the pack warnings, they talked about 5409 it. he did not try to make any effort to quit. mr. wilcox did not try to quit after his heart attack in 1974. his wife warned him, also his doctors warned him. his wife warned him. no attempts to quit smoking. he did not stop smoking when he went to hypnosis. he did not stop smoking when he used the aqua filter. he did not stop smoking when he was smoking half a cigarette. that is kind of obvious because he is still smoking. and he did not stop smoking when he was using the nicotine gum. mr. wilcox stopped using the nicotine gum even though he was cutting back on the amount he was smoking while he was chewing it, and he never tried to quit between the time he used the gum in the '80s and when he put the patch on in 1992. he did not stay quit after he could not smoke while he was hospitalized either for his heart attack or the abdominal surgery. and he never threw out his ashtrays. he ignored and rejected doctors who told him to quit. he never went to a stop-smoking clinic. 5410 he never stopped smoking for even a day before 1992, and he never made a serious attempt to quit before 1992 because he never went 24 hours. and i'm going to briefly say that harry reasoner, you heard this earlier -- (thereupon, the videoclip was played and transcribed as follows:) harry reasoner: it comes down to you whether you like it or not. no one is going to forbid an adult to smoke, and it is now quite clear that no one is going to tell him it is good for him either. the decision is his, the decision and health that may depend on it. this is harry reasoner. good night. (thereupon, the video ended.) ms. henninger: okay. so mr. wilcox's choices were the only legal cause of his death. nothing reynolds could have done could have prevented his death. he was the one who had the ability to quit, and he was a hundred percent responsible for the choices he made. if i can have the elmo, please. and for that reason, we submit that one hundred percent of fault belongs to mr. wilcox and 5411 0 percent of fault belongs to r.j. reynolds. again, there is an instruction right here. if you put a 0 there, you do not have to go any further. but then we are going to talk about two more questions on here as fast as i can. and the next one is question number 5, and that is damages. i'm sorry, can i have the slides? i'm sorry. thank you. question number 5 is damages. there is one thing defense lawyer does not like to do is have to get this far down the verdict form where they are talking about damages, but i'm going to talk about them just because i have to cover everything, as i told you. and what i'm going to tell you is look at the instructions you have on this. the damages on page 23 of the instructions say damages must be fair and just in light of the evidence. you are to consider on this same instruction, it talks about the joint life expectancy of mr. and mrs. wilcox. and there are mortality tables that were introduced into evidence by the plaintiff on that. 5412 the instructions also talk about sympathy. we talked about this, you will remember, in voir dire, when we were asking questions as to whether or not people could put sympathy aside in reaching a verdict in this case. there is no doubt that mrs. wilcox, who is a 90-year-old widow, i had the opportunity to speak with her when she was on the stand, a very nice lady. my heart goes out to her. you felt sympathy. that is understood. but you have to remember an instruction on page 37, that the law tells you to put your sympathy aside. it is naturally legal to have it, but that is not a reason to base damages. damages must be based on the instructions that judge lindsey gives you. and let us talk about what the damages are in this case. just to make clear, plaintiff is not seeking damages for any economic loss like lost wages or financial support, no medical expenses, funeral expenses. and these three things are incredibly important. mr. cleston wilcox's pain and suffering are not part of the damages. 5413 lieutenant wilcox's pain and suffering are not part of the damages. michael wilcox's pain and suffering are not part of the damages. the only damages you are being asked to assess are the damages of mrs. lorraine wilcox for her loss of companionship and protection and for her pain and suffering. and plaintiff has the burden to prove the damages to you. they have the burden of proof to prove why they are asking for $10 million. now, no one is questioning that this is a nice family. that is not the issue. the question is whether or not plaintiff has proven to you that they deserve $10 million. have they shown you anything to support their claim for $10 million for these injuries? so the last question on the verdict form is punitive damages. entitlement to punitive damages. now, page 27 of your instructions talks about there is a different standard, different burden of proof on punitive damages. it is not -- it is clear and convincing evidence. this is different than the greater weight of the evidence that judge lindsey instructed you on earlier in the case. 5414 punitive damages must be found by clear and convincing evidence. that means that the evidence must be more compelling and persuasive. the evidence that is precise, explicit, lacking in confusion and of such weight that it produces a firm belief or conviction, without hesitation, of the matter. that is the burden of proof to answer question number 6 yes. and we have tried to demonstrate this because the burden of proof for all the other issues is the greater weight of the evidence. that is when plaintiffs were talking about weighing the scales and getting to 51 percent. but clear and convincing evidence is a very different burden, and it is outlined in the instructions that i just read to you and judge lindsey read to you. punitive damages can be awarded only for any conduct that was a legal cause of mr. wilcox's death. punitive damages can be awarded only to the plaintiff, mrs. wilcox. and they are in addition to damages that fully compensate her for whatever loss you would determine she had. important. these are in your 5415 instructions. the engle findings may not be considered in any way -- in any way in determining whether punitive damages may be warranted. the engle findings do not establish that plaintiff is entitled to punitive damages. that is on page 10 of your instructions. and then i'm going to go quickly through this. there is some question as to whether or not r.j. reynolds should be punished. you heard a lot about council for tobacco research. dr. proctor talked about how it was distraction research, and that they were actually members of the conspiracy. but keep in mind, there were actually $350 million awarded in research grants that ended up with 7,000 publications, that 600 articles were cited by the surgeon general's reports, ten nobel prize winners had funding from ctr, universities all over the country, including right here in florida, had funding. they funded all four lines of evidence. remember dr. proctor called them the causation lines of evidence or the stools of causation, and they were published in highly respected journals, sometimes published with 5416 funding with the national cancer institute or the american cancer society. so ctr had some valid, very valid contributions to the scientific knowledge and data regarding the dangers of smoking. now, another thing you heard a lot about is how the tobacco companies went out of their way to try to say the surgeon general's wrong or dead wrong and tried to downplay the report. but you heard dr. proctor talk specifically about r.j. reynolds tobacco company and a scientist named dr. rodgman who was a chemist. dr. rodgman did a lot of work before the 1964 surgeon general's report where he found various carcinogens in tobacco smoke, and he turned that over to the surgeon general, and it was in the 1964 surgeon general's report. and dr. proctor said that it is true that the surgeon general's committee in 1964 identified the carcinogens in cigarette smoke, in part, through the work of dr. rodgman, who was an employee of r.j. reynolds tobacco company. now, i wanted to show you, there is two 5417 instructions that are very important here, page 26 and 30. it basically says that you may not impose punitive damages on reynolds for the basis of plaintiff's claims for strict liability or negligence. so what does that mean? it means that punitive damages, if warranted, must be based on the conduct that constituted fraudulent concealment or an agreement to fraudulently conceal. so designing cigarettes is not a basis for punitive damages. negligence is not a basis for punitive damages. it is only if you find the concealment or the agreement to conceal that would lead to punitive damages when you get to question 6. so let us look at some of this. you have heard this from mr. bayuk. r.j. reynolds did not make cigarettes inhalable. they did not make them more addictive. and the fact of the matter is that punitive damages cannot be awarded for cigarette design. cigarettes, dr. proctor told you, from the 1800s were just as dangerous. cigarettes in the 1800s were just as dangerous and addictive 5418 as the cigarettes mr. wilcox smoked. we did not invent inhalability. we did not invent flue-curing. same with these additives. they did not make them more addictive. dr. proctor told you that they do not make them more dangerous. that includes ammonia, that includes levulinic acid, all of the things that have been talked about. there is no proof that they made cigarettes any more dangerous or addictive. mr. wilcox's cigarettes were no more dangerous or addictive than cigarettes in the 1800s, according to dr. proctor, plaintiff's expert. so keep in mind, punitive damages cannot be awarded for cigarette design, such as strict liability or negligence. so, let us go to another jury instruction on page 31. in determining whether punitive damages may be awarded -- or may be warranted, you should also take into consideration any mitigating evidence. mitigating evidence is evidence that may demonstrate that there is no need to impose punitive damages. well, there is one piece of mitigating 5419 evidence that you did hear from dr. proctor. remember he said it would be great if cigarette companies, tobacco companies would try to make a less mutagenetic cigarette, a cigarette that did not cause -- or have as many carcinogens in it as other cigarettes. then you also heard him talk about premier and how r.j. reynolds spent billions of dollars trying to make cigarettes safer. since the 1950s, they have worked to reduce the levels of carcinogens in cigarettes. they actually succeeded in reducing the levels of carcinogens in cigarettes. and that the reynolds scientists genuinely believed that low-tar and filtered cigarettes reduced risks, and they spent millions and hundreds of millions of dollars on this technology called premier. it was a cigarette that heated, not burned, tobacco. they spent a lot of money doing it. you heard about how it was released in the 1980s, and i think dr. proctor said it tasted like dead fish. do you remember that cigarette, the dead fish cigarette? and he told you how it was a big flop. it was a big 5420 flop even though it was less carcinogenic. they tried. they did not give up. so, ask yourself if punitive damages are warranted in this case, and the answer is that they are not. reynolds has worked for decades and spent billions of dollars trying to make cigarettes safer. cigarettes have carried warning labels since 1966. and punitive damages are not needed to prevent r.j. reynolds from concealing the dangers of smoking. the dangers of smoking are known. mr. wilcox knew them. and r.j. reynolds now admits everything. there is no need for punitive damages. mr. sales: objection, your honor, there is no evidence of anything that happened after 1994. the court: sustained. mr. sales: move to strike. the court: granted. ms. henninger: ask yourself, would punitive damages -- what would they do? what would a verdict for mr. wilcox or his estate do in this case? would they make smokers aware of anything that they are not already aware of? 5421 would they make cigarettes safer? would they have any impact on whether people chose to smoke? would they decrease the number of people who smoke cigarettes? would they ban the sale or manufacture of cigarettes? and would they improve public health? the answer is no to all of those questions. last jury instruction i want to show you is an instruction on page 28. and i just fibbed, because that is not the last one. but it is that in determining whether punitive damages are warranted, you may not seek to punish r.j. reynolds tobacco company for any harm suffered by any individuals other than mr. wilcox. that is instruction on page 28 of your instructions. one more instruction on page 26 i wanted to show you, and that is the instruction regarding punitive damages. if you find that punitive damages are warranted, you will proceed to a second part of that issue, during which the parties may present additional evidence and argument on the issue of punitive damages. now, there is more to come if you answer 5422 number 6 with a yes. but for the reasons i submitted, the answer to number 6 is no. if i may please have the elmo. "please state below whether you find by clear and convincing evidence that punitive damages are warranted against r.j. reynolds tobacco company under the circumstances of this case." the answer to that, ladies and gentlemen, is no. now, i want to end by summarizing some of -- can i have the thing back? i'm sorry. i did not give you any warning. (thereupon, the videoclip was played and transcribed as follows:) dr. hammond: it is now established, in my opinion, beyond a reasonable doubt, that cigarette smoking greatly increases the probability of developing lung cancer. in my opinion, people should be warned of the dangers, and they are being warned. what they then want to do, whether they wish to smoke or not, is their own business. (thereupon, the video ended.) ms. henninger: that was the words of 5423 dr. hammond in 1955, and these are the words people used to describe mr. wilcox. mind your own business and do not ever question me again, he did what he wanted to do, he made his choices about what he wanted to do, things were done his way, and he lived his life the way he wanted to live. and, importantly, he did not want to have anybody tell him he should not smoke. ladies and gentlemen, again, i have, apparently, a second left to thank you for the last time. thank you very much for your attention and your patience and for your deliberations later this afternoon. thank you.