closing argument mr. sales: my partners left me 39 minutes to speak to you. i do not have enough time to 5425 tell you everything that i want to tell you. i am going to say thank you. i'm going to do it a lot shorter than they did because of that. i want to begin by suggesting to you that you know, now, that when a case like this is tried, and that -- when a party puts up on a screen from a document, it may be hundreds or thousands of pages, you have seen, because there is been a lot of it, the party selects what the party wants to show from that document in evidence. an advantage that you have as you fulfill the obligation there above her honor, judge lindsey, we, who labor here, seek only truth, to find out the truth in this case. does the truth reside in the yellow highlighted sections of slides just shown to you? does the truth reside in snips from depositions, from pieces of trial testimony? is that where the truth resides? or does the truth reside in the entirety of the evidence in this case? and we would urge you on behalf of mrs. wilcox, on behalf of the lieutenant wilcox, to think about it that way. and i want to just start -- my arguments 5426 are going to hopefully, if i have time, generally track the arguments that have been made by everybody else about the verdict form and the issues that you are going to decide. but i want to begin by focusing on what i just talked about, because it will not come as a surprise to you that i'm going to urge you to view many of the arguments you heard today with a very skeptical eye. and why am i holding the canasta pajamas? because it just has sort of become an icon for the case and we joke about it. because if this is what we are talking about, does all of the information that you need to know about this case reside in the pictures, the people standing in laboratories showing the work that they have done, showing tumors on the backs of mice? because in the way in which this case is argued to you by the defense -- and it is not only this document, it is not only this document -- the defense would have you believe that a very well-read apparently, very knowledgeable, very sophisticated red wilcox sees this, he sees this, but that he does not 5427 actually read the article. and so if red wilcox were to have read the canasta pajamas article, and by the way, if he were to look through the entirety of the magazine, he would have seen that. it is almost christmastime. advertisements for lucky strikes. on the back, more cigarette ads. in their view, he does not see those things. why is that important? because you know, and it is unrebutted in the case, that over the history of his lifetime, based on the unrebutted evidence, we have economic measures of the power of this defendant's message versus the power of the public health message. the message that they say he was hearing. that is only his message that he heard. but you know what? if this same red wilcox were to be reading, not just looking at pictures, what would he have read? "the american tobacco company hastens to point out that tests on mice do not prove that tobacco can cause lung cancer in man." they got their message out. counsel said, you know, that none of this starts until the conspiracy starts and after christmas -- or i 5428 guess it is new year's eve in 1953. these messages -- you know the american tobacco company, that is the predecessor, they are responsible for american tobacco company. before this got started, before that meeting at the plaza hotel, they were conducting their own experiments. it is true they were blowing the smoke on the mice instead of painting the tar on their backs, and they were conducting those experiments in conjunction with the paper company. they knew already. they did not need a life magazine. they did not need publications. they did not need doll and wynder. they knew. but in the view of the evidence that is been suggested to you by the defense, we only see what the defense says that mr. wilcox would have seen. and, you know, i've been carrying this thing around the whole trial. and i just been trying to figure out a time to tell you about it and trying to put -- it would be impossible to show you everything in this document. i think it was admitted when you all were here, 5429 it is pt2555. and it is a collection of some of the press releases that were made by american tobacco, by the ctr, the tirc, and many, many of them from the tobacco institute for decades, for decades. you have heard that in one day, the public -- the tobacco industry had more economic power to put out their message that they wanted smokers to hear, addicted people vulnerable to a message, that it is okay to keep smoking and if it is not okay to keep smoking, switch to a product that is healthier for you. they did that for years and years. if you have a chance, take a look at what is in these documents. you have seen -- you have seen the microscopes in front of -- dr. proctor says maybe some of them are fake. but over time, you know from the news articles -- pt5504 says on it pt2555. the technician: look in the middle. mr. sales: pt5504. excuse me. that is the compilation of those press releases. and what you will find if you look at them is a drumbeat consistently for a period of decades of the same thing over and over and 5430 over again. now, counsel would suggest to you, well, you know, that message -- nobody was really listening. is that possible? and i do not know if you remember this, but do you remember during the cross-examination of dr. proctor that they showed one of these stars and stripes articles? we got up on redirect. well, wait a minute. wait a minute. even in the stars and stripes, the tobacco institute, if it is true that mr. wilcox read this newspaper, they were getting the same time, same air time, the same print time as anybody else who was talking about it. that is the power of their message. dr. proctor told you, it is unrebutted, unchallenged in this record that the message of the tobacco industry was carried consistently in newspapers around the country and also in stars and stripes. so, the suggestion that they were not getting heard and that the only messages out there were messages that nobody -- nobody would pay any attention to, you know, let us talk about the way that case has actually been tried 5431 by the defense. because this is what mr. bayuk said. cigarettes were dangerous and addictive before r.j. reynolds ever came around. okay? so the question that i ask you to ask when you go and deliberate is, why did you lie about it for 62 years, the entire period of time. it started with 1932, that is when mr. wilcox smoked. they are telling you that mr. wilcox, an eight-year-old boy, growing up where he grew up, the way he grew up, knew at least as much about these same hazards as r.j. reynolds tobacco company, its laboratory science, its officers, its directors? that is the defense of this case. well, what else do we know? talking about coming around. now's the time that it is time to come around. because as of 1994, you know that r.j. reynolds tobacco company still had not come around. and both lawyers for this defendant have told you there is not a question on this verdict form that asks you to evaluate the conduct of r.j. reynolds tobacco company. they are wrong. that is the last question. are all of the things that they have done, 5432 is the marketing of cigarettes to children, is the purposefully concealing the information that you know about the things that you are trying to do to cigarettes, hiding it from the public while you are simultaneously telling the public you do not sell a drug, we are going to talk about that. that makes a difference. that is wrong. and it meets, just as mr. gustafson suggested, every one of those four criteria for the imposition of punitive damages. now, just to show you, just to show you the way that this case is being argued to you, i want you to think about something else. counsel was up here a few moments ago and dinged mr. wilcox for trying to use the aqua filter. remember that? suggested that he is at fault because he did not quit when he used the aqua filter. there are two documents in evidence that you have not yet seen. one of them is a memo from a.w. spears to stevens and judge at the lorillard tobacco company. there is one for r.j. reynolds coming in just a minute. and what do we know from them? 5433 they were just as interested in the aqua filter as mr. wilcox. and it is true that they did not make it, judge lindsey told you that. it is true they did not make it, but they studied it. and counsel in this case is asking you to find fault with mr. wilcox because he went out and bought this thing that was advertised on the tonight show, the today show, the phil donahue show, it was featured as an item on the price is right. we showed you that. maybe too much of that. and what do we know from a co-conspirator? "based on the structure of the aqua filter, we considered the claim theoretically impossible." it is important for two reasons. one is because it is just not fair to suggest that somebody who goes out and buys this product is doing something wrong because they do not come off of cigarettes when these defendants -- this defendant knew it does not work. why do i say r.j. reynolds tobacco company? pt13031. in the ultimate irony of ironies, irony of ironies, in this case, you 5434 have before you evidence that reflects -- could not make this up -- that r.j. reynolds tobacco company tested the aqua filter on camel and salem cigarettes. what did they find out? well, what they found out was just what lorillard tobacco company, its co-conspirator, found out. does not work. does not do any good at all. and why is the other reason that this document is important? i want to suggest to you that it is also important for another reason. and that is that this is part of a consistent pattern and trend when it came to the issue of light cigarettes and filtered cigarettes that begins back in 1953. 1953. do you remember that? 1953, that was when claude teague -- the document is called, disclosure of invention -- said, you know, seems to me like people attach significance to whether or not the filter turns brown. and so we ought to come up with a way to make that filter tip turn brown. knowing full well that it was not doing anything. counsel suggested it is not relevant to show that just three years later that when 5435 testing camel cigarettes against, at that time, reynolds' flagship filtered cigarettes, new on the market, winston, that they determined that two and a half times an important carcinogen come out of the smoke in the filtered cigarette. two and a half times. it is undisputed, it is unrebutted, that they never told the public that, ever. mr. gustafson showed you the document from the co-conspirator, philip morris. it is unrebutted, they never told -- the industry never told the public that filters are a mere illusion. and what do you know from dr. proctor? because you were just told that dr. proctor agrees with the defense that this whole issue is insignificant and does not matter. it matters in a very important and significant way. and dr. proctor explained that to you. from 1953 until the time of mr. wilcox's death, by that time, cigarette consumers had migrated almost exclusively from nonfiltered products to almost exclusively to filtered products. and you know, now, because the industry 5436 internal documents, including those of brown & williamson, there was a memo from mr. pepples, you might remember that, we showed it, they acknowledge there is no reduction in the things that are hurting people at that time. now, dr. proctor told you, yes, the public health community was saying otherwise. but as you now know from the evidence, there is no, no evidence whatsoever, that this defendant or any of its co-conspirators ever revealed to the public health community that light and filtered cigarettes do not make a difference. they do not. counsel herself repeated several times during this trial an acknowledgment by r.j. reynolds tobacco company that there is no such thing as a safe cigarette. think about it this way, if you would, please. you know, none of us has training in epidemiology, none of us is a specialist in any of these areas, and we have to rely on the skilled witnesses that come in and the documents that teach us about these things. but sometimes, sometimes -- and there is an instruction on this. i think counsel for 5437 r.j. reynolds went over it. sometimes you just have to use your common sense. and think back -- baron, do you have the consumption curve and the death curve? think back to where we started in the case. you know, the idea in this country that there was a controversy about whether or not cigarettes caused harm first and whether or not they were addictive, those are the two elements of the conspiracy. so you get all those instructions that counsel went over in the end, that is what we are talking about. that is what hurt people. that is what killed the other people that one of the instructions that her honor judge lindsey read to you, you are allowed to consider. but use your common sense. you know about the increase in the filtered and light products over time. they come to essentially erase unfiltered products. but what happens? even if you take into consideration what some witnesses have referred to as the latency period, incubation period between the time people smoke and the time they get disease, even after, even after cigarette consumption 5438 starts to taper off and go down, the rate of male lung cancer death in this country continued through the date of mr. wilcox's death. just then, just then, it was rising and starting to level off. so how can it be? how can it be that filtered cigarettes are better for you? these facts do not lie. and it is true, as dr. proctor explained, that the robots, the smoking machines that were used to study these things, which he told you -- nobody's mentioned this yet today -- were actually designed by the cigarette companies to measure tar and nicotine yields. what do we know? we know from the industry's documents, they do not smoke like people do. because people, you now know, if you did not before, smoke for one reason: they smoke to get nicotine contained in cigarettes. that is the fundamental reason that people smoke. that is the fundamental reason that red wilcox smoked cigarettes. so let us talk a little bit about addiction. you have been told that the greater 5439 weight of the evidence in the case is the more persuasive and convincing force of the evidence. can you put that up? and on the question of addiction, there is some things that are unrebutted. counsel for r.j. reynolds, mr. bayuk, made a big deal about whether things come up in cross or direct examination. but the evidence is what it is. there is unrebutted evidence that mr. wilcox met the fagerstrom test for nicotine dependence, was medium to highly addicted, depending on how that was scored. and he gave you a range. that he met the test for dependence in the heaviness of smoking index. that he met the test for nicotine dependence, the test that he uses for the state of florida to evaluate whether or not people, doctors, lawyers, respectfully, judges have problems with substances under the dsm-iv-tr. dependent, that means addicted. there is no dispute about that. and he did, he did actually evaluate mr. wilcox according to the dsm-5. he found severe addiction. and their answer to that is 5440 rely on the testimony of dr. abramson. i'm not going to repeat. counsel's described for you what the believability standard is, the standard that you are to apply in whether or not you should consider that testimony. and i urge you with respect to that witness to reject it in its entirety because it is unreliable and not worthy of belief, for reasons that you all know. what else went unrebutted and, in fact, was confirmed by the testimony of dr. abramson? that this is not is a disease about ashtrays and lighters and where you put them in your cabinet or how many times you put your cigarettes in the trash can. it is a brain disease. and the defense wants to, as dr. abramson says -- i mean, you have to be a poster child for perfect cessation efforts, one hundred percent of the time, your whole life, or be mentally retarded or have an organic brain deficit, and if you are not one of those things, you are not addicted, according to him. they know that because he is testified before, before they hired him. they know that before they hired him. if you believe his testimony, no 5441 plaintiff can win one of those cases. it does not matter whether he says they are addicted or not, which he says he is done in a case he cannot remember, because according to dr. abramson, addiction does not cause disease unless you are the poster child, the poster man for cessation. that is not worthy of belief. what do we know? it is unrebutted that this is a disease of the brain. counsel poked fun at that a little bit, but it is unrebutted what nicotine does to your brain. i'm not going to repeat all of that. it changes the way that your brain operates. why do people go through withdrawal? why do they go through withdrawal? why do people say cigarettes make them feel better? they say it because when they do not have nicotine, their brain is not normal anymore. it is hijacked. it is been hijacked by the nicotine. and that is what happened to red wilcox. do you have any dispute about it? because one of the things that dr. abramson said -- you may remember this -- he says fifty percent of the people are addicted. you know from dr. herkov the figure is much higher. but he also says 5442 fifty percent of the people have withdrawal. from that same fifty percent of the population, it would be very important for a witness who never wants to see an addicted smoker, never wants to find someone who is truly addicted, to say that they do not have withdrawal. but you know from dr. caruso's notes, you know from the nurse's note that he was addicted, because he describes -- dr. caruso describes a period of agitation in the hospital when this man does not have nicotine. and you know -- and this is extraordinary, this is absolutely extraordinary -- that after mr. wilcox had a lung removed from his chest, he is described in the hospital where people are controlling his breathing, his blood work, his oxygenation, everything about him, making observations of him in the icu 24/7, and what are they doing? they are giving him a habitrol patch. i do not want to say too much more about that. but ask yourselves if there was ever a case where someone who needed nicotine replacement just to be a hospital patient, that 5443 we could reasonably say was not addicted to nicotine. and the clincher? i wrote this down when mrs. wilcox said it. she was being cross-examined by ms. henninger, and they were talking about the patch. and ms. henninger brought out ms. wilcox said, that was something you wanted to do for a long time, and you finally got your wish. and her answer? it says lot about her and a lot about the way she felt about her husband. but it also says something about addiction. what she said was: yes, and i knew that he was being satisfied with the patch on. that is when red wilcox had relief from his addiction, when he had another form of nicotine that was applied to his skin, that allowed his brain to receive the drug that it had required for so many years. let us talk a little bit about lung cancer. i'm not going to talk about pathology, i'm not going to talk about slides, i'm not going to talk about op notes, i'm not going to talk about any of that. i'm going to ask you to use your common sense and repeat to you a few 5444 things that the evidence is unrebutted about, unchallenged about, maybe even agreed to about in this case. 88 to ninety percent of lung cancer is caused by smoking. no dispute. everybody agrees that red wilcox smoked long enough and hard enough to get lung cancer. his doctors, at least some of them, thought he had lung cancer. mr. gustafson explained that. importantly, the dominant lesion was in the lungs. in this case we do not have to look very far to find other cancer because there was never any cancer found anywhere. and whatever those path reports say, whatever it says about where the cancer spread, the only evidence that there was any disease in his body was in his lungs. the only place that it spread, if it spread anywhere, was from the lung to the lung. and you know that the tests on every other part of his body were negative. and they tried to ding that by telling you, well, you know, in 1993, '94, technology really was not so good, and those ct scanners that they had down at baptist hospital, you ought to just forget about that. but you have 5445 got to use your common sense. and by the way, mr. bayuk says on the one hand that we call too many witnesses, so many such that we have burdened you and wasted your time, but then he also says that we should have emptied the pathology department at baptist hospital to bring everybody down here to repeat to you what is in the records himself. the clerk: fifteen minutes, counsel. mr. sales: you know that it is lung cancer. but we also have this, this. we have somebody who has been heard from in this case through mrs. wilcox, and the defense did everything it could to bring this out to you, because they are so determined to suggest to you that mr. wilcox had all the warnings that he needed that he could not possibly have been affected by what they did. and that was -- this is a slide from mr. bayuk's closing. mr. wilcox's brother died of lung cancer in 1992. now, they are not saying it is cancer of the unknown primary. they do not have any medical records for that. he was a heavy smoker with a long smoking history. and he died of lung cancer. 5446 and what do we know from the undisputed evidence in this case, it came from dr. bennett, and that is that, people can have in families, because of genetics, a similar response to similar stimuli. so we have a witness who did not come and testify live. we have a witness that apparently is unrebutted, raised only by the defense in this case that mr. wilcox's brother died of lung cancer. and if it had ever been any suggestion that it was something else, you would have heard about that. but you did not. and it just makes sense. two boys, two men, same parents, same smoking, same disease, same death. brooks. could be lung cancer -- that is their witness -- cannot say. bennett. cannot be lung cancer, but i do not know what it is. that is their case. and when you go to assess the greater weight of the evidence, consider those things. and consider the fact, as mr. gustafson testified, excuse me, argued to you just a little while ago, that dr. bennett himself, 5447 picked by the defense, until 1998, as of 1998, would still not acknowledge that cigarettes caused lung cancer. that is bias. it is bias because of the position and the special relationship that he occupies with this defendant and the other tobacco companies. and you should consider that as well. let us talk about comparative negligence. can you show this? do not put it up, it is all right. the defense wants to suggest to you because there were other medical events involved, because the surgery resulted in complications, that it cannot be a cause -- that the smoking and addiction cannot be a cause of mr. wilcox's death. you know better. most respectfully, you know better. you know that smoking leads to addiction, you know that mr. wilcox was addicted, you know that addicted smokers smoke, and you know now that he had lung cancer. and everything, the cascade of events that occurred following his admission to the hospital, for treatment of that lung cancer, all of those things led in a direct and natural and 5448 continuous sequence to his death. let us talk a little bit about comparative negligence. mr. wilcox did what everybody in his generation did. he smoked. he smoked a little earlier, but he smoked, as a child. not as a teenager, but like his generation, he smoked as a child. a little bit older, teenager. we know that he tried to quit. and they want to ding him because's on the downslope of that curve, when many in his generation were trying to quit cigarettes. you know, you have heard from the evidence the suggestion that these quit attempts were not real. that is just not a fair view of the evidence. there were repeated efforts to quit smoking in this case, and the testimony suggests, fairly, when the age and the memories of the people involved who testified, fairly, when that evidence is considered, you know that mr. wilcox first made his first quit attempt in 1974, and he quit for about two weeks. what else do you know? you know that mr. wilcox did what everybody of his generation did. but when you are asked to weigh the fault 5449 of one party versus another, mr. wilcox did not do anything that was unreasonably dangerous. he used the products of this defendant and smoked them exactly the way that they wanted him to. those products, if you find that mr. wilcox was a class member, were unreasonably dangerous. so where is their evidence when you compare those two things, that mr. wilcox behaved in an unreasonably dangerous way? unreasonably dangerous. they wanted to get him as a kid. they did. they wanted him to smoke. he did. they wanted him to switch to lights, and they can say it is not their fault, but what were they selling those cigarettes for? he did. and he believed what was being said about those cigarettes, so much so, and this is extraordinary, he dissected the cigarettes in order to prove a point, that he was making a healthier choice for himself and his family. so when you consider those things, when you consider whether or not he acted reasonably, you have other information at your disposal. you have the ftc reports from 1967 5450 and 1981. those are those ones that have been redacted in parts. but they tell you the way that people responded to the warning labels. they tell you the way that people responded to advertising. they tell you the incredible number of people in this country who were susceptible to the controversy, the controversy that never really was. millions of people in this country did exactly what red wilcox did. and that is why mr. barnhart and mr. gustafson say, and i agree, that he merits very little responsibility. he never did anything that was unreasonably dangerous, never. they did. and think about that when you fill in those percentages. let us talk a little bit about fraud by concealment. i agree ... can you show this? how much time do i have, please? the clerk: you have nine minutes. mr. sales: i'm sorry? the clerk: nine minutes. mr. sales: nine minutes. i'm not going to show you all the instructions on the fraud claims. we have 5451 finished now dealing with the claims that require that you do those assessments of faults. this instruction is the one that applies to the claims for fraud by concealment and conspiracy to commit fraud by concealment. and the question is whether or not there was concealment, whether there was concealment of material information which was relied upon. it is an awkward phrasing, but that is the phrasing that we have from the engle decision. and i want to suggest to you that when you think about it this way and think about what would have been important to red wilcox, ask yourself this. and counsel says something quite strange. they say, he did not rely on any of our secret documents. well, that is true, because they were secret. but imagine if you would for a moment, turn the clock back and think about red wilcox, straight-laced, pilot, follow the rules, mechanic, raise them up right, decent, honest man, and ask yourselves whether or not in the life of that man, it would have made a difference to know, if it would have made a 5452 difference to know that r.j. reynolds tobacco company, from its own secret files, withheld from him information that it was no more than the seller of a pharmaceutical, that is their words. ask yourselves if it would have made any difference to him to know at the same time that they were denying publicly that nicotine was addictive and continued to do so even after his death in 1994, that they were experimenting on laboratory rats in order to make those cigarettes more addictive. what kind of power would that provide to a straight-arrow decent man who is trying to figure out why he has trouble quitting cigarettes? what difference would it make to know, if they had told him and the public, which you now know they never did, that we are adding diammonium phosphate and ammonium hydroxide to our products for a very specific reason. because we have seen in the sales trends of other brands of cigarettes that there is a correlation between the amount of ammonia and the kick of the nicotine and the sales. the clerk: five minutes, counsel.