mr. cofer: may it please the court, counsel, mr. willis, members of the jury, good morning. almost three weeks ago, i stood in front of you and i gave you my opening statement. and you may remember that i asked you that as you listened to the evidence of the case the last few weeks, could you please ask yourself: what does any of this have to do with jimmie willis? it is mr. willis' lawsuit, and he is the person who is asking you for money in this case. so as we walk through the evidence, ask yourself what did it have to do with mr. willis? did it affect him in any way? now, mr. uiterwyk predicted, because he saw it, that i told you i think this case really comes down to three questions, and i do, and i ask you to think about those questions. why did jimmie willis smoke? why did he wait so long to quit? and what, if anything, did philip morris or r.j. reynolds have to do with mr. willis getting sick? i want to walk through that evidence and i want to talk about it. and let us start with the first question: why did jimmie willis smoke? why did he smoke? did he like cigarettes? did they give him pleasure? did he? or did he really truly detest cigarettes and only smoke because he was just so helplessly addicted that he could not control himself. was that the evidence? did mr. willis understand that his smoking could cause him to get sick? did he understand that? or was he in the dark about the risks of smoking? did philip morris and r.j. reynolds fool him in some way? did we keep him in the dark about the risks of smoking? was he waiting for a wake-up call from one of these two companies that never came? was that the evidence? why did he wait so long to quit? it is undisputed in 1993 after his surgery for laryngeal cancer, he never smoked another cigarette. well, that is not a surprise. he had a stoma. it would have been very difficult to smoke, and i'm sure every day when he looked in the mirror and he saw what his smoking caused, i'm sure he did not want a cigarette. of course he did not. but you know what is important is mr. willis testified that after that surgery, he never desired a cigarette, he never craved nicotine, or had any withdrawal symptoms ever again. and i do not mean he did not just crave them those nine days he was in the hospital. he testified that he never craved nicotine unhappy to come back tomorrow morning and be told at 8:35 he is the alternate, go home. mr. cofer: i think he is going to be kicking his heels, doing cartsprings down the hall, sliding down the banister, running out screaming, i'm free. mr. uiterwyk: that is three times i agree with him. mr. cofer: i'm stopping because obviously i'm not thinking clearly.