mr. jack williams: ladies and gentlemen, you know my name is jack williams and i 2871 represent rj reynolds tobacco company along with my partner dal burton. and i want to start off thanking you as well for your attention this week, for your time this week and you really paid attention to us with all the breaks and everything like that and we thank you. we know that serving as jurors can be inconvenient and it imposes an imposition on your time, and we thank you for that. but that is the only way that our system of justice works. now, we are getting close to the end of the case now, but your work is not quite done. judge eig has instructed you on the law. and after we are all done speaking with you, judge eig will give you the verdict form. and by answering the questions you will resolve this dispute between us. but before you go back to deliberate this is our time to summarize the evidence for you. and as i get started, i want to remind you of a few things that dal burton told you during his opening statement. first he told you that messrs. kaiser and finger would spend a great deal of time talking 2872 to you about document and statements of tobacco companies 40, 50, 60 years ago, and you just saw an example of that. and mr. burton told you during his opening statement that we would not try to defend all of those statements. many of those documents and some of the videos that you saw say things that express ideas that are abhorrent and that nobody would think today, and we told you that over a week ago. but mr. burton also told you if that is all that this case was about, just showing that a tobacco company executive or scientist said something inappropriate or bad or, frankly, stupid, then we would not have spent all this time together. and i need to disabuse something that mr. finger was talking about right away. he made it seem like everyone in the '40s and '50s who grew up in the '40s and '50s turned into a smoker. and that is simply not true, and that is based on the evidence that you heard in this courtroom. virginia williams was born two years after milton. she was born in 1944. she is not a smoker. and if you remember the testimony 2873 when she was on the stand, milton williams had 12 siblings and she could only remember one that was a smoker. so let us disabuse ourselves of that. let us also disabuse ourselves that president kennedy did not know anything about smoking. he wanted to know more and to make it scientific and go public so that is what he did. and i am going to talk about internal company documents, but i just wanted to set those things aside as i proceed. now, mr. burton told you during his opening statement, like i said, if all this case were about was bad statements in tobacco company files then we would not have spent all this time together, but we have. and that is because this case is not about all cigarette smokers, it is about one cigarette smoker and that cigarette smoker is milton williams. it is about his life and his decisions. and almost every question that you are going to see on that verdict form asks about milton williams. it does not ask about the public. it does not ask about some smokers. it asks about one smoker, and that one smoker is milton williams. 2874 now, judge eig talked about the findings and mr. finger talked about the findings a long time and you have seen them up there. and judge eig told you that the findings do not make rjr liable in this case. those findings do not tell you how to answer the questions in this case. you decide through your verdict whether those findings have any applicability to milton williams, milton williams' life and milton williams' decisions. and that is because the focus here and the basis of your decision is milton williams' story, not smokers in general, not some smokers, not even virginia williams. it is milton williams specifically that you have to analyze the evidence about. and let me say a word about sympathy. many of you may feel sympathy for virginia williams for the loss of her husband 15 years ago at the age of 54. that is normal, that is human and honestly we all do. but judge eig has instructed you that those natural feelings of sympathy that we all have must be set aside for you and you must decide this case based on the evidence and the instruction that he gives you. and i know you all took an oath when you 2875 became jurors and that you will follow that oath sincerely. now, mr. finger mimicked choice, control and responsibility because mr. burton told you during his opening statement that this case can be summed up in those words as to milton williams. and mr. burton asked you to focus on some questions as you listen to the evidence in this case. who was in control of milton williams' lifestyle choices? who was in control of milton williams' decision to begin smoking, to continue smoking? who was in control of his efforts to quit or lack thereof? who controlled his motivation to quit, if any? and did he really want to quit? now, we do not dispute that milton williams was addicted, but that is only the beginning of your inquiry here. was he someone whose addiction was so strong it overcame his will to quit? it overcame any committed effort to quit? or did the evidence show in this case, ladies and gentlemen, that he never really made a serious effort to quit smoking? was he a tormented smoker who tried time and 2876 time again? did he wrestle with the bear, or did not he? did he just smoke and not really try hard to quit? did anything rjr said or failed to say about the health risks or addictiveness of smoking have a direct and substantial impact on milton williams' decisions? or does the evidence show that milton williams was not relying or looking to rjr for health information? and the evidence shows that, that he was not looking to rjr for health information. and i'm going to talk about that in more detail later. and we told you during opening statement that the answer to those questions -- when you answer those questions, you would know who was in control ultimately and who was responsible for the choices that milton williams made. and the evidence shows that it was milton williams. and, frankly, you heard mr. finger talk about this from the very beginning that mr. williams accepts some responsibility. the plaintiff admits some fault on the part of milton williams is the legal cause of his death. that means smoking, if it played a role, a substantial contributing role in his death that 2877 plaintiff agrees that the decisions milton williams made, the decisions he made every day for many years to smoke and not try to quit were a legal cause of his death. now, we believe the evidence shows that if showing contributed to his pharyngeal cancer, then it was milton williams' choice to smoke and to continue smoking and the responsibility was his. if alcohol contributed to his pharyngeal cancer, then it was milton williams' choice to drink and to continue drinking and the responsibility is his. if hpv contributed to his pharyngeal cancer and it arose out of milton williams' choices and the responsibility is his. if poor dental hygiene contributed to his pharyngeal cancer, then it arose out of his choices and the responsibility is his. and if there is not enough evidence to determine by greater weight of evidence that smoking contributed substantially to his pharyngeal cancer, then your verdict should be for rjr. and dr. bennett talked to you about that evidence yesterday. and mr. burton is going to talk to you about it further when i'm 2878 done. now, both mr. burton and i are going to speak with you, have the pleasure of speaking with you. and the verdict form is going to be kind of our road map. mr. burton is going to address questions 1, 2, 3 and 8 -- mr. finger: your honor, may we approach the bench? i apologize. the court: all right. (the following discussion was held at sidebar:) the court: i've stopped the clock. mr. jack williams: okay. mr. finger: i was not apprised of the fact that the court is going to allow them to break up one closing argument. i've never heard of it. mr. jack williams: we said that yesterday. mr. finger: did you hear that? i did not hear it. did they bring that up yesterday? the court: i did not hear it. i do not know what is the slightest bit objectionable about it. it is a two-hour argument, does not matter the slightest who is speaking. mr. finger: here's my objection. when 2879 there was a witness testifying and somebody did the direct, that person was responsible for any objections. i assume that whoever does the closing is going to do the entire closing, you know, i mean. i mean, why is the person who does the direct responsible for objections on cross? why could not anybody do it? the court: to keep things orderly. mr. finger: well, to keep things orderly should not the same person make the closing argument? the court: i see no point whatsoever. mr. jack williams: your honor, we have the right -- the court: i do not see any problem with it whatsoever. (the sidebar discussion was concluded and the following was held in open court:) the court: you may resume your argument. mr. jack williams: thank you, your honor. ladies and gentlemen, mr. burton and i are going to split rjr's closing argument. mr. burton is going to address questions 1, 2, 3 and 8 of the verdict form. and this is a kind of a summary. you have seen the verdict form 2880 already, mr. finger talked about it. and i'm going to address questions 4, 5, 6 and 7. and we will both briefly probably touch on question 9. but i want to say something about questions 1, 2 and 3 and you know what that is, that deals with class membership. and i want to emphasize to you that all three of the questions have to be answered before plaintiff becomes a member of the class. and the findings do not count in your assessment of whether the plaintiff is a member of the class. and the findings do not apply when you are thinking about questions 1, 2, 3 in deciding that, as the judge has told you. now, we said that we do not dispute that milton williams was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine, but ultimately that is your choice to decide. that is still your decision even though we do not dispute it. we believe that based on the evidence your answer to question 2 in the verdict form should be no. and mr. finger spent quite a bit of time talking about this and mr. burton will in detail. and we believe that the evidence shows that the plaintiff has failed to prove that 2881 addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine was a legal cause of milton williams' pharyngeal cancer. and the question is why? and there are two reasons. the first reason is because he never seriously tried to quit, the evidence will show that. so if cigarettes played a role, if cigarettes played a role in his disease, it was not because of his addiction, it was because of his own desire to smoke and that is where the fault lies. and the second reason is, remember that milton williams exposed himself to three other independent risk factors for pharyngeal cancer, alcohol, hpv and poor dental hygiene. and as i said, mr. burton is going to talk to you about that further. now, we believe, as the verdict form says, if your answer to question 2 is no, then your verdict is for defendant rjr and you should proceed no further except to date and sign this verdict form and return it to courtroom. and that is what we believe the evidence shows, ladies and gentlemen, that you should stop at question 2. 2882 now, if you do proceed to question 3, we also believe that your answer to that question should be no and that your work should be over in this case. but if you decide otherwise, i'm going to talk to you about some of the other questions on the verdict form and the evidence relating to it. now, i'm going to address damages first, that is question number 9. if you decide rjr is liable to plaintiff in some degree, even a small amount, then i want to discuss some of the evidence that you should consider. this is question 9. "what is the total amount of damages sustained by virginia williams for the loss of her husband's companionship and protection and for her mental pain and suffering as a result of mr. williams' death?" now, ms. williams' lawyers have asked you for a lot of money, over 5 million dollars to compensate her. and this is the instruction that you are going to get in connection with -- that judge eig read to you. "in determining any damages to be awarded to mr. williams' personal representative for the 2883 benefit of mr. williams' surviving spouse virginia williams you shall consider elements of damage for which there is no exact standard for fixing the compensation to be awarded and any such award should be fair and just in light of the evidence regarding the following elements: virginia williams' loss of mr. williams' companionship and protection and her mental pain and suffering as a result of his death." now, ms. williams is a nice lady, none of us disputes that, but if you decide that some award of money is appropriate, then you need to assess the quality of her relationship with milton williams. that is what the award is based on. in order to assess that relationship you need to take into consideration the evidence that has been presented to you. some of it is good, but there is also other evidence that you have been presented. and it is appropriate for you to consider all of that evidence in determining an appropriate award if you get that far. we believe the evidence shows you should stop at question 2, but if you get that far, these are some of the things you should think about. 2884 virginia williams told you that she loved milton williams, but over a long period of time there were a number of instances when he did not show love for her and her family. and that evidence is relevant to your determination. now, when someone is deceased, we tend to remember the good things and not the bad and the incentive to focus on the good things is even greater when you want money to be awarded. but it is your job to look at all of the evidence if you decide to consider awarding virginia williams money. and we trust that you will do that evenhandedly. now, we respect virginia williams and we are not here to sully or disparage her marriage to milton williams. but justice requires that you look at the negative evidence just like you look at the good evidence and when you are making that decision to award money damages. you told me during jury selection, if you remember, that you could do justice to a big company like rjr just like you could to an individual. and justice requires that if you decide to award damages to virginia williams that you look at all of the evidence. 2885 now, i'm not going to go through the details of the evidence that we went over when virginia williams was on the stand. i'm not going to go in detail about the problems between her relationship in her marriage with milton williams, because i did that when she was testifying. but the divorce papers are in evidence, the tro, the temporary restraining order is in evidence and the report is in evidence. and we ask that if you decide to make a damage award in the privacy of the jury room, the privacy of your deliberations that you look at that evidence and discuss it and consider it just like you consider the evidence that she gave you. and this evidence should factor strongly into any money award if you decide to make one. now there is a lot of paper that is going to go back to the jury room with you, but i'm talking about maybe 6 or 7 pages of the documents that i just told you about. now, i want to talk about questions 4 and 7 of the jury form if you get that far. and as i said again, we will repeat, question 2 is important, we believe your answer should be no 2886 as to question 2 and that you should not proceed any further, but if you do, i want to talk about the evidence now to questions 4 and 7. questions 4 and 7, which mr. finger talked to you about, deal with defect and negligence. "question 4. were the defective and unreasonably dangerous cigarettes placed on the market by rjr a legal cause of milton williams' death." and "question number 7. was the negligence of rjr a legal cause of milton williams' death?" now if you get to these questions, there is something important that judge eig told you and i want to go over that. and he said, rjr's mere selling, advertising and manufacturing cigarettes cannot be a basis for your vote for the plaintiff in this case. here's the instruction that he gave you. the manufacture and sale of cigarettes is a lawful activity protected by federal law. therefore, i instruct you that rj reynolds cannot be held liable merely for manufacturing, selling or advertising cigarettes. i also instruct you that the warning labels placed on the cigarette packages by rjr complied with 2887 federal law and rjr had no obligation to place any additional warnings on its cigarette packs. i also instruct you that as long as the cigarette pack bears the federally mandated warnings cigarette advertisements from july 1, 1969 forward cannot be the subject of any claim that the advertisement undermined or neutralized the warnings or made them less effective. and with that instruction in mind, ladies and gentlemen, here's why if you get to question 4 your answer to question 4 should be no. the only allegation made against cigarettes here was by dr. proctor. he said ammonia added to marlboro and perhaps some other brands made them more addictive, gave them more nicotine kick. you heard mr. finger talk about that and you heard me cross examine dr. proctor. we talked about ph and protonated nicotine and words like that and my tongue got a little thick saying all those big words. but dr. proctor admitted on cross-examine that he had no idea if nicotine was added to unfiltered pall malls and that is the only cigarette that milton williams smoked. dr. proctor talked about marlboros. marlboros are irrelevant here. 2888 and a document read by mr. finger about a philip morris executive is also irrelevant here. and i'm not going to go off on that tangent, but we need to focus, as the judge told you during his instructions, on rjr. but more importantly, when dr. proctor was on the stand he admitted that there was no scientific evidence that ammonia makes cigarettes more addictive. here's what he said, that is the question i asked him, "now to close off this area, to move on to another topic, i want to ask you: you are not aware of any scientific paper in any peer-reviewed literature that concludes it is more difficult to quit smoking a cigarette with ammonia compounds than it is to quit smoking one without ammonia compounds, correct?" and dr. proctor said that he thinks that is a fair statement. and that is the only allegation that cigarettes were defective here or that rjr was negligent. so if you get to questions 4 and 7 your answer to those questions, based on the evidence based on their expert witness should be no. 2889 i want to move to questions 5 and 6. as i've discussed with you, we believe the evidence -- based on the evidence in this case that you should not reach these questions, questions 5 and 6. and i'm going to discuss the evidence showing why your answer should be no. now that is a mouthful right there. "did milton williams reasonably rely to his detriment on information known to rj reynolds tobacco company that intentionally concealed or omitted a material fact that was unknown to mr. williams and not otherwise obvious to him concerning the health effects and/or the addictive nature of smoking cigarettes such that but for his reliance, he would have acted differently and avoided his death?" that is question 5. it goes with question 6, which is a similar question. and i'm not going to read it to you because it is a mouthful, but i want to break it down. what does this really mean? it means that plaintiff must prove to you that but for the wrongful concealment of material information by rjr that milton williams would not have smoked 2890 and died of pharyngeal cancer caused by smoking. now, mr. finger argued to you and during the trial mr. kaiser put on evidence that rjr knew and hid information about the addictiveness and risks of smoking. they said that internal company documents marked secret and in the files of rjr prevented milton williams from making an informed decision to smoke or not to smoke and that rjr kept him smoking by a campaign of denial. now, the evidence in this case has shown you that no concealment by rjr prevented milton williams from making an informed decision about smoking. why? and the reason is you cannot conceal something that is already common knowledge and that someone knows. the evidence shows that milton williams was fully aware of the dangers and addictiveness of smoking but he chose to smoke because he liked it. and i'm going to go over that evidence. but let me say a word about internal company documents, because mr. finger brought out a lot of documents during his closing argument and during particularly when dr. proctor was on the stand they kept saying denialist campaign, open 2891 controversy and things like that, conspiracy. and i want to address that right now. he talked about claude teague, that is the name that came up a lot during this case and during mr. finger's closing argument. now, claude teague authored a document entitled a survey of cancer research with emphasis upon possible carcinogens from tobacco. and this document was brought out on closing and it was talked about at length by dr. proctor if you remember. and according to dr. proctor, this document was the beginning of the concealment. the teague document they call it. this was the core document of what they said rjr began concealing information about the dangers of smoking. dr. teague was a research scientist at rjr and he wrote this memo in 1953. and it does indicate that there is a link between smoking and lung cancer, but what they did not tell you and what came out on cross-examination was that dr. proctor said -- what dr. teague did was review publicly available information. and then he created this memo from publicly available information. and there is a bibliography at the 2892 end of the memo citing the 78 sources of information that dr. teague used. dr. proctor admitted on cross-examination that all of those sources of information were publicly available. here was his testimony: "this is the teague survey. are you familiar with it? "yes. "if we go to the very end of the document, he lists his sources of information. "that is right. "and i'm not going to go page by page, but there are 78 of them in the bibliography, correct? "yes. "and all of those sources of information were publicly available at the time that teague did his survey, correct? "yes. they are published articles." that was the testimony and that did not come out when mr. finger was talking to you during closing argument. there was nothing concealed about this. this was a memo created like if i went on the internet, took internet information 2893 that was publicly available, wrote a memo about it, that is not hidden, that is not concealed, that is public. now, dr. proctor also admitted up through 1964 there was no information inside rjr that was not otherwise known outside rjr in published scientific literature. here's his testimony: "and let me ask you a question leading up to 1964, okay? "okay. "you cannot identify any fact about smoking and health that was known internally to reynolds that was not otherwise known in published scientific literature in 1964, is not that true?" look at his answer: "i cannot think of an overlap because there is so much that is published." that is published outside. "so i would have to agree with you on that." there is no concealment, ladies and gentlemen, there is no concealment here. now, you will recall that 1964 was a big year, that is when the surgeon general published the report and released the report identifying the 2894 many dangers associated with smoking including lung cancer and throat cancer and that sort of thing. so if there is nothing hidden inside of reynolds up to 1964 and you have the surgeon general's report, there is no concealment. it was supposed to begin with teague and lead up in the '50s and the '60s and the facts do not bear that out. now, the evidence in this case shows that milton williams was not fooled or misled by rjr's statement or conduct, he was not tuned into what tobacco companies were saying or looking to them for advice. he was not taken in by any campaign of doubt or denial. there is absolutely no evidence of that here. and remember this case is about milton williams. and this case is not a detached kind of abstract investigation, and i think mr. finger admitted this, about rjr. this is one lawsuit about one smoker, milton williams. there is no question that you will find some dumb statements in the files of rjr that executives made, but mr. finger did not really care whether those statements had any connection to milton williams' smoking decisions or not, 2895 because they did not. and you will recall that dr. proctor had no idea one way or the other of what milton williams knew, what he heard, what he relied on, what his motivations were. he knew nothing about the man. but virginia williams repeatedly told you that milton williams did not rely on anything from tobacco companies, but the plaintiffs do not care about what milton williams relied on. they just want you to get mad. it is their plan to make you mad by showing stupid statements and mis -- in poor taste, statements and conduct in poor taste by tobacco executives and that might encourage you to award more money. but, ladies and gentlemen, we trust, we trust that you will base your verdict on the evidence and how that evidence relates to milton williams, not arguments about concealment, denial and that sort of thing and conspiracy that do not at all relate in any way to milton williams. now, you will recall that during dr. proctor's testimony and during mr. finger's closing argument he referred to a bunch of newspaper articles, press releases, white papers and statements by ceos saying that the link between 2896 smoking and lung cancer had not been proved, it was an open controversy or denial and that sort of thing. the question for you is whether milton williams was influenced or relied to his detriment on any of those statements. and the evidence shows that he was not. and your answer to questions 5 and 6 should be no. now, dr. proctor was the only witness who talked about tobacco company statements and you are going to have to take a close look at who dr. proctor is. he admittedly and unabashedly is an anti-tobacco advocate. you remember he testified that he knows nothing about milton williams, but he readily admitted, he comes into the courtroom, he wants the plaintiffs to win. he wants the plaintiffs to win because he said testifying against tobacco companies drives up their cost and hopefully in the end that will limit the amount of cigarettes and eventually put an end to cigarettes. that is who dr. proctor is and that is his personal animosity. and you should keep that in mind when you evaluate his testimony and what he told you. he is certainly not an objective historian and that is what you want to look at. he is 2897 admittedly biased, he says that, he tells you that. and you should keep one of the things in mind that the judge told you and that is in evaluating -- this is one of your instructions -- in evaluating the believability of any witness and the weight you will give the testimony of that witness you may properly consider -- and i skipped a couple of things, i want to go to the bottom and focus on that bottom line -- any interest that witness may have in the outcome of the case. and let us think about that in the context of who dr. proctor is. he makes a lot of money testifying. he admitted to about $30,000 a pop and he pops a lot. and he does not have to do a lot to pop. why? because he told you he tells the same old story over and over again. the smoker's story does not matter, who the smoker is does not matter. he goes into a courtroom, he talks about denial, he talks about conspiracy and he will do things like came out here, he will not tell you that the teague document is based on publicly available literature. that has to always come out on cross-examination. that is 2898 who dr. proctor is and you have to consider that when you think about how much you rely on his testimony. an expert is supposed to bring his or her specialized knowledge to the courtroom, an expert is supposed to be fairly objective. and as you saw, dr. proctor is anything but objective. many times he would not answer my question directly, he was evasive. and he tried to paint a terrible picture of rjr without having a clue as to whether any of the information he was talking about, any of that picture he was painting related in any way to the only smoker that matters in this courtroom, milton williams. now, let me switch subjects, meaning a witness who did know milton williams, what did she say? virginia williams testified that he did not rely on anything and he was not influenced by tobacco company information. she testified that she never heard him mention white papers, frank statement, ctr, tirc, tobacco institute. and she only recalled him talking about tobacco advertising one time. you remember what she said, they were watching tv back in the '60s, 2899 because it was on television, a pall mall ad comes on and he says, that is my brand. how insignificant is that? how insignificant is that? yet you hear about millions of dollars of advertising and how much rjr and the other tobacco companies spent -- spend. but that is not about milton williams, that is not about the only smoker that should matter when you deliberate on this case. the issue here, ladies and gentlemen, as it relates to milton williams is about information. it is not about whether milton williams saw a particular document in the files of rjr or heard some statement about rjr executives. and i'm going to go off the track a little bit here because it was distracting some of the things that mr. finger said about rjr. the waxman hearings. he did not tell you the last executive before the tape stopped was the rjr executive. and what the rjr executive was trying to say and he got cut off, and you have seen that tape twice, is that under the 1964 classic definition of addiction, cigarettes are not addictive because that required intoxication, like alcohol, like cocaine, like 2900 heroin. the definition was changed in 1988 that did not require that. and he was trying to explain that. and the congressman just said, i'll take that as a no and moved on. the story is more complicated than what they portrayed it. and they misportrayed it, because he was not saying the cigarettes were not addictive as per the new definition, it was the old definition that he was going under. but the bottom line, ladies and gentlemen, is this case is about information and the evidence shows that the dangers of smoking were common knowledge and that milton williams knew them and he accepted them and he smoked because he liked it. now, i want to talk about the evidence of what smokers like milton williams knew at the time he was smoking. and you will recall that on cross-examination i discussed with dr. proctor the detailed survey and polling information contained in the 1989 surgeon general's report. and one of the surveys that we went over was this one. and you will note the question being asked is: is cigarette smoking harmful to your health? 2901 and the last column over here, all adults, and this includes smokers and nonsmokers. and this is 1964, 1966, 1970 and 1975; 81 percent, 85 percent, 87 percent and ninety percent knew that smoking was harmful. and there was another gallup poll that we looked at as to whether people believed smoking was putting their health at risk. and if you notice, cigarette smoking is harmful to your health. they are personalizing this. and what are the numbers? look at the numbers on the end here. this is 1977 through '87; 90 to 94 percent were saying that they know, they believe that smoking is harmful to their health. they are not being deluded, they are not in the dark. and, importantly, these numbers take into consideration all the bad stuff that they tried to lay on you, any information from rjr or other tobacco companies, any conduct that dr. proctor talked about about ceos talking about denial and open controversy and all that, these numbers took that into consideration. and you saw they went from 90 to 94 percent. so the bottom line, what does that tell you? it tells you that whatever they say the tobacco 2902 companies are doing, it is not blunting folks, normal people getting the word or knowing that smoking is dangerous. that is what these high polling numbers tell you. now, earlier i said you cannot conceal something that is commonly known. and you have seen a lot of information in this case about the common knowledge and information on the dangers and addictiveness of smoking. i'm not going to go back into detail over all of the stuff that you have seen, all the evidence that you have seen, but you will recall, and mr. finger talked about it, went back to columbus and his experience with his sailors and the native americans. and why is this important? it is important because this is in the fabric, this is common knowledge. it is like fish in water. it is not something that you would notice if you are in water. smoking is dangerous and people have known that for hundreds and hundreds of years. that is what columbus wrote, that his sailors were having a hard time quitting. he did not use the word "addiction," he did not say "habit," but it is the same concept, ladies and gentlemen. and that was over 500 years ago -- over 600 2903 years ago. now, we move forward to king james. and king james said -- this is the king james of king james bible fame -- tobacco is bewitching. and he said this in 1604. and he also said, "a custom loathsome to the eye, hateful to the nose, harmful to the brain and dangerous to the lungs." and that is what i want to focus on. and that was that long ago. and then we move forward and you heard about john quincy adams, our sixth president and how he said that in his early youth he was addicted to tobacco and two of its mysteries, smoking it and chewing it. and this was 1845. and at this time it was common knowledge that smoking was addictive. then we move to the 20th century and you heard evidence on that and we talked about a florida health note from the florida department of health from june 1906. and what does it say? it says, "today the cigarette is looked upon by all smokers as the very worse form of addiction." and this is 35 years before milton williams 2904 was born. and then we talked about common knowledge and the abundance of public information on smoking's dangerousness. and we talked about reader's digest, and you remember, i'm not going to go over all the articles, but this one from 1941 is important because it is by a common person, gene tunney. it is about joe louis and he talks about nicotine here. you remember that mr. finger talked about a teague document that talked about we are in the business of selling nicotine and nicotine is why people smoke in 1972. this is 1941 and this is a common person saying essentially the same thing. "the cause and most of the trouble is, of course, nicotine. no one has ever denied that nicotine is poison." it is no secret, ladies and gentlemen, this is reader's digest. then we move to the 1940s and '50s when milton williams was a young person and still a nonsmoker. and we talked about some of the articles in common magazines. this is common knowledge about smoking. this is reader's digest from the 1920s through the '40s. and we 2905 went into some of these, we talked about a few of these with dr. proctor and how there was an abundance of information that smoking was two things, it was dangerous and it was addictive. that was not a secret. it was not a tobacco company secret. it was common knowledge. this one speaks for itself cancer by the carton 1952. we discussed this one also. once again in reader's digest, a commonly, widely spread magazine. and you remember dr. proctor said at that time it was like the internet today, a lot of folk had access to it. then we looked at the 1950s when the more scientific information was coming out. dr. wynder, the mouse skin paintings. and we talked about that and how it was not just the scientists debating this, this information was available to the public, it was on newsstands back then, you would see this. so this was not hidden and folk knew that smoking was dangerous. and then we also talked about leroy burney and you recall i asked dr. proctor about leroy burney. this is 1957. and to make this personal, milton williams, if he was smoking then, he just began smoking. he is about 15 2906 years old, he was born in 1942. this is not an executive, not a scientist in private industry, this is the surgeon general of the united states. his main role is safeguarding the public health. and he is telling folks that the position is, his position is that we have informed the public through the excellent coverage in the press, the radio and tv. that is the surgeon general talking. and then in 1964 the surgeon general's report comes out and it is widely spread news, it is in all the newspapers all over the country. it is a big deal. and i'm not going to go back to the slide, but you remember the slides of the surveys that i showed you of whether people knew smoking was dangerous. it was all in the 90 percent. mr. finger said folk did not know, folk did know. this was a big story and a big deal. and it was in the miami herald, the jacksonville journal and it was on all three of the news channels at that time, smoking is dangerous. and we looked at news clips. and even dr. proctor admitted that this was a huge story. and you heard testimony in the case that milton williams was a big tv watcher, that he liked 2907 watching tv from back in the '60s, he liked watching the news and he liked keeping abreast of what was going on. and anybody like that could not have missed this. he was 22 years old. he was intelligent. he could read. and this was the biggest story on the planet at that time. we saw the clip from harry reasoner. and i want to play this one just so you see what was on the news january 11th, 1964. (video clip was played.) voice: this is the cbs news extra on smoking and health, the findings of the surgeon general's committee. voice: almost from the moment that cigarettes were introduced they were attacked, but the attacks took a new turn 10 years ago and culminated in today's report by the surgeon general's committee. this, in summary, is what the committee says. cigarette smoking is a major cause of lung cancer in men and data on women smokers points the same way. cigarette smoking is a significant cause of cancer of the larynx and probably the most 2908 important cause of chronic bronchitis. cigarette smoking may be related to other lung diseases. male smokers have a much higher death rate from heart disease, although it is not proven that smoking is the cause. in short, the committee says if you smoke cigarettes you increase your chances of dying early. the sooner you start, the more you smoke, the more you inhale, the worse your chances are. in this kind of a country it comes down to you whether you like it or not. no one is going to forbid an adult to smoke and it is now quite clear that no one is going to tell him it is good for him either. the decision is his, the decision and the health that may depend on it. this is harry reasoner. good night. (video clip concluded.) mr. jack williams: mr. finger said at one point that milton williams did not live in a cave. i think i heard that when i was sitting over there. i agree with that, he was not living in a cave. he was very likely hearing a news report like that in 1964. and no one, no 2909 one could sincerely say they do not know anything or have a clue about smoking is dangerous when you hear a story like that. you cannot say that. and the jury charge -- and i read over it, but there is a certain language you need to pay attention to. it talks about "not otherwise known to milton williams" when it talks about the reliance. if you look at 5 and 6 it says "not otherwise known to milton williams." this is information that is known to milton williams and some of the other information that i showed you too. and that is why for 5 and 6 your answer should be no, that is one of the reasons if you get that far down. but there is more. we talked, as we continued and not only with dr. proctor on the stand that millions of american smokers who quit and they quit in that period of time from 1966 to 1970, 13 million quit, in fact, right after the 1966 pack warnings went on. and every pack of cigarettes had that warning, but that was not the only warning, that was a caution statement. and mr. finger disparaged that a little bit, but in 1970 it got stronger. and in 1985 it got even stronger than that. smoking causes lung cancer, 2910 heart disease, emphysema and may complicate pregnancy. and those were rotating warnings. and one of those was on every pack of cigarettes. you will recall that virginia williams testified that milton was intelligent, he could read and there is no reason she knows of that he did not read and understand the warnings. and dr. proctor admitted on cross-examination that during the 1950s and '60s information on smoking and health was abundant. here's what he said. i'm not going to read it all, i'll just focus on that bottom question and answer. "and throughout the 1950s and '60s scientists continued to study smoking and the news media continued to publish the results and talk about the results of scientific research? "that is correct. it was still news." we also talked about public service announcements, that is when you have the celebrities go on tv like ed asner -- and do not worry, i'm not going to show his tape again -- talking about they smoked, they quit, the great smoke out, or i have a smoking-related disease 2911 and why you should quit. those were abundant in the 1970s and '80s. and you heard dr. goldman testify. he was plaintiff's addiction expert. he was the lung doctor. he is another witness who testifies a lot against tobacco companies. he had an edge to him. you could tell that when he was sitting in the chair and i was asking him questions. he is testified against tobacco companies for 15 years. but he said, he admitted, and he is been practicing medicine sine the 1970s, that he never met a patient who did not know smoking was dangerous. that is what he said. that is his testimony. and i'm not going to read it, but that is what he testified to, it goes back to 1977 and he is had thousands and thousands of patients and none of them did not know that smoking was dangerous. and that is the plaintiff's expert saying that. and he also said that milton williams, he is sure, new the dangers too and i think mr. finger admitted that. but it was not just like when milton started to get sick that he knew the dangers. he knew the dangers when he started 2912 smoking through the '50s and the '60s based on a lot of the media coverage that you have seen. and i'm just showing you the tip of the iceberg. milton williams in trying to quit, the testimony needs to be clear when you think about it, dr. goldman testified and mrs. williams testified that she bought him patches. and it was unclear of when the date happened, when that happened. patches were not available over-the-counter until 1996. and ms. williams said she got them. no evidence of prescription there. they were available by prescription in 1992. so 1996 is when milton williams finally tried the patches. and you recall that the testimony was he only tried them for a week and he smoked while he tried them. the bottom line is he never made a serious attempt to quit smoking at all. now, i talked about common knowledge and i want to come more home here and about the messages that milton williams got about smoking being dangerous from family members, people who matter. it makes a difference if you see something on tv, that is information and you get that, too. but when somebody who loves you 2913 says, stop smoking, it is hurting you, you would listen. you get the message hopefully. and milton williams got the message from a bunch of family members all the way up the line. you remember his sister-in-law janice testified by deposition yesterday. she told him smoking was bad for him and that he smoked too much in the 1980s. and janice said that he simply blew her off and said smoking is what he liked to do. this was the testimony: "what did you tell him in the 1980s? "why does he do it all the time? he just said, it is something i like to do, that is smoking. "did you tell him that it was harmful to his health? "from what i had read and heard it was, yes, i mentioned it to him. "and what did he tell you? "he just laughed it off." that is not somebody who is trying to quit or does not know, ladies and gentlemen. "and every time you mentioned to him something about smoking were you telling him that it was bad for his health? 2914 "yes. "and would he laugh it off every time you told him that? "he would say something like, sister-in-law, i'll be all right, you know, in that type of fashion, or basically getting away from that. "blowing you off? "yeah, blowing me off basically so i did not keep elaborating on it." that is not someone who is been taken, been had, been fooled by the tobacco company. that is somebody who knows smoking is dangerous and enjoys smoking. and folk do that, the people now who smoke, mr. finger was talking about, it is out, the mystery's gone. people still like to smoke. and that is one of the rights we have in america is to smoke so people are allowed to do it. so it is not like milton williams just because he smoked he did not know. he did know and he smoked because he liked it. now, milton williams had a number of other personal warnings about the dangers of smoking. virginia, his wife, told him over the years, quit smoking, cut back, you heard that testimony. 2915 and she testified that she had an uncle by the name of charlie weaver who died in the 1970s of what she believed to be smoking-related copd. she had another uncle by the name of ivory wheeler who died in the 1980s from what she believed to be smoking-related copd. she has family members dying of smoking-related disease, she believed it was smoking related in the 1970s and '80s. it is not a secret to them that smoking can harm you. now, during this period of time she tried to get milton to quit smoking. she said she did. she threw away the ashtrays, but the problem is she wanted him to quit. he did not want to quit. and he is the smoker. and he is the one that counts. you cannot make somebody do something that they do not want to do. he knew smoking was dangerous. he enjoyed smoking. he liked it. janice testified to that. so he did it. then in 1988 virginia's own brother felton williams died of lung cancer. and she believed that that lung cancer was caused by smoking. and you heard pamela denson, her daughter, testify that she became very worried about her father and told him what happened to uncle 2916 felton is going to happen to you. and pam had told her father a long time ago when she was in the 8th grade, i believe the testimony was, back in the late '70s, early '80s, i learned in health class smoking is dangerous, daddy, you ought to quit. and he did not. she said he tried to cut back, but smokers always -- and dr. goldman testified to that -- will say they are doing something and they do not do it, if they really do not want to quit. and the evidence shows that he really did not want to quit. then in 1990, you heard the testimony on this, the dentist story, serious mouth problems, nobody disputes that. the dentist tells him, smoking is affecting your teeth and it is affecting your health. and virginia continues to warn him. and still nothing. he continues to smoke because he wants to. then you heard testimony in the 1990s a family friend jimmy johnson says that he has smoking-related copd. he tells milton and virginia that smoking caused his copd and still milton continues to smoke because he wants to, ladies and gentlemen. that is clear here. 2917 so not only was there common knowledge, but milton had close family relations telling him for decades that smoking was dangerous. i believe the first was his mom in the 1960s. and he had a professional, a dentist telling him that as well. so the bottom line is that your answers to numbers 5 and 6, if you get that far, if you get that far, should be "no" based on the evidence. you cannot conceal, you cannot trick, you cannot lie to somebody about something they already know. now, there is no evidence what rjr did or did not do or said or did not say something that milton williams relied on to his detriment or that anything rjr did that affected his smoking decisions in any detrimental way. remember, simply making, selling and advertising cigarettes cannot make rjr liable here. no matter how many ads they put on the screen, rjr cannot be liable because it advertised its cigarettes. and there is no evidence that milton williams relied detrimentally on any ad anyway. mr. finger told you that. he knew that smoking 2918 was dangerous and that it was addictive and it was obvious to him for many years. my mother used to tell me something when i would not do the right thing when i was a little boy. she used to say, you can take a horse to the well, but you cannot make it drink. mrs. williams wanted milton to stop smoking; his daughter wanted him to stop smoking; some other family members wanted him to stop smoking, but the problem is milton did not want to stop smoking and he did not. it is not about addiction, it is about the fact that he liked smoking and he did smoke. so ladies and gentlemen, i thank you for your attention and i hope you will give my partner dal burton the same wonderful attention you have given me. thank you. mr. burton: good morning, ladies and gentlemen. we are in the home stretch. we are in the home stretch. i'm going to talk to you probably for a little bit less than an hour and then mr. kaiser or mr. finger will talk to you for a little bit. and what i wanted to do is remind you what i said in opening 10 days ago. this case is about milton williams, it is about pharyngeal cancer and it is about choice, control and responsibility. now, my partner jack -- and i'm going to refer to him as jack because we have so many williams in this case. my partner jack talked to you yesterday about what milton knew and when he knew it. he demonstrated to you that milton did not see or rely on anything that mr. -- that reynolds said. he demonstrated to you that milton never changed his behavior based on anything that reynolds said. and mr. finger made a very interesting, what i was startled by, he said in his argument yesterday, i cannot say anything they did, meaning reynolds, caused milton to smoke. so i'm not going to talk about those issues anymore. what i'm going to do is i'm going to talk about the second two; that is, pharyngeal cancer and choice, control and responsibility. and what i'm going to do is i'm going to try to avoid repeating things yesterday, because i know there is been a lot of repetition in this trial. but some of it is going to be unavoidable because in talking about those two issues i'm going to have to talk about addiction and i'm going to have to talk about some medical issues. but as you have heard, the first thing that you do when you return to the jury room is you have these three questions to decide class membership: was he addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine? was addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine a legal cause of his cancer? and was pharyngeal cancer a legal cause of his death? now, yesterday the first question, let us look at that. yesterday we heard a lot of discussion about that. and as i told you when we started, we do not contest that milton williams was addicted as that term is used today. but when you look in those instructions that the judge has given you, you are not going to find a definition of the word "addiction" or "addicted." it is not a legal word. it is a lay word. it means different things to different people. and so when you decide how to answer that question, you should use your collective wisdom and collective judgment based upon what you have heard in this courtroom. but remember, you as the jury, as the fact finder, are free to accept or reject expert testimony on that subject. so let us go to the second question. was addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine a legal cause of milton williams' pharyngeal cancer? ladies and gentlemen, this is really a two-step process. the first step you have to prove is addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine was the legal cause of his smoking and then you have to prove that the smoking was the legal cause of the pharyngeal cancer. so what i want to do for a moment is i want to focus on that first question. and what this question asks you to determine is whether milton williams' addiction to cigarettes was the legal cause of his smoking. now, what the plaintiffs want you to believe is that his addiction was so strong and so powerful that there was not anything he could do to stop, that he was deprived of his free will and that he was deprived of his free choice. it is as if he got on a train, a nonstop train from jacksonville, florida in 1958 and that train did not stop until 1996 when he got to the veterans' hospital. but, ladies and gentlemen, you have heard the evidence, you know what it is. you know that train stopped several times along the way. it stopped in 1964 when the surgeon general's report came out and was published on tv. you saw the harry reasoner description about it yesterday. the train stopped in 1966 when the warnings first went on the packs. now, remember, ladies and gentlemen, that warning is on every pack of cigarettes. if he smoked a pack and a half of cigarettes a day, every time he picked up that pack there was a warning looking back at him. and i did some simple math, that would be about 425,000 warnings when he picked up those cigarettes. the train stopped again in 1969 when his wife first told him to stop smoking. the train stopped yet again when the psa warnings, the public service announcements started to air. you remember the one we played. i'm going to play it for you again today. (video clip was played.) voice: we receive many warnings in our life, and sometimes they can save our lives. this message is brought to you by the american cancer society. (video clip concluded.) mr. burton: now, ladies and gentlemen, we have heard some discussion about how much milton williams watched tv. i do not have the document with me, but i noticed last night in reviewing some records, there is a medical record in which he described his hobby as watching tv. so there is no doubt that mr. williams watched a lot of tv. the train stopped again in 1978 or '79 when pam williams warned her father of the risk after an 8th-grade science class. stopped in 1980 or '81 when his sister-in-law warned him for the first time of the risks of smoking. it stopped in 1983 when pam warned him a second time after her 10th-grade health class. it stopped in 1988 when uncle jack died. you remember, pam went to her father and said, look, you do not want to end up like uncle jack. you need to stop smoking. and the train stopped in 1990 when mr. williams was treated for dental problems. so as you think about whether he had the ability to quit, did he have the ability to get off that train. think about dr. goldman. you remember dr. goldman. he came from tampa. he was the guy that did not really like to answer a question, particularly when my partner jack was asking him questions. he would not even concede that the surgeon general's report or the national cancer institute were authoritative sources of information on smoking and health. but when he was pressed, he admitted two things. he admitted, one, that being addicted to smoking does not mean you cannot quit. and the other thing he admitted, and this is critical, is that the key is motivation. now, what, if anything, does motivation have to do with being successful at quitting smoking for an addicted person? again i'd say you have to try. you have to make earnest attempts to try to discontinue whatever it is, whether it is smoking or cocaine or heroin. you have to be motivated to quit. ladies and gentlemen, what that means is nobody can force milton williams to quit smoking. he had to decide that he wanted to quit and he had to decide to quit. dr. goldman agrees: "and you would agree that no one could force milton williams to quit smoking, correct? "that had to be a decision that he came up with on his own." and remember what dr. goldman also said, if a person does not try to quit, they never will. and i'll submit to you, ladies and gentlemen, there is not a truer statement made in this courtroom in this trial. if you do not try to do something, if you do not decide, you do not try, you are never going to do it. and what is the evidence here, what is the evidence here with respect to whether milton williams wanted to quit, decided to quit or tried to quit? we do not have to look at the experts. we can look at the testimony from his immediate family. mrs. williams, "but he never told you directly that he wanted to stop smoking and you never heard him tell anybody else that, did you?" and his daughter pam, "he never said to you i've made the decision to quit, would you help me. "no, sir, that was not his statement. "and to your knowledge, he never made that statement to your mom. "i do not know." and, ladies and gentlemen, his actual behavior, his actual behavior, as best we can tell, because we did not have a chance to talk to milton, his actual behavior demonstrates that he did not want to quit and he never tried to quit. he never threw away his cigarettes. he never threw away the ashtrays. ms. williams did one time, and what did he do? he went out and got another one. he never went to a stop smoking clinic. he never -- (there was a cell phone interruption in the proceedings.) juror rueda: sorry. mr. burton: that is all right. he never tried hypnosis. he never sought medical help to quit. and, again, the one time mrs. williams got patches for him he disregarded the instructions and continued to smoke. so, ladies and gentlemen, the bottom line is, if he was on this train, he never got out of his seat. he never stood up. he never took a step toward the door of that train. and you know why? because addiction is not what was making him smoke. he did not want to quit. he never tried to quit. and his daughter janice told us exactly that. "did you ever hear mr. williams refer to himself as addicted? "i do not think he said that. he just said, 'this is what i like to do.' because i said something to him about it, and he said, 'that is what i like to do.'" and later on she said the same thing. "what did he tell you in the early '80s? "why does he do it all the time? he just said, 'it is something i like to do.'" and, ladies and gentlemen, we did not get a chance to talk to milton because he died prematurely 15 years ago. but we do not have many conversations and many statements directly from him. this provides you with an insight into the man, what makes him tick, and what this tells you is that he smoked because he wanted to and because he liked it. so why is this significant? well, it is significant for really two reasons. the first comes from dr. goodwin. "if mr. williams had quit smoking in 1966 when he would have had a much lower risk of contracting pharyngeal cancer, correct? "yes. "in fact, it would have been almost being that of a never-smoker, would not it? "thirty years, yes." so what that is telling you, ladies and gentlemen, if he had quit in 1966 when the warnings first went on the pack we probably would not be here today because he would never have gotten pharyngeal cancer. now, i want to talk about dr. goodwin in a minute. mr. finger talked a lot about dr. goodwin, told you how clinical he was and how knowledgeable he was. you know what, i'm going to talk a lot about dr. goodwin. when we get to the medical case, i'm going to show you testimony from dr. goodwin. and i want you to pay careful attention to what dr. goodwin said and what he did not say. because dr. goodwin's testimony is going to demonstrate to you why the plaintiffs cannot prove that smoking was a legal cause of milton williams' cancer. so let us go -- secondly, secondly, what this evidence shows is that the plaintiffs cannot prove that the addiction was the legal cause of the smoking. he did not want to quit. he never decided to quit, and he never tried to quit. remember, the surgeon general defines a serious quit attempt as 24 hours. he did not quit for a day. so let us move to the second question. this is whether smoking causes pharyngeal cancer. well, this is a medical causation question, it is a medical causation question. and so you have to decide whether smoking was the legal cause of the pharyngeal cancer. as i said, i'm going to talk a lot about dr. goodwin, but as we do this, i want you to remember the hypothetical or the example i gave you in opening about texting and driving and having an accident. remember, i'm driving down the road and i'm texting, which is negligent, i come up, i look up and i see the stoplight and i put on my brakes and the brakes fail and i still have an accident. in that case the texting is not the legal but-for cause of the accident because if you take it out of the equation, the brakes still would have failed and you still would have had the accident. well, in this case, ladies and gentlemen, milton's smoking is like the texting; the hpv, alcohol and poor dentition are like the brake failure, and the cancer is like the accident. so what they have to prove to you, what they have to prove to you is if you took smoking out of the equation that milton williams would never have gotten pharyngeal cancer. you did not hear anybody tell you that in this case. and we are going to go over that. dr. goodwin did not tell you that. with everything dr. goodwin came in here and said, he never said, you know, if you took smoking out of this question i do not think mr. williams would have gotten pharyngeal cancer. he did not tell you that. so let us go through this. four risk factors, independent risk factors: alcohol, hpv, poor dental care and tobacco. each one is an independent risk factor. that means all by itself it can cause the disease. that is what it means. and remember what dr. goodwin said. i've gotten ahead of myself. remember what dr. goodwin said, "not everyone that smokes gets pharyngeal cancer. in fact, it is only a very small percentage of smokers that get pharyngeal cancer." and remember what the other experts said, if you smoke and you get pharyngeal cancer, you know what, that does not necessarily mean the smoking caused the cancer. now, dr. goodwin told you that he, in his view, tobacco and alcohol acted together to cause mr. williams', milton williams' pharyngeal cancer. but let us look what else he said. "you are agreeing with me that there is nothing in the records other than what you saw in terms of history that would have determined whether alcohol or tobacco as the cause. "yes, i'm agreeing with you." so there is nothing in the records that says alcohol or tobacco or poor dentition or hpv caused this disease. he went further. he said, when you look at the cells, when you take a microscope and you look at the cells, you know what, there are not any features in the cells that you can identify with tobacco or alcohol or, for that matter, poor dentition. so, ladies and gentlemen, but what he did say, though, is, you know what, there are objective criteria for hpv. when it starts on the tonsils, it is most likely to be hpv. if it is poorly differentiated nonkeratinizing and basaloid features. that is dr. goodwin. those are objective features that are in this particular cancer. mr. finger made a big deal out of these objective features and he asked a lot of questions of dr. bennett. but he cannot change the evidence. he cannot change the fact that those features right there are in this tissue. dr. goodwin tried to run from that. he tried to run from that. he said, oh, no, no, no, back in 1996 we did not have the testing. people with hpv tumors do not recover better -- i mean, do not recover as well -- or recover better, things like that. but dr. goodwin also admitted that there was not any testing available for hpv in 1996. he told you as of 2002 hpv was not even a risk factor for the disease. and we have an epidemic of that disease today. he acknowledged to you that the literature on pharyngeal cancer and its relationship to poor dental care is exactly the same today as it was in 2002 for hpv. and he also told you hpv tumors can be deeply invasive and hpv patients can have a poor diagnosis. and dr. bennett told you that the hpv virus occurs in smokers, people in their 50s and the african-american population. but most importantly, ladies and gentlemen, i want you to look at this. these two experts that came in here -- and i asked dr. gomez-fernandez the same thing. mr. finger told you that dr. goodwin said yesterday that he did not see anything to suggest hpv. "so the bottom line, as a medical professional, dr. goodwin, is that you cannot rule out hpv as a cause of his cancer; is that right? "that is true. "and when you talked to your pathologist, the one that you sent the slides to. "yes. "she told you that in her opinion it could be hpv or tobacco or alcohol, right? "the pathologist cannot tell." so, ladies and gentlemen, the two experts that the plaintiffs brought you acknowledge that this tissue had objective features of hpv, and, in fact, cannot rule it out as a cause of the disease. but there is more. dr. goodwin told you that there are tests that you can run for alcohol or tobacco. "let us take hpv and put it off to the side, just looking at the cell, is there any test that you can run that would determine whether the pharyngeal cancer was caused by exposure to alcohol? "no. is there any test you could run that would determine or tell you whether the pharyngeal cancer was caused by the exposure to tobacco? "i believe there are some studies that show mutation associations with tobacco and alcohol, but i could not quote you them in detail. "and certainly none of those were run in this case. "no." and at a later point he says, "if a person is exposed to more than one risk factor, looking at the cellular material, is there any way to tell which one it is? "no." so the medical records do not tell you. the objective criteria, there is nothing for alcohol and tobacco, you cannot test for alcohol or tobacco or poor dentition. but you know we can test for hpv. what that means, ladies and gentlemen, is there is no scientific way that we can determine which of these risk factors actually caused his disease. that is what dr. bennett told you and that is what dr. goodwin is telling you. these scientific tests, which is what they do, they cannot determine -- they certainly cannot point to the two risk factors that he identifies. there is no reference in the medical records, there is no objective evidence and there is no test. now, ladies and gentlemen, this is a significant case, as you know. ms. williams, as we learned yesterday, is asking for a lot of money, asking for a lot of money. and as a result, we have had to talk about some things that make us uncomfortable. one of those things is hpv testing. and we know today hpv testing is available. but, ladies and gentlemen, we did not inject that into this case. mr. finger raised it with dr. bennett. and what he said was: "in those hours of depositions, dr. bennett, did you ever see where the defendants asked her whether she had been tested?" and then he went on a second time and he said, "dr. bennett, when you had a chance to talk to the lawyers, did you ever ask them to ask her whether she would been tested?" and then yesterday mr. finger made a big deal of it again. well, ladies and gentlemen, i'm compelled to respond to that. mr. finger represents ms. williams. mr. finger has had access to ms. williams for years. mr. finger and the plaintiffs have the burden of proof to prove all of these issues by the greater weight of the evidence. if the greater weight of the evidence does not support plaintiff's position on these issues then your verdict should be for the defendant. now, ladies and gentlemen, if this was such an important issue for mr. finger, why did not he have the test done and then ask her the question at the deposition? why did not he have the test done and ask her when she sat right there for two to three hours? do not you think if the answer to that question was, yes, i've been tested but the test came back negative he would have asked? the only reasonable inference you can draw from that, ladies and gentlemen -- and mr. finger talked about drawing inferences -- mr. finger: judge, i'm going to object and i'd like to go sidebar on this. the court: all right. (the following discussion was held at sidebar:) mr. finger: i'm objecting to this line of questioning. the jury cannot draw any inference from my failure to ask any particular question. they can draw an inference from the evidence, but he is asking them to draw an inference from the fact that i did not ask a question. that is not evidence. and i will be moving for a mistrial when you suggest to them that the reason i did not ask for it is because i know the answer. that is where he is going. and i will be moving for a mistrial, because what i ask and what i do not ask is not any inference. mr. burton: your honor, i have a case here that says a negative inference can be drawn from evidence not presented. mr. finger: and i think additionally it is inflammatory. it is completely out of line and it is suggesting that there is some sort of collusion or some wrongdoing on my part that i'm hiding the evidence. the message that they want to get across is i'm hiding evidence that is harmful to my case. and it is a direct personal attack on me and my integrity, suggesting to the jury that i'm doing this intentionally to keep the jury from getting the facts. the court: did you want to see this case before i rule? mr. finger: sure. mr. burton: your honor -- (the sidebar discussion was concluded and the following was held in open court:) the court: ladies and gentlemen, we are going to take a five-minute recess while we discuss a legal point. during the recess please do not discuss the case among yourselves or with anybody else, do not do any independent research and do not form a fixed conclusion until the conclusion of the argument and my final instruction before you all begin to deliberate. [#deleted sidebar#] [#deleted recess#] [#deleted sidebar#] mr. burton: thank you, your honor. ladies and gentlemen, if you look at the instructions you have before you you have an instruction on the reasonable inferences you can draw. and what i want to suggest to you is you can draw reasonable inferences from the evidence. so i'm going to move on now. one of the things that plaintiff want you to believe is that you should accept without challenge what dr. goodwin says. and i've showed you a lot of evidence about what he says that undercuts things. what they really want you to do is ignore a lot of other testimony. remember that doctors talked about a dose response relationship. and what that means is the greater the risk -- the greater the activity, the greater the risk. the more you drink the greater your risk is of getting pharyngeal from drinking. the more you smoke the same thing. the higher your exposure to hpv the same thing. now, there is no doubt in this case that milton williams smoked, no doubt about it. it is a risk factor, no doubt about that. but let us think about the alcohol. mr. williams drank alcohol. he drank lots and lots of alcohol. and yesterday during dr. bennett's examination there was an effort to minimize the alcohol. you will remember they flashed up the screen and said, aha, it was only one day he drank half a pint of vodka. oh, maybe the nurse got it down wrong because this is wrong, this is wrong, on daily beer and gin use. well, ladies and gentlemen, you have heard the evidence on alcohol abuse and use, and let us look at what it really is, all of the evidence. mr. williams drank beer, gin, vodka and occasionally scotch. he drank daily in the '70s and '80s. ms. williams thought he was a heavy drinker and had a drinking problem. how many of those days did he have half a pint of vodka? said he drank heavily at times. in '87 he got in the squabble with his daughter. in the early '70s they had some troubling times because he was staying out drinking with his friends. on how many of those nights did he have two or three or four or five, which a half a pint of vodka is? so, ladies and gentlemen, if you consider the role of alcohol, remember, the higher the use the greater the risk. let us talk about hpv, another risk factor. but remember, the risk increases with the number of sexual partners. and the evidence is uncontradicted that mr. williams had two children with mrs. williams, he fathered a second child, anethette, with a second woman, he fathered a fourth child with a third woman, and we know he had at least one extramarital affair. so if plaintiffs wanted to eliminate from this case -- i will not say that. what i want you to do on this is use your common sense, use your common sense on the role that hpv played. you have this evidence, you have the objective criteria and you have dr. goodwin saying he cannot rule it out. let us go to poor dental care. now, this is a third risk factor. and the plaintiffs tried to belittle this one as well. said there was not any literature on it and so forth. but remember what dr. goodwin told you, the literature on this is just like it was on hpv in 2002. and ask yourself, ladies and gentlemen, why did not they ask dr. goodwin to look at the dental records? why? they did not give him the dental records. and what do we know about the dental care? cavities, abscessed tooth, cutaneous fistulas, purulent fluid, osteomyelitis, bone necrosis. that is horrible dental hygiene. and remember, ladies and gentlemen, the lymph nodes that were swollen when mr. williams went to the hospital were in the right submandibular area, that is exactly where the dental surgery was. those lymph nodes were necrotic, which means dead, just like the bone tissue in the same area was dead as a result of poor dental hygiene. now, as i said, dr. goodwin is the only expert that is come in here and said unequivocally that in his view tobacco was a cause. but remember what he said, it was not just tobacco, it was tobacco and alcohol and tobacco was a bit more responsible, a bit more responsible. let us look at what dr. goodwin actually did in this case. he spent two to four hours, what that means, ladies and gentlemen, is he had a stack of about 100 pages, he ran 100 pages of medical records, picked out two of them that he thought were important and then he picked up the phone and called dr. gomez. and you remember what he said on his note, the very first thing he said to dr. gomez, got to review this for hpv, got to test this for hpv. so what did he not look at? he only reviewed part of the medical records. he did not review any of the dental records. he did not review any depositions. he did not do any investigation. and he did not do any medical research. so what does he not know? he does not know the true level of alcohol consumption. he does not know the real risk of contracting hpv. he does not know how poor the condition of mr. williams' teeth is because he did not look at it. and remember, each one of these is a dose response relationship, the worse it is the higher the risk. he did not look at any of that. what did dr. bennett look at? he looked at all the medical records. he read all the depositions. he did his own scientific and medical literature research. and what did he tell you? "i want to focus on the last four, that there are four risk factors here, poor dentition, smoking, alcohol and hpv, and you know what, you cannot say that any of them were a substantial contributing cause. and, ladies and gentlemen, that is the only logical conclusion that you can draw, the only logical conclusion. because remember, dr. goodwin was here, dr. goodwin was here, they did not ask him, they did not ask him whether milton williams would have gotten pharyngeal cancer if he never smoked. they did not ask. draw your own conclusions. fact of the matter is, ladies and gentlemen, what this shows is they cannot prove and they have not proved that smoking was a legal cause of his pharyngeal cancer. so let us move to the third question. was pharyngeal cancer the cause of his death? what you have to look at here is you have to assess the role of the delay in seeking treatment. we know that mr. williams was in dire condition when he went to the hospital, t4 n2b massive tumor, been there 6 months to a year, not a candidate for surgery, chances of survival less than 15 percent. and we also know, out of the mouth of dr. goodwin, what would have happened if he sought treatment earlier, more options, better prognosis, a survival rate for stage i is greater than eighty percent. dr. goodwin again. "is it fair to say that mr. williams could have been cured if he had presented earlier? "we do not cure everyone who presents early, but he certainly would have had a much better chance. "if he had presented 6 months to a year earlier his chances of surviving this would have been substantially enhanced. "yes." now, ladies and gentlemen, in assessing the symptoms that mr. williams had you are going to have to use your common sense here. you will have to use your common sense. you saw when i put right here the picture of the ct scan. you saw how big the tumor was. it was so big it completely closed his throat. he could not swallow. he could not eat solid food. does it make sense, does it make common sense that those symptoms were there for two to three weeks? i submit to you that it does not. and i submit to you that it is not -- no coincidence that pam williams saw problems a long time earlier. "when did his throat start bothering him? and the answer you gave me under oath was, 'i think about a year before we found out about the cancer. it may not have been a year, i do not remember exactly, but somewhere before.' "would it have been like '94 or '95?" and her answer was: "yes, '95. "and that is the answer you gave under oath in july of this year? "right. "in your deposition? "yes." use your common sense on that one, ladies and gentlemen. the unfortunate truth, ladies and gentlemen, is that in all likelihood mr. williams would have been here with us today if he would just gone to the doctor. we know he had access to health care. but the plaintiffs have failed utterly to demonstrate that the pharyngeal cancer was the legal cause of his death. okay, i'm going to shift gears here now because i think we have established that the plaintiffs cannot prove class membership. they cannot prove addiction was the cause of the smoking or have not proved. they have not proved smoking was the cause of the pharyngeal cancer and they certainly have not proved that pharyngeal cancer was the legal cause of his death. so what i want to talk to you about now a little bit is comparative fault. we do not believe he is a class member and that you should check one of those questions no. because if you check any of them no, you come back, hand your verdict to judge eig and you are free to go home. if you get past that and you get to damages we believe an appropriate number is in the thousands, not the millions. but if you get there the other thing you are going to have to do is you are going to have to apportion fault. you are going to have to decide how much fault to attribute to milton williams and how much fault, if any, to reynolds. mr. finger challenged me to come up here and tell you that milton williams was one hundred percent responsible. and, ladies and gentlemen, i believe that is what the evidence shows. and to help us on this what i've done is i've prepared a chart. this is the comparative fault instruction you will get and you have to put the numbers there. but i've prepared you a chart. and what i've done is i've gone back to the three words i said in opening, choice, control, responsibility, percentage. let us talk about tobacco first. mr. finger said -- or you heard in jury selection, you heard in jury selection, nobody made mr. williams start smoking. and there is no evidence in this case of why he started smoking, you have no evidence of that. mr. finger said in his closing statement, i cannot say anything they did caused him to smoke. mr. williams' choice. and let us talk about control for a minute. you heard the addiction experts, dr. goldman, their expert. the fact that you are addicted does not mean you cannot quit. what you have to do, though, what you have to do is you have to want to quit, you have to decide to quit and you have to try to quite. and, ladies and gentlemen, there is not one shred of evidence in this case that mr. williams ever wanted to quit, ever decided to quit or ever tried to quit. mr. williams smoked because he liked it. you heard that from janice. milton williams was in control. and under those circumstances where he is made his choice and in his control, i submit to you mr. williams is responsible. he knew what he was doing. he smoked because he liked it. he never tried to quit. mr. williams is one hundred percent responsible. let us talk about alcohol. who made the choice to drink, whether it be two or three beers a day or half a pint of vodka? mr. williams. who was in control of that decision? was it reynolds? we were not there. and whose responsibility was it? mr. williams. and certainly one hundred percent. hpv, who made the choice to engage in the behaviors that put him at risk of hpv? is that something reynolds did? no. it is mr. williams. who was in control of that decision? mr. williams. and who was responsible for the consequences of that? mr. williams. to what degree? one hundred percent. now let us talk about poor dentition. who was it that decided that he did not want to go to the dentist for months? you saw the record. who was it that decided that after -- that when it got so bad that he was having fluid coming out of his cheek that he would not go to the doctor, he would go home and put aspirin and orajel on it? that was mr. williams. who was in control at that time? mr. williams. who is responsible for the consequences that flowed from that? mr. williams. to what degree? one hundred percent. delay in treatment. who was it that decided that with this growth in his throat and a sore throat and all of the symptoms that he would not go to the doctor? it is mr. williams. who was in control? mr. williams. who was responsible? mr. williams. to what degree? one hundred percent. now, ladies and gentlemen, it is been a long, long trial, and i'm about to sit down. and i'm not going to have an opportunity, me or my partner jack, to talk to you again after mr. finger or mr. kaiser talk to you. that is the way it works. plaintiff gets the last word. so when i sit down and they get up, i want you to keep a few things in mind. keep in mind what jack told you, never saw or allowed anything, never changed his behavior, mr. finger told you in his own closing argument, i cannot say that any particular thing they did caused him to smoke. i also want you to keep in mind that mr. williams, milton williams was an intelligent man. he was a decisive man. he lived life the way he wanted to. he did what he wanted to when he did it. he smoked when he wanted to and as much as he wanted to and he chose to never even try to quit. he drank when he wanted to and as much as he wanted to. he got involved with other women when he wanted to and as often as he wanted to. he ignored his teeth for so many months he had severe consequences. and he delayed seeking treatment for his pharyngeal cancer for so long it likely cost him his life. ladies and gentlemen, those were deliberate, conscious, intentional choices that mr. williams made. he made them over his entire life. he made them repeatedly. and unfortunately, it is those choices, those choices that caused his premature death. and for that reason, ladies and gentlemen, we are asking that you return a verdict for rj reynolds tobacco company. thank you.