mr. uiterwyk: may it please the court. good morning. when i was getting ready this morning, i looked in the mirror and i said, god, henk, you look tired. and then i thought, you know, i'm tired because i've been talking for three and a half weeks, and then i thought, you know, talking is easy, listening is what is hard. and then i imagine, you know, you all sitting here for three and a half weeks listening to a tremendous amount of testimony, many, many documents, exhibits, and so forth, and a lot of repetitive things. and for that reason i want to give a special thanks not only on behalf of myself, my client, and all the attorneys and everybody in this courtroom. if it was not for people like you who are willing to give almost four weeks out of their lives and listen for those four weeks, our system would not work. and it is because of people like you that our system does work. now, fortunately or unfortunately, depending on the perspective that you look at it from, you are going to have to listen to us a little while longer. and you are going to have to listen to us talk to you about what you have heard and what you have seen over the last three and a half weeks. starting with that if a company in its zeal to make profits and increase their profits causes harm to its customers and to others because of their actions, they should and must accept responsibility for those actions. the defendants, as you have heard throughout this entire case from voir dire on, still do not accept responsibility for their actions. they will attempt to make this case about mr. willis' choices. they are doing this for obvious reasons. they are doing it to divert your attention away from many of the real issues in this case. which real issues are their choices and their decisions and how it led to what happened to jimmie willis; hoping that you will not focus on their choices and their decisions but only focus on choices or decisions that mr. willis made. and because we have seen and it is now apparent after three and a half weeks, they have not presented a single shred of evidence, a single corporate representative, a single witness, to give any evidence regarding the decisions and choices they made and how those decisions and choices affected people like jimmie willis. shame on them. no one to explain the choices and decisions that they made during most of the 20th century. the choice, for instance, to design, engineer a cigarette in such a way that it was easy to inhale so that you could take the smoke and the nicotine that is in it deep into their lungs, a choice to design and manipulate the cigarettes early on to obtain the 8 optimum level of nicotine to cause and sustain addiction; choosing early on to actually design a perfect drug delivery device, and the drug being nicotine. they chose to design and manipulate their cigarettes in a way that it made it easy for teenagers to inhale, made it easy for them to overcome the initial distaste for a cigarette, and they maintained the optimum level of the nicotine that once they started to smoke it, it caused them to become addicted and would sustain their addiction throughout their life. and they did this for young people particularly in the 1940s and 1950s like jimmie and others his age, so they would become addicted, as i'll explain to you more a little later. because once they became addicted, as a result of their manipulation of the product, they knew that they stayed addicted, that they would remain addicted. and they knew if they stayed addicted and remained addicted, they were customers and they were somebody they could make money from. the defendants also at the same time as they manipulated their products to appeal to the youth of this country, they also designed their marketing program, their ads, to appeal to people like jimmie as teenagers. and then when it got out that their product could cause you some harm, they chose and they decided that they not only were going to deny it that it could cause you harm, they only were not going to deny it that their product was addictive, they were going to cover it up, they were going to conceal and cover up what they knew and what they should have told all young americans and people in that generation. they chose and decided to enter a well planned and well designed, just like their cigarettes, coverup, to fraudulently conceal and hide the addictiveness of their product and the harm that it could cause. and when they got caught, which did not occur until the '90s, when their documents were forced out of their hands and they had to disclose their internal documents -- when they got caught at that particular time they said, oh, it is not our fault; it is all the smokers' faults. it was his choice. no different than what they are doing here today. the amazing part, instead of having someone explain and defend their choices and their decisions, they use arguments and manipulation of words. no one answered the overwhelming evidence that indicts them for causing the death and sickness of millions of americans. as they said in their opening and as they probably will say today in their closing, that this case is about three questions, and they will actually, as we remembered last time -- the first question was why did mr. willis smoke? they say it was his choice, but at the age of five when he tried his first cigarette was it an informed choice? no. when he started at the age -- regularly at the age of 15, 16, was it informed choice? no. at that time the cigarette companies chose and decided that they were not going to tell anybody, put any warnings, or disclose anything about their product that they already knew about. they decided at that time to not put anything on their packages regarding the addictiveness of their product or the harm that it can cause you. whose decision was that? whose choice was that? who should be held responsible for those choices and decisions? a time when they chose -- when jimmie was at the age of 5, 15. when they chose and they decided to make their ads appear sexy and healthy, cool, the thing to do, be big. whose decision and choice was that? and who should be responsible for that choice and that decision? a time when they marketed to youth and people jimmie's age, whose decision was that and who should be held responsible for that? a time when they chose and decided to intentionally make their cigarette easy to inhale, kept the level of nicotine at the optimum level, so once they got people of jimmie's age using their product, they had a customer for life and they had them hooked and addicted, whose choice and decision was that? who should be responsible for that decision? the second question: why did not he quit earlier? they are going to say it was all his choice. again, they actually probably will not say anywhere in their closing nor have they said in this courtroom about their decisions and their choices. well, he did try to quit, but he failed. he failed because of the choices the defendants made in choosing to design and manufacture the cigarettes in the way they did to cause and sustain his addiction. they will argue that he never made serious quit attempts, and we agree that he should have tried harder. you have heard from the very beginning we have agreed that he should have and could have tried harder, and for that he bears some fault. but why did 9 those quit attempts fail? because he wanted them to fail? no. he was unable to stop and relapsed every time because of the addiction to designed -- perfect drug delivery device that they designed. they will argue that he was not the motivated enough and he did not try hard enough and that it was his choice, but it was their choice to intentionally undermine motivation and diminish his choice when they designed the perfect drug delivery device so that he was -- when he did try to quit, he was in the grip of the addiction which caused him to relapse. they refused to take any responsibility for the addiction that they created and sustained as a result of the perfect drug delivery device. they refused to accept any responsibility for the choices they made and the decades of deceit and denial which provided a crutch for people like jimmie, oh, it is not that bad, they are saying there is nothing wrong with it, oh, they are saying if there is anything wrong with it we will take it out, they will say if there is anything wrong, we will go out of business. providing a crutch, the rationalization of denial for people like jimmie who were addicted. then the third question is what if anything did philip morris or rjr that could cause jimmie willis -- to cause mr. willis to be sick? the question should be whose defective, manipulated, designed and specifically marketed product was it that got him sick? this case is not only about jimmie's choice, as they want you to believe, it is actually primarily about the defendants' choices. let us go over what you are going to decide as it relates to that. before i do that, i need to remind you that the defendants have actually admitted after denying for decades, for decades, certain things -- they have come in here in this courtroom and admitted certain things. they have admitted that nicotine in cigarettes is addictive. they have admitted after ten years -- ten years -- after decades of denial -- that smoking cigarettes causes laryngeal cancer, bladder cancer, lung cancer, including small-cell lung cancer, and copd. and you have as part of the exhibits back there, you have that stipulation, you have -- and let me deviate for a minute, you have reams of exhibits there. and i actually urge you to look at some of these. as difficult as it may be, i think it will be an eye-opener because you will be able to spend some time rather than us having to do it to get this trial done. finally they admit that cigarette smoke was a medical cause of jimmie willis' laryngeal cancer. they have admitted that. also remember in this type of case and in these cases as the judge explained to you and as you have in your instructions that we have the burden of proof, but we have to do it by the greater weight of the evidence. and if you remember, we talked about that in voir dire at length -- we talked about the tipping of the scales. it does not require like this; it requires the greater weight of the evidence. it is not beyond a reasonable doubt, like you hear in criminal cases. it is okay to have doubts, as long as it is a greater weight of the evidence. with that all in mind, with these stipulations and that burden of proof, let us decide -- what time did i start? videographer: 9:10. mr. uiterwyk: i got scared for a minute. and you will see that happening because we have got a certain time limit, and i'm sure you are glad to hear that. but for all of us -- but anyway, we have a certain time limit, and so we do have a certain time limit we need to get through some of these things, and so i may all of a sudden talk real fast, i'm not going to do that to you. anyway, the first question on the verdict form -- and i'm going to actually put the verdict form up here because it is somewhat difficult to see up there. you all have the verdict form as part of your package of instructions and you will have it back there, one verdict form. and this is the verdict form. can you all see this? you can see it up there, too. you can see it better up there. the first question is, was an addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine a legal cause of jimmie willis' laryngeal cancer? that question is not about who caused it; that will come later. that question is not about whose fault it is; that will come later. that question is about -- is not about whether defendants' choices or decisions caused his laryngeal cancer; that will come later. the only question there, and i need you to look at it carefully, is was his addiction a legal cause of jimmie p. willis' laryngeal cancer, not the legal cause, a legal cause. and so in order to do that you have to do two things. number 1, you have to determine whether he was addicted. on the issue of addiction, try to think of a single witness who testified in this courtroom who said he was not addicted; there was not one. as a 10 matter of fact, when we tried to ask their witness, dr. goodman, about addiction, he tried to skirt around that like a rabbit in a cornfield. mr. cofer: objection, your honor, improper argument and (inaudible) the court's ruling. the court: overruled. ladies and gentlemen, this is argument, as you know. mr. uiterwyk: every witness who testified on the subject of addiction said there was no doubt that jimmie willis was addicted, heavily addicted. you will remember dr. benowitz -- and that is probably what is the hardest thing about this case to do is to go back three weeks -- and i know some of y'all took great notes -- go back three weeks and try to remember what some of these witnesses said three weeks ago is quite a burden. we are going to try to help you with that a little bit. because you will remember dr. benowitz, he was the world-renowned authority on addiction who came in here and testified about what addiction was, how mr. willis was addicted, what addiction caused, and we will go over that in a minute. he was a senior scientific editor of the 1988 surgeon general report on addiction. and we have dr. cummings who headed the largest in the country quit line. you will recall that dr. benowitz defined addiction, and he defined it as, loss of control of drug use. loss of control of drug use. that is the definition of addiction. he explained that what happens is, particularly with nicotine, is that it is not a psychological thing; it is actually a thing that has an effect on the physical part of your brain, that, in fact, is not a psychological, it affects the structures of the brain. i'm sure you all remember him talking about how the nicotine goes up and affects the nicotine receptors, which actually replaces acetylcholine, and i'm not going to get into detail, because i do not have the time to do that -- and it talks about how that changes the brain, and particularly if you remember he talked about when somebody started young in their adolescence, that they in particular not only had the changes in the brain but the changes were permanent. he then showed, and we have one board showing actually what happens when it goes in the lungs, how the cigarettes it rapidly -- debbie? clerk: yes, sir. mr. uiterwyk: thanks. thank you. how the manipulated cigarettes cause the nicotine -- because you inhale it deeper, the way they designed it, and because of the adjusting of the ph makes it go quicker to the brain and hits the receptors. that is exactly what happens and that is exactly what happened to mr. willis. and then once it hits the receptors, you have these receptors firing off until a period of time, and then you start feeling withdrawals, and then you light up again because the receptors require it. he told you how it releases dopamine and other hormones. and he also explained to you that once they get to be a regular smoker, once they have the nicotine kicking off the brain, that the smoker, the addicted smoker is no longer a total free choice; it is a diminished choice, driven by their addiction and their need for the nicotine hitting the receptors. let us see what dr. benowitz said during his testimony. what effect does the physical changes of the brain have on the loss of control? the loss of control occurs because exposure to the drug has produced physical changes to the brain. what about the issue of choice as it relates to the definition of nicotine addiction or addiction? do people really have a free choice once they become addicted? no. why? they keep on smoking because they need to have nicotine to feel normal. so that really drives their choice. "and in your opinion, does the addiction contribute substantially to driving and determining the choice?" "yes." "so is it the addiction that is the substantial contributing reason that people continue to smoke?" the answer: "yes." "in your opinion, based on your research, what have you determined as to whether or not -- why smokers keep smoking, even though they know it is bad for them?" "even though they know it is bad for them -- because they are addicted to nicotine." "so in your opinion, does the body or brain become dependent on being stimulated by the nicotine?" "yes." "and is that part of the addiction process?" "yes." "in your opinion, is that one of the reasons that people quit and then start again?" "yes." "or relapse?" "yes." and you will remember he showed exhibit no. 2003, 11 which is the demographics of smoking in the united states. how seventy percent of smokers want to quit. they are not committing suicide when they relapse; they just do not have the free choice and the control anymore. each year 17 million try to quit, and how many succeed, 3 percent. 97 percent -- 97 percent basically relapse because of the addiction. unfortunately jimmie was one of them. in fact, you will remember that he said that in the morning the first thing he did -- first thing he did was light a cigarette because of the addiction. he smoked between one to three packs for 37 years, a pack and a half average. he smoked -- got up in the middle of the night, his wife told you, former wife. he smoked when he was sick and he talked about all the withdrawal symptoms when he tried to quit: anxiousness, the irritability, the loss of the concentration; typical signs for addiction. and let us look at the slide which displays the addiction power and depth, the power and depth -- addictive power and depth -- and let us look where we put him, older start is down at the bottom, younger at start at the top. lighter smoker, heavier smoker, near the top. shorter duration, longer duration, at the top. longer the first cigarette, shorter the first cigarette, at the top. you know, the defendants argued that since he quit once he had his larynx removed he was not addicted. of course it is possible to quit an addiction. we are not going to be standing up here and telling you the person is addicted, that they cannot quit, that they cannot even try to quit and that they do not quit. some do, some cannot. even heroin addicts can quit. does that mean they are not addicted? secondly, even dr. goodman admitted that ninety percent of his patients come in are still smoking. he admitted that almost all of his patients, if not all, who have had a laryngectomy have no withdrawals after they had their larynx amputated. we also heard from dr. cummings -- testify on the issue of addiction. he said jimmie willis was heavily addicted and the evidence did not stop there. it did not stop with dr. benowitz, did not stop with dr. cummings. it also went on to dr. civantos, who you remember is the ear nose and throat doctor from the university of miami. he said jimmie was addicted, and also jimmie -- his three treating doctors who have no dog in this hunt, paid employees of the va administration, who said without exception that jimmie willis was addicted to cigarettes. so now you are left with the second part of the question: was his addiction a legal cause? and in order to do that we need to look at the definition of legal cause. you have this definition, but i'm going to point out some things to you with regard to the definition of legal cause. and these are important words to remember when you recall the testimony. addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine is a legal cause of loss, injury, medical conditions to jimmie willis, if -- and then it goes, or contributes substantially to producing. i do not know if you recall, there was tremendous amount of questions where the question was, did his smoking, did his addiction, contribute substantially to producing? the reason those words were used is because that is the words that is required to get legal cause: contribute substantially to producing such loss. and then you need to read on with that instruction -- in order to be regarded as legal cause of loss, injury, medical condition or damage, addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine need not be the only cause. addiction to cigarettes containing may be a legal cause, even though it operates in combination with the act of another, some natural cause, or some other cause, if -- if the addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine contribute substantially to producing such loss. note that it does not have to say it has to be the only cause -- only -- the magic words are contribute substantially to producing. let us look at the exact testimony from the witnesses on that exact question: did his addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine contribute substantially to causing his laryngeal cancer? dr. benowitz: "do you have an opinion, dr. benowitz, within a reasonable degree of medical certainty as to whether or not mr. willis' addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine contributed substantially to producing his laryngeal cancer." "yes, i do." "what is that opinion?" "that it did." and here: "without his addiction to nicotine he would never have been smoking the way he smoked and would not have developed laryngeal cancer." we all know that the nicotine does not cause the cancer, that is not what caused the cancer. the nicotine is what causes the addiction, the addiction is what causes the person to continue to smoke, and 12 they designed it in such a way so that you do continue to smoke, they make it easy to inhale so you do continue to smoke, they make -- manipulate the level of the nicotine so you do continue to smoke, and then when you continue to smoke, it continues to bathe and bring the carcinogens into the system. that is why -- how you connect the addiction to the disease, and that is why these doctors are telling you that it is the addiction that, in fact, causes the disease because the addiction leads to smoking, smoking leads to disease. and it is their product, that they made it exactly that way to happen, not to cause you diseases. they did not intentionally cause you disease. i am not representing that here. they did intentionally cause you to be addicted. then, sure, "in your opinion, but-for his addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine, would he have gotten laryngeal cancer?" "no." then we go on to dr. civantos, let me cover some opinions, and i'm going to kind of go through this really quick. "do you have an opinion within a reasonable degree of medical certainty as to whether mr. willis' addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine contributed substantially to producing" -- the exact words that we are looking for. "i believe it did." "but-for his addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine, would he have gotten laryngeal cancer, in your opinion?" "i do not believe he would have gotten a total laryngectomy, i believe it is extremely unlikely he would have gotten laryngeal cancer if he had not been addicted to laryngeal cancer -- if he had not been addicted to cigarettes." now, let us look at who the defendants presented on this subject, as to whether the addiction to cigarettes contributed substantially to causing laryngeal cancer. doctor goodman, did he answer that question? no. dr. stonesifer? no. dr. rosenbach? no. dr. epstein? no. anyone else? no. what they will argue is that had he quit earlier he would not have gotten laryngeal cancer. now, this is a trick, and do not be swayed by this trick. it is possible to quit an addiction, we do not deny that. like i said, all heroin addicts, just because they quit, does not mean they are addicted. but on this question -- on this question -- the first question of class membership, there is nothing -- there is nothing in that question about quitting; it is whether his addiction was a legal cause which led. the issue comes in later on the verdict form when you allocate fault as to what his choice played a part in it. it does not come into play here; it is not part of the first question. it is undisputed that stopping is possible. we know that. it is true with all addicts. the roles, however, of choice and addiction are not an either/or proposition; they both play a role. jimmie's role will be allocated in question number 4 where we allocate the fault. the defendants' role we allocate in number 4 where you allocate fault. they raise it here incorrectly in this particular question, the issue of choice. the reason they do that, because they know they do not have any defense to addiction. they have no witnesses to addiction, they have no witnesses on addiction and causation. one of the documents that they were forced to disclose and you will have back there will explain why they are doing that, why they are raising this issue of choice on the question of causation. it is exhibit no. 2184, and that document, in fact, says, we cannot defend continued smoking as free choice if the person was addicted. that explains to you why they are raising the issue of free choice, but they do not -- and why they do not touch the issue of addiction -- because they cannot defend these cases, continue smoking as free choice, if the person was addicted. it is undisputed evidence that he was addicted from six different doctors: dr. civantos, benowitz, cummings and the three treating doctors -- undisputed from two doctors who addressed the issue of causation, and contributed substantially to causing, that it was -- in fact produced his laryngeal cancer. they did not ask one witness that question. he continued to smoke their cigarettes because of his addiction, which caused his laryngeal cancer. the substantial reason he continued was because of the addiction. so once the judge told you -- once you first find him a member of that class, once you find him as a member of that class and that he was addicted, his addiction to cigarettes contributed substantially to producing his laryngeal cancer, you then go -- the findings come into play and those findings then are binding you on. they are part of the case. and it may be difficult for you all to accept that, but as you remember during voir dire, we went over that quit a bit, about your willingness to accept 13 it, if he is found to be a member of the class. keep in mind that that jury heard thousands and thousands of testimony -- hours of testimony -- and saw thousands of documents. and it actually saved you all a lot of time. could you imagine being here for a year like they were here? i notice i did not get a disagreement on that one. they actually saved you a lot of time so you did not have to go through those thousands of pages of testimony -- hours of testimony and thousands of pages. you will have these findings with you in the jury room. i'm going to summarize them briefly because i got 25 minutes -- i'm okay. those findings. number 1, the last finding was that they failed to use -- exercised reasonable care, which basically means they were negligent. that is actually the defendant, that is -- the definition of negligence. so rjr was negligent and pm were negligent. rjr and philip morris -- and this is a finding that the jury made, cigarettes were defective and unreasonably dangerous. now, these findings do not come into play unless he is a class member. that we need to be clear on. but once you find him a class member -- were defective and unreasonably dangerous, and fraudulent practice -- rjr and philip morris concealed and conspired with others in business to hide the harmful health effects, addictive properties or both. and then part of the findings: cigarettes are addictive, cigarettes cause laryngeal cancer, bladder cancer, lung cancer, and copd. now, where do we go from here? we could go to question 2, but i'm going to skip for a moment question 2 and question 3 of the verdict form. question 2 has to do -- whether cigarettes cause diseases -- it does not mean we are not coming back to it, i can assure you, we are coming back to them -- and question 3 has to do with how the conspiracy, whether or not it caused mr. willis' diseases and injuries and so forth. that is whether their concealment caused it. i'll come back to those, but i think from a flow point of view that you need to look at actually the fourth question, which is the allocation of fault. and here is what you do is you actually define the percentage of fault attributable to each party as being the cause of his injuries. how much was reynolds, how much was philip morris, and how much was the plaintiff's? and you will note that he says right here, in determining the total amount of damage, do not make any deduction -- reduction because of the fault of the plaintiff. the court, in entering judgment, will do that later on. now, in this question you will determine how much of what the defendants did played a part in causing jimmie willis' diseases. in that regard, the defendants chose to have a strategy that had three goals. they became a success with this strategy, and unfortunately at the expense of millions of americans. they made it as easy as possible to start by telling everybody no proven health risk, smooth, satisfying, cool, sophisticated with athletes and stars. made it as hard as possible to stop, look for greater addictive effects, enhance deep inhalability -- we talked about, control the nicotine levels. those are decision and choices they made to accomplish this strategy. and then they make it as easy as possible to start again by saying, anyone can quit anytime. feed denial, provide a psychological crutch, which you will hear. make wishy-washy, watered down and weigh way off any harm that may be caused by the product. eliminate the clear and present danger, which we will talk about a little bit longer, and appeal -- by doing that, appeal to the addicted smoker's rationalization and denial, which we will talk about. how did they implement that strategy? and we will look at four different factors in doing this. they physically manipulated, they marketed to youth in advertising, and they did mental manipulation. and then we will look at the choice they made with regard to what evidence that they presented on those issues. the physical manipulation -- and i'm going to put -- do we have the physical manipulation board here? well, we have it on the screen, and the reason i want the board is we are going to go back and forth here a minute. you will remember dr. henningfield, the first witness to testify in this case. dr. henningfield was the ph.d. from the johns hopkins medical school who worked for the national drug institute, who worked with the fda -- and worked with the fda on the number of factors -- who has actually written three books on the subject of tobacco, addiction, and cigarette design. and you will remember that he was the one who interviewed by dan rather, looked a lot different than he did on the stand. he was also the one who dissected the cigarette and showed us in a video how the smoke is inhaled and goes up to the lungs to the brain. now, what he did -- dissected the cigarettes and 14 explained to you at the same time how they added chemical compounds to tobacco to allow the easier inhalation and altered the natural tobacco. and at the same time how they controlled the nicotine level to keep it above the addiction threshold. and you remember he talked about -- and the documents show that they actually knew what the addiction threshold was, and you will have those documents back there. exhibit 1920 is one of them that we will talk about in a little bit. and what did he say regarding the physical manipulation? i'm not going to show you everything he said because we spent some time. and there was an answer there, cigarettes are among the most addictive delivery systems in the world and the risk of progressing from any use to -- from what? "the risk of progressing from initial use to addiction is higher than we see for any other addictive drug." "including cocaine and heroin?" "including cocaine." next, exhibit -- and then he explained about a drug delivery device, and he told you how it was, in fact, designed to be a drug delivery device. and this is actually from their own document, a tobacco product, and this is their own researcher who is saying this, and their secret document that did not get disclosed until the 1990s. the tobacco product is in essence a vehicle for delivery of nicotine designed -- designed to deliver the nicotine in generally acceptable and attractive form. our industry is based upon design, manufacture, et cetera. and then i asked dr. henningfield on that, and he explained to you how the defendants in this case designed the cigarettes to deliver the nicotine at the optimal level to cause and sustain addiction. let us see how he answered that. "what is your opinion as to whether or not the cigarette company have historically controlled the level of nicotine to make sure it is delivered at the optimum level to sustain addiction and cause it?" "they have for well over a half a century." unfortunately that half a century includes jimmie's life. he dissected the cigarettes and he explained how the defendants for decades manipulated the compounds and added flavoring to make it easier to inhale. and he explained -- "what effect the allowing of easier inhalation by adding chemicals -- does that have on the effect of nicotine and the ultimate addiction?" "it makes it easier to get the drug, easier to get high doses of the drug, and easier to get the drug deep into the lung where the most explosive kick or impact would occur." and then exhibit 3291, their own document, this is where they talk about -- and i'm just going to -- because of time, i'm going to summarize what this said, but you will have exhibit 3291. i urge you to look at 3291. i urge you to look at 1920. i urge you to look at 3065. and i may give you some more numbers. i urge you to look at all of them. but particular, this document talks about how they designed the cigarette to actually give a freebase effect, and you remember him talking about the manipulation of the ph. so, in fact, it becomes freebasing. freebasing like what? the same way freebasing cocaine -- gets the high quicker, gets the addiction quicker; it gives a kick. they knew it, they studied it, and there is indication they did it. now, they did not stop there. they then add flavoring compounds for taste, smoothness, bronchial dilations to overcome the aversion. an example, menthol. and if you look at that exhibit that we just talked about, 3291, you will see they actually talked about kool cigarettes, which is the cigarette that mr. willis smoked for most of his life from the early '60s to the mid 1980s. they did it so they could overcome any harshness, so they could bring it deeper into the lungs. they also -- and this is -- i do not know if you remember this from dr. henningfield -- they controlled the size of the smoke particles, and they did that to make sure that it would be absorbed by the lung easier, meaning the nicotine. i think you remember dr. henningfield saying -- how do you compare a cigarette of early 20th century from the cigarette in the mid 20th century, i believe he said it is like a kite to a rocket ship. they highly engineered, highly designed the cigarette to do what they wanted to do. i think dr. henningfield said it best, and let me let you look at this quote. "the way i have described it with friends and relatives and others is, i live in two different worlds. in one world i've worked with pharmaceutical companies, that in this area -- i'm not saying that everything they do is great, but in this area, they are doing everything possible to make it less addictive, safer, and the tobacco companies are working them out to make them more addictive." they called no one, no one to explain why they 15 manipulated their product, why they made it easier to inhale, why they adjusted the level of ph, why they adjusted the level of nicotine. they did not need to make their cigarettes easier to inhale. as a matter of fact, like that, they could make it less easier to inhale today. have they done it on any of their major brands? no. they did not have to manipulate the level of nicotine to keep it at a perfect level, optimal level to sustain addiction. they have the ability and have had the ability since the 1920s to remove all nicotine from their cigarettes. should they remove it all? no, but reduce it below the level to sustain addiction, keep it above that -- instead of what they do, keeping it above it. and why do they do this? because as dr. dunn said in his speech, 3605, which is another exhibit that i ask you to look at carefully, particularly pages 4 and 5 -- without nicotine, the argument goes, there would be no smoking. no one has ever become a cigarette smoker by smoking cigarettes without nicotine. why did they do it? they do not want to lose money. they knew that by doing that it may be better for their customers and may be better for the americans, but it could not put that cash in their bank account. and then in exhibit 1920 -- this is the rjr document, and i kind of shortened parts because of time. they said, we are a specialized, highly ritualized and stylized segment of the pharmaceutical industry. this is their statement, not mine. this is their document, not mine. i urge you to look at this entire document; it is enlightening. the cigarettes are designed to deliver nicotine in a generally -- an acceptable and attractive form. and then he goes, if we remove nicotine from our products, then we shall eventually liquidate our business. greed, that is what this is all about, greed. unfortunately, they put -- judge, we are not at an hour yet, i got ten more minutes. the court: yeah, we will do a little bit more. mr. uiterwyk: they have always put profit above the health of their customers and the americans. the worst part about it, they chose to do so intentionally and for exactly the purpose that they accomplished. the engineering and manipulation was done intentionally; that is what caused jimmie willis to get addicted. and which undermines his motivation and determined his free choice, causing him to relapse. but-for his addiction, he would not have continued smoking. but-for his addiction, he would not have gotten sick. the choice was theirs when they designed the cigarette that way. jimmie's choice was diminished by their choices and their decisions. but then that was not enough for their greed, for their profits. that was not enough for the manipulation of the product and the highly engineering nicotine delivery device, that was not enough. so what they did then, let us get the kids in. let us bring the kids in. let us get them when they are young, and what they did, they marketed to youth. they designed their ads to market to youth. and you know what they called them? they called them replacement smokers. do you know why they were replacing smokers? the ones they were killing, the ones that were dying from their product. the ones they did that to in the '40s and the '50s are the ones like jimmie who are sick and dying today. the ones who they appeal today -- the 440,000 deaths we have per year are actually the kids that they appealed to during that time frame, that they recruited in those years passed. they know not only how to market -- i mean not only how to manipulate the cigarette, they knew exactly how to market to the kids in the '40s, '50s, and '60s. unfortunately as i explained to you, the earlier they do that to somebody, the more addicted they become. the earlier they do that to somebody, the more heavily they are addicted. they knew this. the earlier they do that to somebody, the more they relapse. the earlier they do that to somebody, the more likely they are getting a smoking-related disease. as teague from rjr said -- and because of time i'm going to actually -- and this is another document i ask you to look at, this is a document 1040, and it is an important document because what it shows you, this is -- here, what qualities and image the new brand aimed at the youth market should have. first of all, moderate level of nicotine delivered at ph -- see the right ph, the right level they got in there, to ensure slow absorption. bland, soft, moist mouth feel, with minimal irritancy. highly -- very lightly mentholated, some visible novelty in the product, cool, sexy, neat. in the direction of greater manipulation, convenience for the beginning smoker. they knew exactly what they were doing. and then they talk about the product image and how they should do the -- designing the ads to make it adventurous, different, adult, those kinds of things. they knew exactly what 16 they were doing. and, you know what -- this document, the next one is going to be taking a little longer, and it is document 4051, exhibit 4051, and this was the 1967 ftc report about advertising. and i'm going to take a few minutes to see -- here's what the government said about their advertising that they were doing in the '50s and -- '40s and '50s that they were doing to kids and they were doing to the american public. they conclude, now due in part to the cumulative effect of cigarette advertising over the years, advertising that shows cigarette smoking to be enjoyable, pleasurable activity and ignores the suffering -- they not only ignored it, they kept it away from everybody -- ignores the suffering and early death that it causes, many youngsters consider smoking to be an acceptable and socially desirable activity. they tend to view cigarette smoking as a visible mark of maturity, a passport to adulthood. you member what jimmie said why he started, i wanted to look big. exactly what they are concluding in here. and then let us look about what they say about the -- about the advertising, and this is cigarette advertising, and this is where they say, well, our advertising -- he could not name a specific ad -- our advertising, we do not know that it reached mr. willis. let us see what the fcc concluded. "cigarette advertising reaches virtually all americans who can either read or understand the spoken word. cigarettes are advertised on both network and spot television, on radio and magazines and newspapers." you know, it is hard for us to imagine this because we do not see it. we have not been there. we cannot feel that, we do not relate to it, most of us do not. some of us unfortunately at my age. and many types of point of sale, advertising aids, we still have that, they have not gotten rid of that point of sale at the 7-eleven. "so pervasive is cigarette advertising that it is virtually impossible for americans of almost any age to avoid cigarette advertising." as dr. cummings explained, as he said -- he said, we have been talking about -- some time about the marketing, the wallpapering effect of this advertising, the marketing the culture that it created; it was a culture, it was wallpapering, it was everywhere. and he said -- we have shown and discussed to the jury about advertising. "do you have an opinion as to whether jimmie was exposed and affected by that advertising?" "he was exposed and he was affected." do you remember: number 1 brand everybody smoked, luckys, camel, number 1, pall mall, number 1, kools, number 1 menthol, and then marlboro number 1. he obviously was affected by the advertising. the defendants knew it. they knew their advertising worked, and they knew -- and it worked unfortunately on jimmie. he told you about the ads that he saw. did they put on a single witness, one company employee, one expert to explain or justify their marketing? to explain their marketing to kids who -- they made the product easier to inhale and get people addicted like jimmie willis. the thing i would like to (inaudible) what dr. cummings said -- anyone to mention or apologize for marketing to youth, getting them addicted without telling them what their product would do to them. once they got the youth of our country hooked on the nicotine in their cigarettes, they enticed them with their ads and continue to do so. and you have a book of those ads back there, look at them. we only showed you a few, but when you look at them, you will see the themes are so obvious who they are directed to. and they continued -- after doing it, they continued the manipulation, they continued to refine their engineering, as you saw on the exhibits about -- from rjr. remember, we are talking about the percentage of fault of the defendants in discussing this. now, we talked about their physical manipulation, we talked about how that affected jimmie and caused him to become addicted and cause his diseases. we have now talked about marketing and advertising. now, let us go into the conspiracy and coverup and talk about that for a moment. coverup not only of the harm that it caused you but of the addictiveness of their product and how that affected jimmie. your honor, it may be a good segue to stop. the court: in one minute it will be one hour, so that probably is a good time to break. ladies and gentlemen, we are going to take our morning break at this time. even though you have heard all the testimony and evidence, even though we are in the closing argument portion of the stage of trial, i urge you to, again, not talk about the case amongst yourselves. you will have plenty of opportunity to do that when you begin your deliberations. and continue to resist the temptation to form a definitive or fixed 17 opinion about the case. you have heard the instructions on the law, you have heard the evidence, but you have not heard the closing arguments. we will be back in 15 minutes, so that makes it about 10:25. enjoy your morning break. we will see you in about 15. (jury out at 10:09 a.m.) the court: all right. we will be in recess. (a recess was taken from 10:10 a.m. to 10:26 a.m., after which the following proceedings were had:) the court: frank, you can bring the jurors in. (jury in at 10:26 a.m.) the court: all right. mr. uiterwyk, you may proceed. mr. uiterwyk: may it please the court. before the break, we had talked about physical manipulation. we had talked about the marketing to youth. what we are going to be talking about now is what has been referred to as a conspiracy and coverup, not only of the harmful effects of their products, but also the addictive qualities and nature of their products and what they did to them as well. remember, this is a time we are talking about in the '50s and '60s of so forth. we did not have internet, we did not have cable tv, we had three tv stations, this is the time when we did not have investigative reporting, things did not come out, people were not exposed to what they are exposed to today with internet, cable tv and investigative reports and tv shows and so forth. it was also a time that we trusted the corporations, that they were telling us the truth, they were disclosing to us what was going on. now, remember also on this issue of conspiracy and coverup, you have already gotten -- if you have gotten to this point, you have gotten past the findings. the findings were already there, that they committed a conspiracy that they did cover up, that they committed a fraud. now, but this issue is not only important as it relates to comparative fault, but it is also related to other issues as well that we are going to be talking about. you remember this all started when the rat studies came out, painting the back of the rats with the cancer, and that was when they had the meeting at the plaza hotel. now, they had a choice at that time. they could have chosen at that time to come clean and tell the americans what they knew themselves, and they could have -- they had a choice to say, you know what, we know this as well. they had a choice to tell them what they were doing to their cigarettes to make them addictive. they had a choice to tell them that their cigarettes were addictive. they had a choice to tell them about what harms they knew about their products themselves. but instead of telling everybody, instead of embracing it, instead of telling them that as a result of their design and manipulation that cigarettes were addictive and because of the addiction that they will probably smoke for a long period of time in significant quantities that could harm and kill you -- instead, they made another choice that had devastating consequences on millions of people. they chose to cover up and lie. and as you have seen from dr. cummings, they went on a media blitz, and they went on a campaign like this country has never seen since then. it is hard to relate about this coverup and what they did to their cigarettes because we all know now, decades later, as a result of what was disclosed in the '90s what they did, so it is hard for us to think about how do we put that in our mind. let us assume that society -- what would society do today if someone was manufacturing a high-energy drink and they marketed it as high-energy drink to our kids in a package that was cool, sophisticated, adult, grown up. and what society did not know is that this energy drink had a drug in it that the manufacturers manipulated to cause and sustain addiction. and they had the right amount of the drug in there so it would be optimum level to sustain addiction. what society did not know either is that this drink also had carcinogens in them that cause cancer. the company knew it, both about the addictiveness and the carcinogens, but they hid it. then when there was some publicity about it, this high-energy drink, the manufacturer came out, just like the heads of the tobacco companies, and made public announcements: do not worry, there is nothing wrong with our product. it is not hazardous. and if we find anything -- and these are quotes from them -- if we find anything, we will remove it or go out of business. but at the same time, they know otherwise based on their internal documents. these are the same identical statements that the cigarette companies made. if society found out today about that drink and what they did to that high-energy drink, how they marketed it to the kids and how the harm that it would 18 cause, and the manufacturer of that drink did not do anything about it, did not disclose it, did not come out on it, the americans would be outraged. the american public does not like to be fooled or lied to, and they did not like to be fooled and lied to in the '50s and '60s and '70s, and thereafter. the reason i use that example because of the passage is time is difficult to grasp what the cigarette companies did during that time frame. it is not well known when jimmie started smoking and became addicted. it was not well known. now, they are going to -- there is a thing here. you will see that they will bring out some articles from the readers digest from 1926 or they will talk about some florida notes, or they will talk about these things in this paper or that paper about cigarettes and the harm or addictiveness and so forth. they never put that together, though. they always talk about that separately from when they talk about: well, we really did not know what the definition of addiction was yet. we denied addiction because it really was not a formal definition of addiction. you know, they do not put it also with their quotes from their interviews that: oh, we do not know if our product is harmful. we are looking into it. they do not ever put those two together and keep them apart separately. when the defendants chose to cover up, they knew and they chose to do what they did. the campaign that they went on lasted for half a century. not only -- so they manipulated their product, they manipulated their advertising, and then they hid from the american public about the addictiveness of the product. they knew if they would deny it -- they knew if they would deny it, they would create a psychological crutch for their addictive customers, who would say: oh, i do not have to quit now. they tell me they are going to take it out if it is bad for me. it is not bad for me. they do not know yet. so they were creating this campaign on purpose to create the doubt and rationalization for their customers. all this came out in the 1950s when jimmie willis was becoming a regular smoker. they had a choice and a decision at that time to put a warning label on their cigarettes, or to advise the american public. they could have put a warning label like this in the 1950s: warning: these cigarettes are addictive. they can and do kill our customers. did they choose to put any warning label like that in the '50s? did they choose to do anything like that to inform the customers or the youth of this country? you also saw at the same time many examples of the interviews that they were coming out at that time, contrary to what this warning label is saying. let us look at a composite of these videos of these defendants. these are interviews that occurred in the '50s and thereafter. these are interviews during the time they know their product is addictive, they know their product contained carcinogens, they know their product causes cancer. and these are things that they are saying to the american public on national tv shows for decades. this is why the engle jury -- these are examples of what was seen and what you have seen in this particular trial as to how this campaign really worked. go ahead. (at this time, a video was played in open court and taken down to the best of the court reporter's ability.) speaker: well, if it was found by somebody looking under the tobacco industry research grant, it would be made public immediately. speaker: i do not think the industry admits there are any bad elements. if there are bad elements through our laboratories, through the surgeon general, through the ama, through acts of god and luck, we hope that we may find them. and if they are found, they will be removed. but at this point, we do not know. speaker: we do talk to the person of whether or not cigarettes are hazardous. we do not believe that cigarettes are hazardous. we do not accept that. speaker: okay, the jury has not come in. speaker: it may not be harmful? you are not convinced? speaker: it may be or it may not be. we do not know. speaker: we do not know what causes cancer in general right now, so i think that we may find out what causes cancer and we may find out some relationship which has yet to be proven. (end of video.) mr. uiterwyk: in the meantime, they had documents which you will see. one of them is exhibit no. 1817, which is a document that they, from their own internal records, from philip morris' records talking about the surgeon general report, and this is written right after the surgeon general report in 19 exhibit 1817: the restraint and unity of the industry has been very effective. the opponents have had their inning. however, at some point, reflecting the same seriousness with which we met the report, we must in the near future provide some answers which will give smokers a psychological crutch and self-rationale to continue to smoke. here they are saying: we need to come up with more psychological crutches to continue to smoke, knowing that it is going to kill them. and then in exhibit no. 2050, they talk about this whole campaign and look back at it for the last 20 years. exhibit no. 2050, another document i urge you to look at when you go back. here. for nearly 20 years -- sorry, for nearly 20 years, this industry has employed a single strategy to defend itself on three major fronts: litigation, politics and public opinion. it has been, in fact, a holding strategy, creating doubt about the health charge without actually denying it. and that is what they have been doing. they have been creating doubt since the '50s when it started all happening. it gave people like jimmie the psychological crutch to -- you know, to quit, psychological crutch not to quit, to continue to smoke. you know, they talked about, and they will talk about, the issue of risk reduction. had he quit earlier, maybe he would not have gotten the diseases. you have heard testimony about this, you will hear argument about it. the problem with that is, the strategy of that all is, is that they have only been saying that in recent litigation. unfortunately it was not until 1985 -- 1985, after jimmie willis had been smoking for almost 30 years that they came out with their warning that -- to their customers that quitting now greatly reducing the serious risk to your health. they never told the public, never said anything to the public on any of their cigarettes when it really mattered in the '50s and the '60s and the '70s and the early '80s. time really did matter. unfortunately, the decision to wait until it was too late is what really mattered. each of the episodes when somebody talked about cancer, when the surgeon general report came out, when the rat painting came out, when the warning labels came out, was an opportunity. it was the best opportunity for them to tell their customers: we need -- you need to get rid of it, you need to quit, you need to stop. the best hope for most people who were addicted to have the maximum motivation created by that clear and present danger. but even then, people would relapse because of their addiction to the product. it is crystal clear that life and death events will motivate -- create the best circumstances to have the best chance. but nobody knew that better than the cigarette companies. that is the criminal part of it. that is the tragedy of it all. they considered every one of these opportunities, where they talked about the health effects to be actually an enemy of their business, one that may interfere in the flow of cash to their bank vaults. like hill & knowlton memo said, you know, if they just smoked one less cigarette a day, it would cost them billions. so what they did was, they intentionally watered down the message, made it wishy-washy, made it far off on purpose. they knew by doing that -- unfortunately, by doing it, by delaying, by not admitting what the problems were, they were dooming oil customers and millions were crossing the line between the normal life and a life with an altering disease -- life-altering disease. what a difference it would have made had they owned up instead of covered up, had they at least hushed up and let the health authorities and the health threat take its natural course. so going back to the verdict form, which we have up there, we have talked about their -- what they did, the decision and choices they made, and you will also have an opportunity to assign percentage of fault to mr. willis. they want you to accept that they do not have any responsibility for what happened to jimmie, that he bears all that responsibility. they want you to ignore the fact that they designed and manipulated their cigarettes and made sure jimmie willis could easily inhale them at the optimum level of nicotine. they want you to ignore the fact that they marketed them to kids. they want you to ignore the fact that they knew how addictive their product was, but they did not warn about it, or even disclose it, until years ago, and even lied to congress about it. they even lied to congress about it. they want to ignore the fact -- let us go to the mental manipulation -- with their mental -- we talked about physical -- they also did a mental manipulation, made smoking appear cool, healthy, fun and sexy. denied any suggestion of health risk, called for more research. 20 claimed that if research revealed a risky substance in their smoke, they would remove it or go out of business. well, they sure as heck ain't out of business. claimed cigarettes were not addictive. and created a controversy, you remember we talked about and i showed you a number of documents of how they created a controversy, intentionally, to do it, to provide a psychological crutch through their conspiracy. what evidence did they bring to explain their actions of the coverup and the mental manipulation and the conspiracy, the damage they did? not a person, not a witness, not a thing. jimmie willis relapsed. he bears partial fault because they did not try harder, but they bear the biggest brunt of that fault because of the parts that they played in this strategy and what happened to jimmie, because of what they did to their product, what they did to their unreasonably defective, dangerous products. we talked at length about laryngeal cancer and how addiction was the legal cause. now, they will probably say in closing: had he gone to the doctor earlier, had he gone to the doctor earlier, that maybe it would not have been as bad or he would not have gotten cancer, other than -- and they are relying on a single note from the discharge note, the four years of hoarseness note. jimmie emphatically denies it. the doctors tell you there is no way he had cancer four years before, even three years before. cotton smith, you remember we read his deposition? the guy who jimmie was help remodeling his house. he said he does not remember him having any problems up and through '92 and '93. paul, his own nephew, said the hoarseness did not start until the spring of '93 and testified to that. and they are trying to use the fine art of hindsight and speculation in order to avoid responsibility for what they intentionally did to their product, making it addictive -- and their unreasonably dangerous product. you cannot decide this case on speculation. you cannot decide it on speculation. even dr. goodman, who met with the lawyers for 24 hours in meetings, with regard to this matter, said the minute it gets less than a year, i cannot tell you if earlier treatment would have made a difference. he is the one who testified to that. as dr. civantos said, when asked if it was a year between dr. ellis and dr. howell, whether earlier treatment would have made a difference, he said it would be speculating. we do not have enough information. and they do not. we do not. we do not know the stage, we do not know when it was, we do not know what jimmie was told. we do not even know if it would have made a difference. so that brings us to the second question. your honor -- what time did we start, debbie? clerk: 10:30. mr. uiterwyk: the second question is: was smoking cigarettes containing nicotine a legal cause of jimmie willis's lung cancer, bladder cancer, copd. now, remember you have already got the findings at this point. the findings say that cigarette smoking does cause these things. smoking causes laryngeal cancer, et cetera. cigarettes that contain nicotine are addictive. and so then we go to the question about -- the second question, if we could, please, again, jeff. but let us look at the evidence on causation of those diseases. there is no dispute that sixty percent of bladder cancers are caused by smoking. you know what? he did not have small cell bladder cancer. he had mixed cell bladder cancer, which was predominantly transitional, with some glandular or adenocarcinoma and some small cell component. since the time of the initial occurrence in february of '04, some of the recurrences were transitional, some were small cell, which indicates clearly that he had a mixed cell. again, let us look at what the doctors say who have no dog in this hunt. and you know, i apologize by having to show you by video -- we had no choice. these are employees of the va, and we had to take their depositions at the va. dr. mowlazadeh. doctor: based on your experience, review of mr. willis' records and your care and treatment, do you have an opinion as to whether his bladder cancers were caused by his smoking cigarettes, more likely than not? yes. and what is that opinion? i think it is -- it is more likely than not related to smoking. he goes on. doctor, let me ask you this way: did his addiction to cigarettes and smoking contribute substantially to producing -- and you remember the "substantially producing" -- contributes substantially to producing, as we have in that definition, to 21 producing his bladder cancer more likely than not? yes. doctor, did -- more likely than not, did his addiction to cigarettes and his smoking, in your opinion, contribute substantially to each of his recurrences of his bladder cancers in 2007, 2008, '9 and 10, more likely than not? yes. now, we go on to dr. weinstein. now, in your opinion, doctor, more likely than not, did his addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine and his smoking contribute substantially to producing the bladder cancer that was found in february of 2004? it would be my opinion, yes. doctor, based on your experience, your care and treatment as to whether his addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine -- do you have an opinion containing nicotine and smoking contributed substantially to producing all the reoccurrences of the bladder cancer since 2003 up to the tumors that were removed last week, more likely than not? it would have -- i would have to say more likely. than not? answer: than not. did they contribute substantially to producing those cancers? correct? yes. i agree. yes. all right. doctor, i want you to assume further that he stopped smoking in -- this is an important answer he gives here -- i want you to assume further that he stopped smoking in 1993 -- they are all actually important -- after he had been smoking for approximately 37 years. can you explain to the jury how there can be a five-centimeter tumor in 2003 when he quit in 1993? answer: do not think that is unusual at all. we see a lot of people who have stopped smoking for 10, 15 years who come in with tumors, bladder cancers. we heard so much testimony about whether this bladder cancer metastasized to the lung, and we heard about it, i do not know, for hours and hours and which they refused, the lung, to call it small cell lung cancer. instead they call it cancer of the chest or cancer of the hilum. even though every doctor and every record that you have back there and every medical record, every doctor at the va called it small cell lung cancer. these are not experts that we hired; these are doctors, independent doctors. you know, did you notice that there were a few words in this trial that they just refused to use? one was "addiction." one was "small cell lung cancer," and one was "mixed-cell bladder cancer." very artfully, they changed the word. they changed "addiction" to "choice." they changed "small cell lung cancer" to "cancer of the hilum," and they changed "mixed-cell bladder cancer" to "small cell bladder cancer." they are doing this to create a red herring. i do not know how many of you know what a red herring is. basically to deviate the attention off to the goal that you are to solve. actually -- the explanation was actually used in a fox hunt, they used to drag it along the trails. the dogs would get off the scent. and that is what they have been trying to do. they have been trying to create a red herring. why do you think it is so important for them for them to try to say that the bladder cancer metastasized to the lung? the reason being is 98 percent of small cell bladder cancers are caused by smoking. let me address this whole thing of metastasis from the bladder to the lung for a moment and put out a few facts for you. almost all primary small cell lung cancers start in the hilum. you heard this testimony from dr. anderson, his treating physician, you heard this testimony from dr. mowlazadeh, you heard this testimony from dr. villa. almost all primary small cell lung cancers start in the hilum. you also heard them explain to you that the parenchyma, which means the lower part, you do not see it in there. 95 percent of small cell carcinomas are primary small cell lung cancers. and then if bladder cancer metastasized out of the bladder, mr. willis would be dead. the fourth one. cancers, bladder cancers, do not jump from the bladder to the hilum. now, they had an interesting take here. he said: well, he had an enlarged inguinal lymph node. i'm sure you remember the enlarged inguinal lymph node. how could you possibly forget. i'm not going to go over it except to say one thing. and that is, first of all, the bladder does not drain into the inguinal lymph nodes; it drains into the pelvic lymph nodes. that is a red herring. secondly, the most important part -- you remember dr. rosenbach, he was up here. and he said, the december of 2003 cat scan showed the enlarged inguinal lymph node, and then they showed him the march 2004 22 cat scan and he said -- it said no enlargement of inguinal lymph node, but he said -- then he said: well, here it is. it is still enlarged. and he said that. what you also have, though, what i urge you to look at, is the october 2004 cat scan. and let me tell you why. between march and october, actually up to september, he was under chemotherapy, and that chemotherapy, if you look at the october 2004 ct scan, that chemotherapy -- the mass in the lung was gone, the chemotherapy worked on the cancer that he had in the lung. it is gone. the cat scan shows it as gone. but guess what is not gone? the enlarged inguinal lymph node, which means it never was cancer. it never was cancer. it is all a red herring. all a red herring for you to go off on a tangent totally unrelated to what really happened. and then remember also the pet scan had no uptake, nothing. secondly, you know, if it was that type in the bladder, why did not this chemotherapy cure the small cells in the bladder? they reappeared. now, again, i want to bring you back to the treating doctors. dr. anderson, his primary treating pulmonologist since 2004 -- a pulmonologist, not a radiologist, but a pulmonologist who diagnoses lungs. and on the issue of primary lung cancer, this is what he said: in your opinion, based on your experience, review of the cat scans, pathology, was mr. willis' small cell lung cancer a primary cancer? did it start in the lung rather than some other organ? in my opinion, his small cell lung cancer was a primary cancer that did start in the lung. then based on causation -- dr. anderson, based on your review of the records, et cetera, more likely than not, was his small cell lung cancer of mr. willis caused by smoking? more likely than not, i think his lung cancer was caused by cigarette smoking. more likely than not, did his addiction and smoking contribute substantially to producing his small cell lung cancer? in my opinion, the fact that he was addicted to nicotine-containing cigarettes was very related to his later development of small cell lung cancer. and did his smoking contribute essentially to producing his small cell lung cancer? answer: yes, it did. all the doctors have agreed that his small cell lung cancer was caused by smoking and that it was primary. every record in the hospital reflects that. now, they are arguing: well, the doctors did not know because they did not stain the same. i'm not going to get into this tumor board. the doctors knew there was small cell there. they already knew about it with the march, 2004 tumor board. the staining is a red herring. the staining makes no difference. even when they were told about the staining during the deposition, they said it does not make a difference. dr. villa explained: it does not make a difference. dr. villa, dr. anderson, dr. mowlazadeh, said the lung was primary. two of those doctors are treating doctors. and both dr. villa and dr. mowlazadeh told you it really makes no difference whether it metastasized because, as dr. mowlazadeh testified: all right, but does it make a difference as to whether or not it metastasized? it is your opinion contributed substantially to causing both cancers? as a cause of cancer, no, it does not make a difference. and in this case, does it make any difference? answer: no. and what did their doctors say about causation? remember what dr. epstein said about causation when i asked him what caused his bladder cancer, he goes -- he actually said, i do not think it is smoking, but i do not know. and then he said -- dr. stonesifer: what causes bladder cancer? i do not know. when i asked dr. stonesifer what causes lung cancer, i do not know. and then you have dr. rosenbach, i do not know. is that a familiar phrase? "i do not know." sound familiar? (at this time, a video was played in open court and taken down to the best of the court reporter's ability.) speaker: at this point, we do not know. speaker: i believe they have not been proved to be unsafe. speaker: the fact that we do not know and nobody knows. speaker: i do not know what harms a cigarette smoker or what does not harm him. speaker: it may be or it may not be. we do not know. speaker: we do not know what causes cancer in general. (end of video.) mr. uiterwyk: on message, on message. 2004 -- 23 strike that. 1954, here is what they said: cigarettes are not addictive. here's what they said in this trial: cigarettes are not addictive to jimmie willis. here's what they said in '54: no definitive proof cigarette smoking causes cancer. here's what they said in 2010: no definitive proof smoking caused jimmie willis' bladder and lung cancer. on message, creating the doubt, creating the doubt, creating the doubt. what is the expression? you cannot take the stripes away from the tiger or lines or something like that? i think you know what i'm talking about. i do not know exactly what the expression is. do not let them -- their talk about this and their play of these words fool you. and then we have copd. everybody admits copd is caused by smoking; that is not an issue. however, they have a radiologist to come in here and said in court: radiologically, it is mild copd. well, if i have copd, i sure as heck do not want to go to a radiologist to be treated for it. we look at what the pulmonologist, his treating pulmonologist said. he said it was moderate to significant copd. that is the one we rely on. not on some radiologist who has an opinion about everything and anything. now, so then we go to the third question and it is very difficult to read because it is upside down. clerk: mr. uiterwyk, an hour and a half total. mr. uiterwyk: that means i'm going to have to hurry. we have two and a half-hours, and i have rebuttal as well and i have to save some time for that so that is why i'm doing this. okay. basically, the question here in number three was concealment of information regarding the health effects and/or the addictive nature of smoking cigarettes a legal cause of jimmie willis' loss, injury, or damage. you need to look at the jury instruction on reliance because the jury instruction on reliance says, basically -- all right. and we go here to jimmie willis, start there to the end of the paragraph: jimmie willis must show that he relied on the concealment or omissions or that he would not have acted as he did but for the concealment or omissions. a material fact is one that is of such importance that jimmie willis would have acted as he did, but for the concealment or omissions. that is the definition. that is what we have to show, to show answer yes to question three. let us look at mr. willis' testimony of whether he would have acted differently, but for the concealment: if they had told you that it would get you addicted, that it would get you cancer, would you have started regularly at the age of 16? i do not believe so. then, about whether he would have done differently in quitting if they had told him in '66 what they said in 1985 with the new warning labels: if the cigarette companies at the time, meaning in '66, had told you that smoking caused cancer, like they did in '85, and that quitting smoking at that time greatly reduces serious risk of your health, would you have probably tried harder to quit? yes, i believe i would have. and then he said -- this was the deposition that was read, portions of it, during the course of the trial, he said -- is it here, the video. (at this time, a video was played in open court and taken down to the best of the court reporter's ability.) q. do you believe that any tobacco company withheld information from you that would have affected your smoking decisions? a. i do. q. what? a. they lied. q. what did they lie about? a. about tobacco. q. what did they -- a. and what it did to you. q. what did they say that was a lie? a. they did not tell the truth. q. when did not they tell the truth? a. i do not know. q. who did not tell the truth? a. the tobacco companies. q. which one? a. all of them. q. what was it they said that was not truthful? a. they did not tell the truth on what it would do to you. q. what is it that it would do to you that they did not tell you about? a. i would say, take a look at me. (end of video.) mr. uiterwyk: all right. let us go on. also testimony during trial -- and i'm going to skip over a little of this and go only to the part, at 24 the time -- are you with me down here: at the time that you were smoking regularly and you were trying to quit, did you know at that time that they had lied to you? no. and had the tobacco companies not lied to you, would we be here today? i do not believe we would. we would not -- we would not be here today had they not concealed. ultimately, they got caught. and we all know they got caught in the '90s. and i urge you to look at the internal documents which show what they knew versus what they said, which revealed for the first time their acknowledging the dangers of their products and the addictiveness that it caused, revealed for the first time that they actually were manipulating their product and, in fact, manipulating it in such a way that it would cause and sustain addiction. the engle jury -- let us go back. strike that. the engle jury found that out and issued its findings. so what we have here is, quickly, we have the first question, which is: was cigarette addiction to nicotine a legal cause? yes. was smoking cigarettes a cause to the lung cancer, bladder cancer, copd? yes. all the doctors -- everyone who has testified on these issues have said yes, that it contributed substantially to producing, which is under the definition of legal cause. was it concealment of information, which we just discussed? yes. we discussed at length the percentages. and let me suggest something briefly there to you. you know, how do you separate -- well, first of all, let me suggest that it is your decision to make a decision as to what percentage should be allocated. i'm going to suggest twenty percent for jimmie willis. why do i do that? why do i say not 50/50 between mr. willis and the defendants? if we look fairly at the evidence, jimmie did not know he was going to get addicted, jimmie did not know that they manipulated their product, jimmie did not know that their product was defective. they did not disclose it. in fact, they outright denied it. yes, jimmie should bear some fault for trying harder. but he was driven in a significant way by his addiction to nicotine. so the significant fault for the development of his diseases, in fact, should be lying on the defendants, because they were the one who designed the product that got him addicted, and kept the dangers of the product hidden. that is their fault, that is their responsibility. his choice was driven by addiction -- strike that. their choice was not driven by addiction. jimmie's was driven by addiction. their choice was also driven by greed. when they could no longer defend their product, they devised a new strategy, blame the smoker. it was his choice. he should have known. all the more reprehensible, all the more reprehensible since they -- since they had the knowledge and publicly denied it. after you decide the percentage of the fault in question to number 3 -- question 3 and 4, you then come to the issues of damages. and let me go over those issues of damages. those are obviously important questions. the first question is the issue of his past medical expenses. you have an exhibit there which showed the total of his past medical expenses as being $412,104. it is in an exhibit outlining exactly those past medical expenses of 412,000. you also have a copy of the report from dr. raffa and its tables showing the future medical expenses of 255,000 to 435,000, depending on his life expectancy. now, we know he is not well right now. you know what, he has not been well for the last 17 years. mr. willis is a survivor. he has proven he is a survivor. one thing i ask you to do is not cut him short. not cut him short on the life expectancy, not cut him short on his future medical expenses. if it is not enough, he cannot come back here. he cannot come back in here and have another jury decide if he should have more. this is the only chance that he has of recovering the damages that he sustained as a result of what they did to their product and as a result of what they did. and remember, once you award just medical expenses and damages for medical expenses, both past and future, you have only awarded a part of his damages because in addition to the medical expenses are pain and suffering, disability, physical impairment, disfigurement, mental anguish, inconvenience, and loss of the capacity of life, enjoyment of life. we all think it is just pain and suffering; it is not. it is all those other factors that are in that pie. now, how do you determine what those damages are? it is an enormous task, very enormous task. you need 25 to kind of put yourself kind of in a time machine and go back and look what jimmie's life was before he got his laryngeal cancer, before he got his lung cancer, his bladder cancers, and his copd. when there was a time when he was going fishing and four-wheeling and enjoying life with his kids, when he would go out to dinner, movies, and have a good time. now, then we need to go in that time machine, that same time machine, and we need to look at what his life has been like for the last 17 years. and he is not able to do things that we all take for granted every day. not able to talk normally, eat normally, drink normally, smell normally, taste normally. every sense that we all take for granted. we also need to look that during the last 17 years he is had chemotherapy, six bladder surgeries, many, many more cystoscopies. the pain he is gone through, the hospitalizations, the pneumonia, the shortness of breath, the medications, the inhalers, the fatigue. unfortunately, it is not going to change. he either has to have his bladder removed or he needs to go through chemo and radiation. either one is exceedingly traumatic. he is a survivor. jimmie wants to live. so how do you determine the amount of these damages? well, you award what you all collectively feel is reasonable, fair, and just. there is no exact standard like there is for medical expenses. one way of doing this is we can use a want ad. and let me suggest -- this is a want ad, and this is a want ad for the person who has the job that jimmie willis has. this is a want ad that says: no education or previous experience necessary. job requires applicant to undergo removal of his laryngeal cancer nix with radiation to follow. job requires applicant to be unable to eat normal food, choke frequently while drinking liquids, no longer have normal speech, making him difficult to understand. applicant will lose all his teeth, sense of smell and taste. solitude a must, because applicant will not want to be stared at when in public. job further requires six bladder surgeries, multiple scopings, must endure constant pain, burning while urinating, multiple hospitalizations. must undergo a radical total removal of the bladder and/or chemo and radiation therapies. if surgery is the only alternative, must be willing to wear a bag to hold urine that must constantly be emptied and cleaned. applicant will be constantly short of breath, take multitude of medications and inhalers. applicant, because of the pain that must be endured and the repercussions of the surgeries, will not be able to enjoy the activities he once enjoyed. the problem with this job is, is that it is 18 hours a day, 365 days a year, for 17 years in the past and 13 years in the future. this job is a lifetime job, no vacations, no time off, no coffee breaks, no fringe benefits, and once accepted, you cannot quit. he is had this job for 17 years. he will have this job, according to the life care tables, for 13 more years. how do you determine the hourly rate for that job? i'm suggesting a rate of $65 an hour, ten percent of what one of the experts are paid. you can go less than that, you can go more than that; that is your decision. and then what you need to do, though, is you need to take the 18 hours a day for 365 days a year times 17 years. it works out in the last 17 years as 111,000 hours, 111,000 hours. for the next 13 years, it works out to 85,000 hours. you all determine that hourly rate for that job. after you decide on an amount that represents justice -- justice is what we are here for -- we are left with one more job in this particular case, and that is the issue of punitive damages. now, the question of punitive damages is: under the circumstances of this case, state whether you find by clear and convincing evidence that punitive damages are warranted. you do not establish the amount at this phase; just whether they are warranted. and you note it is not by the greater weight. let me put that board up here. it is not by greater weight; it is, in fact, by clear and convincing. that is a higher standard. it is a higher standard than greater weight, but lower than beyond a reasonable doubt. you can, again, still have doubts as long as it is clear and convincing. now, the instruction -- again, it is more than 51 percent, more than tipping the scales; it is clear and convincing. punitive damages, as you will see from the instruction, is punishment to one or both of the defendants for their actions. it acts as a deterrent to others so that others will not lie and mislead the american public like these defendants did. punitive damages are warranted -- go up above that, please. if you find for jimmie willis and against either 26 of the defendants, you must decide whether, in addition to compensatory damages -- in addition -- punitive damages are warranted as a punishment to one or more of the defendants and as a deterrent to others. we submit to you that you have got to deter these defendants. you, as members of this state and as members of this county and this community must be willing to send a message to others that actions like those by these defendants will not and cannot be tolerated. and in order to do that, if you find by the clear and convincing evidence -- let us go to the next one -- that the conduct causing loss injury, meaning the conduct they did, the conduct of manipulating their products, the conduct of marketing to youth, the conduct of lying and deceiving and conspiring to conceive (sic), was so gross and flagrant as to show a reckless disregard of human life, or of the safety and persons exposed to the effects of such conduct. what can be more reckless conduct and disregard of human life or the safety of persons exposed to the effects -- what can be more flagrant than manipulating a cigarette so you can get addicted to it when they know it could kill you? what can be more flagrant to make it easier to inhale so -- a product so they would have you as a customer? what can be more flagrant to a market to our kids, to our teenagers? what can be more reckless disregard than to lie and deceive the american public? what can be worse than that, particularly when you figure they are doing it to our kids? and they did it to the kids of jimmie willis' generation, the ones who are dying today. they showed an entire -- and these are "or," by the way. you do not show each one of them, or the conduct showed an entire lack of care, that the defendants must have been consciously indifferent to the consequences. they could care less that their product -- that they manipulated and designed their product so people would get addicted. they could care less that they encouraged people to smoke a product that was killing you. they could care less what they did and how it harmed. all they cared about was their profits, their bank accounts, and that is all they cared about. showed entire lack of care that the defendant must have wantonly and -- or recklessly disregarded the safety and welfare of the public. how could what they did not be a wanton and reckless disregard for the safety and welfare of this public, of our public, of our country, of our community? showed reckless indifference to the rights of others -- these are "or," as to be equivalent to intentional violation of these rights. you know, what is even worse -- what could be more reprehensible and outrageous, than to design a product, get your kids to use it -- get the kids to use it -- mislead their customers about what it has, what it does, in order to make a profit? not refuting it by having anybody come in here and explain what they did and why they did it, but by blaming the person that their conduct harmed? their product is deadly. their product is addictive, and they lied about it to jimmie willis and millions of others. they not only lied about it, they made it that way. they designed it that way. they marketed it that way. where was any witness to tell you that their design, that their marketing, that their design to make it easier to inhale, where was their witness to say about their design to maintain an optimum level of nicotine? where was the witness to explain, tell you why they were telling jimmie willis that their product was safe when they knew it caused cancer and was addictive? they are unrepentant, unrepentant. they have not repented to this day. they have offered no explanation to this day. you have heard them accept no part in playing -- causing jimmie willis and developing his devastating health problems. but that was their strategy and their shield, then and now. you, by your verdict in this courtroom can tell them what they did for the last 60 years is outrageous. outrageous, and a reckless disregard for the care and safety of our country, of the people of our country, and our community. they never cared and they still do not care. it is your role, it will be your job, to show that there are people who do care, there are people who are willing to say: enough, enough. you must be punished. we need to deter this type of activity. thank you. clerk: mr. uiterwyk, you have about 39 minutes left. mr. uiterwyk: thanks. mr. uiterwyk: may it please the court. good afternoon. the good news is i've got 39 minutes left. the bad new is i've got 39 minutes left. and i've got a lot of territory to try to cover because there was some new things -- or things that i even did not see during the trial that kind of, you know, that i felt like we should cover. but let me start with something that is a -- kind of a demonstrative, kind of shows the history of what the cigarette companies have been doing and why they have been doing it. and it is kind of a -- it gives a quick summary. you know, if you have noticed, they particularly promoted the deception, opposite of the truth they knew, they said it was not harmful, that is what happened. they denied deception: we did not know. that continued in the '50s and '60s. then they qualified the deception, they said we still do not know for sure, not proven not safe; depends on what you mean by addiction. they not only did that in the '60s and the '70s and the '80s and the '90s, they did it in this courtroom. deflect responsibility for the deception: we did not have anything to do with it; it is all your choice. then they repeat the new message: choice, choice, choice, and their defensive definitions. that has been the deception that they have been carrying on since -- for over half a century. you know, when we listen to mr. cofer's closing, all we heard -- the only thing he talked about was jimmie. he never once talked about philip morris. he never once talked about what philip morris really did, never explained what philip morris really did. it was just like the trial. they did not say what they did and why they did what they did, and then, interestingly, mr. johnson showed the chart of the 56 reduction of the nicotine, and interesting, if you note that chart, it actually was done by the ftc smoking record. if y'all remember the ftc smoking record, that is actually when they actually manipulated and changed the way they did the filters, so, in fact, the machine would not really draw the right amount of smoke; the way they did the overwrap, the filters, they put the vent holes -- did the overwrap so it would deceive the machine as far as the numbers that would come out. the numbers that they are looking at are, in fact, deceiving numbers, they are wrong numbers, as dr. henningfield testified during this trial, number 1. number 2, i never said that they increased the nicotine, no, and i never meant to say they increased the nicotine. as a matter of fact, the documents show what they did was they met the level of nicotine -- if it is too high, you cannot inhale it because nicotine is sharp, it burns. that is why natural tobacco wrapped in paper, you cannot smoke it, it is too harsh. so what you got to do, you got to do what dr. henningfield called was find the sweet spot, number 1, and you find the sweet spot; and, number 1, at a level that reduces the harshness and number 2 at a level that still sustains an addiction. and they did that, number 1, by manipulating, making sure they kept it at that level because they knew the level -- what the level of addiction was, and their documents, which you will have in the back, show that, number 1. number 2, they added the compounds to adjust the ph in order to allow for the easier inhalation, number 1. number 2, in order to make it smoother so you could go down into the lungs. they also added flavoring compounds to allow it to go deeper in the lungs. you never heard them say one single word in defense of the position that they manipulated their cigarettes and manipulated their product and manipulated the design to make it easier to inhale. not one word did you hear from them either in closing or during the trial. and then they say with regards to the physical manipulation they say, well, we reduced the nicotine, but they reduced it exactly at the level where people could inhale it and it still caused and sustained addiction. that is what the whole trick is, that is what dr. henningfield was talking about when he testified how they manipulated to a perfectly engineered and designed -- and their own articles talk about how they manipulated the level, kept it at a certain level -- it was not too high, was not too low, and that it can inhale without any difficulties and bring it deeper in the lungs. so then he also comes in here and he is talked about, well, we did not market to teenagers. well, that -- one of the exhibits you have back there is a 1926 letter written to their marketing people to go visit the prep schools and market their product. and what you will also have back there, you will have all the ads where you show -- and we showed, for instance, one of the comic-type ads where you get the free magic book after a certain number of coupons; you can see from those ads that they, in fact, targeted the youth. you also have other publications and you also have other documents back there which shows that they actually investigated marketing and the -- and what -- children did -- as young as 12 years old. so for them to say they did not target or market the youth, it is just not true and the documents speak differently. and then he points out, mr. johnson, about the issue of the documents, that we only had one document from this company, 13 documents from this company. you know, the deception, that is what we got here, we have deception, so, you know, that is deception. that is actually true deception, and i will show you some more deception before i finish in my next 20 -- 31 minutes, whatever it is. and the deception was is that they -- and i lost my train of thought. oh, yeah, the number of documents. they -- what they did not point out, what he did not point out, what they did not tell you is all the tobacco institute documents and the tirc documents and the ctr documents. those are part of the stack of documents you got, number 1. number 2, as we explained to you, we did not bring all the documents that the first engle jury saw. we did not want -- you would have been killing us by now had you seen all these documents. you would have been -- the judge would be killing us as well had we brought all these documents. and the jury looked at all those and made their findings about a defective and unreasonable dangerous product, made their findings about conspiracy and committing fraud, made their findings about negligence and so forth. they did it with all those documents. we brought you a sample, as dr. cummings explained to you, of the documents, not all of them. so basically all you heard was choice, choice, choice, and we know why they say that and why they try 57 to say it. and, you know -- we know that exhibit 2184 -- and we have seen it three or four times, and it is up there -- i do not know if it is up there -- there it is -- and the lawyers remind us, i'm told, that the entire matter of addiction is the most potent weapon a prosecuting attorney can have in a lung cancer/ cigarette case. we cannot defend continued smoking as free choice if the person was addicted. the reason being is if someone is addicted the addiction will always be a legal cause for long-term smoking. it will always contribute substantially. addiction will never be -- for anybody who is addicted will never be insignificant and meaningless; it obviously will not be. they still -- i do not know why but there is still a message, even though this -- the secret is out -- the reason they have -- the argument is choice, that is all they have got. they know they cannot defend the addiction. they must hope that there is some emotional reaction to their argument about the choice and that it overrides all evidence and common sense as to the role that addiction plays in it. and they were hoping that you would not notice or something that it is addiction that really is the part that plays in it. and as we know from the experts who only testify to this, the nicotine drives the choice. the nicotine constrains the choice, the nicotine undermines the motivation, the nicotine diminishes the free choice and the addiction to that nicotine that they created does that. the tragedy of this, they knew it in the '40s and they know it now but they still do not acknowledge it. so they knew the physical addiction that they were causing with the manipulation of their product, they knew it actually constrained choice, and that is what they wanted it to do. they did not want people to have a free choice, they did not want people -- and the reason being is, as you have seen from some of the articles -- and i do not have time to bring them all up -- if -- people would not smoke if it was not for the nicotine; that is exhibit no. 3065, the dunn speech. that is exhibit 1920, the teague article and research article. you know, it is one thing to continue to manufacture a product which basically kills you and can kill you and make you very sick. it is almost criminal to add to the killing effect of that product by -- in such a way that it diminishes the person's free choice when they find that that product can kill you -- and undermines their motivation and causes the smoker to continue smoking the deadly product, even when they know it. and that is because they maintain it at a perfect level. they design it in such a way that you can inhale it, they design it so it is easy to inhale and keep the nicotine going. they never had anybody even in argument talk about that. you know, it is criminal also that they marketed the product, particularly in the '50s and '60s -- mr. cofer: your honor, excuse me, this is the third time he is used the word "criminal." that is improper argument. the court: ladies and gentlemen, this is argument. i give fair latitude in argument; obviously this is not a criminal trial. the context that mr. uiterwyk is using that term, you can determine. mr. uiterwyk: i'm not using it in that term, i'm not. and what is the term i'm using it -- and actually the term i said was almost criminal was the term i used -- that they marketed at that time as being healthy, as doctors recommending it, as does not take your wind, as athletes using it. and they marketed it that way so that people would take of their product and think their product was fine to smoke even when they knew differently. without revealing in those ads during that time frame -- and we have got to bring ourselves back to that time frame, we cannot look at what is going on today because that is not what we are talking about -- we are talking about the time frame that jimmie became a regular smoker. you know, it is wrong for them to try to put this all on jimmie because of his choice. when they caused the addiction with their product and sustained it, they never warned about it until he was well into the addiction cycle. and when they did -- and you heard this testimony -- when they did warn about it, they did -- in fact, the warning, it may be hazardous to your health. you remember the testimony? in fact, they had people testifying before congress to actually water down that label, to actually get it less than what it actually -- to get it low down: it may be hazardous to your health, instead of saying what it said in '85 and it should have said in '55 is that it kills you, it causes cancer, and that it is addictive. they never put anything anywhere about addictive. and the tragedy of all it is, too, that when this warning did come out, it may be hazardous to your health, people said, you know what, maybe i should try 58 quitting like jimmie did, and he tried to quit. but at the same time they were pumping millions of dollars into advertising, millions of dollars, and there were pumping millions and millions and multimillions in the whole coverup and the media blitz, and then having people come on tv and saying if anything is bad we will take it out. you know what -- and the funny thing about it is you will see -- and why do not we pull it up now. why do not we go ahead and pull up the federal state (phonetic) speech. you have that? this is a speech given by the vice president of philip morris, and at the time -- this is 1954. remember, mr. johnson talked about 1954 that they disclosed, in fact, at that time, that there were carcinogens -- that dr. rodgman was finding carcinogens in their cigarettes and knew that the cigarettes had carcinogens, 1954. this is 1954, the same time when the rat studies came out. this is 1954 when they say from their own documents -- that they disclosed carcinogens in the product and they knew about carcinogens -- not disclosed them, knew about them in '54. and then he tells the people that he is making the speech for, if any one of us believed that a product we were making and selling was in any way harmful to our customers' health and our own as well, we would voluntarily go out of business. their product was then and is still today harmful to your health, and they have done nothing to make it less harmful, they have done nothing to stop it from causing cancer, they have done nothing to prevent people from getting addicted to it, they have done nothing to prevent people from being able to inhale it deep into their lungs. at the same time, ten years after that, the general counsel of brown & williamson, the manufacturer -- one of the manufacturers now owned by r.j. reynolds -- on exhibit 3615 -- how much time do i have? do not count this time for me asking about the time. clerk: you started at 3:33, which is -- ms. humphries: 19 minutes. mr. uiterwyk: 3615. we are going to do this quick. he says here, moreover nicotine is addictive -- this is the general counsel for philip morris. we are in the business of selling nicotine, an addictive drug effective in the release of stress mechanism. they said they did not know it was addictive at the time, they did not use that term. this is their own document saying that. and then in the meantime, at the bottom, we say, here is our triple, quadruple, or quintuple filter capable of removing whatever constituents of smoke is currently suspect while delivering full flavor, and incidentally a nice jolt of nicotine. these are documents, 3615 -- the document you are going to see -- and this is just examples of them, a nice jolt. and then he says if we are the first to be able to sustain the claim, what price kent? you know, i need to spend a little time going over the issue of legal cause. oh, yeah, and before i do that, one of the things that they were talking about is that he did not try hard enough to quit. well, he actually tried and he did not try hard enough. we agree he could have tried harder, but he did try to quit many times and he -- but what does it tell you when he was not able to quit, even though he wanted to quit? it tells you that he was addicted. it shows you that he was addicted. did he do all the right things? no. did he even know about the right things? no. did the philip morris publish the right things, r.j. reynolds publish the right things? no. they have the thing from 1997 -- well, jimmie was -- this case was over as far as jimmie was concerned in 1997. to the contrary, they lied about the health effects and they covered up what they knew and continued to engineer the product. now, why would they do this? greed. why would they make a product even more addictive when they knew it harmed and killed you? greed. why would they market to kids and everybody else to tell you that it is helping? greed. why would it start to come out that the product could cause harm, that they conspired together and attacked the surgeon general and deny what they knew? greed. why did not they make a cigarette less easier to inhale? greed. why did not they reduce the level of nicotine below the threshold for addiction? greed. why did not they warn their customers with a warning that had some meaning to it? greed. now, mr. cofer talked about tremendous freedom, and i agree, this great country has -- you have tremendous freedoms. but along with those freedoms you said you have responsibility. they have responsibility, too, for the decisions and actions they made. i'm rushing because i've got -- i want to get to a few things, and i do not have much time. i need to 59 talk about legal cause. mr. cofer, in fact, left out in discussing legal cause something very, very, very important. the question is a legal cause, and what the second paragraph says is that in order to be -- regarding the legal cause of loss, injury, et cetera, addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine need not be the only cause. addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine may be a legal cause of loss, injury, or damage, even though it operates in combination with acts of another, some natural cause or some other cause, if addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine contributes substantially to producing. it does not have to be "but-for"; it simply has to be contributes substantially to producing. now, let us talk about that because i do not have much time, and that is with regard to addiction. life is not simple, that there is only one cause for diseases, that there is only one thing that causes something. do you remember my example during voir dire? i told you about the guy that got in a wreck and it clearly was not his fault and he had a severe brain injury. and we all know that wreck was the cause of his brain injury, but then i added to that, he was not wearing his seat belt. and that is what also caused him to have the brain injury, make his brain injury worse. and i explained to you, there you had two legal causes. number one, the legal cause of the accident; number two, the legal cause of not wearing your seat belt. frequently life -- and that is why the whole thing about cause and choice, it is not an either/or situation; they all play some part. they all play some role. you know, all it does is contribute substantially. this is why i explained to you that nothing in life is so simple that there is only one cause. now, has anybody denied that addiction was a legal cause -- or not a legal cause -- substantial contributing cause? no. could he have gotten treatment quicker? yes. but let us talk about that for a moment, the treatment of the laryngeal cancer, and it is important that we look at 420 and 421 of his deposition, talking about dr. ellis. (at this time, a video was played in open court and taken down to the best of the court reporter's ability.) q. to boone, north carolina? a. yes. q. and you took him because he was hoarse; correct? a. yes, me and him both. q. and so the doctor he scoped your throat at that time, dr. ellis; is that right? a. yes. q. and then as a result of that, did you go see dr. howell because the hoarseness did not go away? a. yes, that is what he told me to do. q. and do you recall when it was that you saw dr. ellis in boone, north carolina? a. i do not remember. q. do you remember would you say it was fairly quickly that you saw dr. ellis and then you saw dr. howell or was there some sort of extended period of time between those two visits? a. i do not know how long it was, but it was a short time. q. generally a short time? like a month or so? a. yes. q. okay. (end of video.) by mr. uiterwyk: q. 1993, a month or so. and then we have paul willis who testified: do you remember the summer or spring when he went up to tennessee before in '93, before he had surgery in october of '93. yes, sir. and do you remember talking to him before he went up there -- yes, sir. -- with regard to what you noticed about his voice? he appeared to have a sore throat, and kind of raspy voice. and what did you tell him? i asked him if he thought he ought to get checked it before he went. i did not want him sick on his trip. what did he say? he said it was a cough, that he would be all right. if it got worse, he would have it checked out. do you remember how long that raspy voice? i do not remember exactly. did he have it when he came back in '92? no, sir. did he ever have it prior to 1993? it was before he left on his trip. i'm talking about before 1993, did he ever have it? not that i recall, no. month. did you ever recall him having a hoarseness or raspy voice before the time he was leaving for north carolina in 1993? no, sir. tennessee in '93. sorry, i beg your pardon. i said: no, sir. are you certain that when you heard the raspy voice for the first time, it was in '93? yes, sir. so we have that testimony, and we have carolyn's testimony which was in may of '92 and it was actually in '93. we have testimony that says -- we have testimony all over the place. we have issues all over. exhibit 19, for instance, which is from the johnson city from the radiological consultant, what did he say? quote: the person has a history of sore throat associated with hoarseness which worsened in the last what they want you to do is they want you to speculate on the gap between when he had his hoarseness and when he was finally diagnosed by dr. howell. they want you to speculate and make a decision about legal cause based on pure speculation on snippets here, snippets there, and totally -- i will admit, it is 17 years ago, there is testimony all over the place in that regard. but they are the one who are saying that it did not cause. they are the ones who are saying, well, if he had gotten -- if he had gotten treatment, if he had seen a doctor, if it was in '90, '92, or maybe if it was -- but then you remember dr. goodman testified, anything less than a year between when he saw dr. ellis and when he was diagnosed by dr. howell, i cannot tell you with any degree of certainty as to whether it would have made a difference; that was dr. goodman's own testimony from their experts. clerk: mr. uiterwyk, you have 15 minutes remaining. mr. uiterwyk: how many. clerk: 15 minutes remaining. mr. uiterwyk: are you sure? clerk: 4:12. mr. uiterwyk: i was going a mile a minute. i was killing lori with that one. sorry, lori. i may go back. no, i'm kidding. and then they say -- first, they say the addiction has nothing to do with it, but, in fact, the in fact they are saying the addiction is meaningless, it had no substantial effect, it did not participate at all in contributing to his laryngeal cancer. and you know the interesting thing about it is, they admitted that smoking causes laryngeal cancer. there is an admission, a stipulation that is part of the record that they admitted that smoking caused his laryngeal cancer. they cannot escape that now with speculation, which is what they were asking you to do. he did a good job, but if you looked at the different snippets and different pieces, they were all over the place. they were everywhere from four years -- which, by the way, dr. goodman says there is no way he has cancer four years before -- and dr. civantos -- no way he had cancer three years before, and probably did not have cancer two years before because the life of this tumor, from growth until diagnosis, is anywhere between seven to eight months to 18 months. and that is what the testimony was. so this hoarseness of four years ago or two years ago really does not play a part in this case. it is pure speculation on their part to suggest otherwise and for you -- and asking you to do otherwise. now -- and that is what they are asking you to do on that issue. let us talk briefly about the lung. i think we have covered it enough. they want you to ignore the treating doctors on the issue of the lung being a primary cancer; they want you to ignore the treating doctors who said that it was caused by his smoking. and they want you to basically -- saying that the treating doctors, even though they found out about the stain, they are sticking to their guns because they may be sued -- first of all, they work for the u.s. government and the va hospital, number one. and number two, for them to even suggest that, it is called deception and it is called basically speculation. that is what i heard so much in their closing was them coming up with stuff that it is just pure speculation. well, maybe the doctors did it for this reason, and maybe the doctors did it for this reason. there is no evidence, and the judge will tell you -- has told you in the instructions. you do not speculate. you base your decision on the evidence, not on their speculation, which is what they are asking you to do on the issue of the laryngeal cancer and actually asking -- and trying to tell you to ignore what the treating doctors said about the lung cancer. and then they -- again, deception. i tell you, they have been experts at it for over half a century, and unfortunately, they are still using it here in this courtroom. i ask you not to be fooled by their deception. 61 for instance, 46 percent people who die were caused by smoking. we are not talking about death in this case. what we are talking about is what the information is, 60 to 66 percent of people who develop bladder cancer are caused by smoking. they, again, kind of twist a word here, twist a word there. and then they talk about the copd. they even twisted that. they said it stopped progressing. what they did not tell you, as we get older, our lung capacity gets lower, and as dr. anderson explained to you in his deposition three weeks ago or so, two and a half weeks ago, he said because of age, your lung capacity gets lower; and unfortunately, because of the copd, that exacerbates the loss of lung capacity that you have as you get older. and, again, it is a deception on their part. now, i do not have much time left. you know, you saw that speech by wiseman, the vice president of philip morris in 1954, where he said: if anyone we believed that the product we made was harmful, we would go out of business. we would voluntarily go out of business. we now know their product is harmful, and they have done very little to change that or make it less addictive. we cannot put them out of business. we cannot do that. but we can punish them for what they have done and send a message to other people and deter future actions like this. and that if you do things like they have done -- and you know, i need to stop here for a minute. they say: well, what did we do that affected jimmie? that is just totally not fair. they made their product so that people like jimmie would get addicted. they made their product in such a way so people like jimmie could inhale it. they made the product so that he would lose his choice -- not lose it completely -- diminish his choice, undermine his motivation, and they made it that way. and so what we need to do is you need, on the verdict form, there is question three on the reliance issue. question three, if you recall: was the conspiracy, the concealment, a legal cause of jimmie willis' injuries. and that was, if you remember, was the concealment regarding health effects, the addictive nature of smoking, a legal cause of jimmie willis' -- and they said, and do you remember the instruction, which you have, it will tell you that in order to be a legal cause, you have to show that he would have acted differently had he known about the addictiveness or the health effects. and let us look at jimmie 1 and jimmie 2 and see what mr. willis said, and i'm rushing. that is in quotes for him. i saw you say: what is jimmie 1 and jimmie 2? let me tell you what that is. that is actually -- i call it jimmie 1. it happens to be in the computer as jimmie 1 and i have it in my notes as jimmie 1. it has nothing to do with anything other than jimmie 1. if they had told you that it could get you addicted and that it could get you cancer, would you have started regularly at the age of 16? no. and we know they did not tell him. we know they did not warn him. let us go. do you also blame the cigarette companies? i do. why? because they lied to me. what do you mean, you say they say they lied to you? what have they lied to you about? they did not tell us what it would do to us, and what was in the cigarettes. the chemicals they put in there to make it easier to inhale. the flavors they put in there to make it less hash. at the time you were smoking regularly and you tried to stop, did you know at the time that they lied to you? and you -- you know, they interestingly say -- and he says, no. they interestingly said: you know, he never could tell you what they did not tell you. he never could tell you what they concealed. he was not able to tell you what they concealed. how can you tell somebody -- how would he know what they concealed if they concealed it? and that is what they asked him. they said: do you know what we concealed that would have made a difference? he did not know what they concealed, and he did not know until 1998 what they concealed. and had the tobacco companies not lied to you, would we be here today? i do not believe we would. debbie? clerk: you have five minutes. mr. uiterwyk: i'm not going to take the five minutes. i'm not going to do that. i just want you to remember that the other jury had millions of documents -- not millions -- thousands of documents and looked at thousands of hours of testimony. we gave you a sample of what the documents are. 62 i urge you to look at those documents. you know, henningfield is the only person who testified about the manipulation of the product. henningfield is the only one who explained to you how they manipulated the product and what effect that manipulation did. as a matter of fact, they also talked about filters for one second, and they did say one thing, and i do not know if you remember this from dr. henningfield. he, in fact, testified that, yeah, they used the filter, but they always made sure that they got enough nicotine to sustain addiction. and that was his testimony. they always made sure. and the blatnik report -- this is the blatnik report to congress. here's what congress concluded about their cigarettes: the cigarette manufacturers have deceived the american public through their advertising of filter-tip cigarettes. congress's conclusion about what they did, and they said, oh, we were so great, we put these super-duper filters on. they deceived the american public because -- i would urge you to look at this document because there is a number of -- a lot of information about what they did and how they did it and how they manipulated and how they deceived the american public. you know, mr. cofer ended up with a quote from jimmie: that is your decision. what drives that decision, though, that it is your decision about smoking, that what drives that decision from an addictive smoker is the nicotine. it is still your decision. it is still your decision to light it up. but if you do not want it, if you do not like it, if you do not think it is healthy for you, why do you light it up? because you are addicted. and that is what jimmie willis was. he was addicted, he was harmed by the addiction, he developed laryngeal cancer from the addiction, he developed his other cancers from the addiction. they have been deceiving the public, they have been trying to do it with creating doubt, what they mention in their documents. do not let them do it in this courtroom. thank you.