mr. finger: thank you. may it please the court? counsel and ladies and gentlemen of the jury, good afternoon. when i spoke to you a little over two weeks ago when we first met, we talked about your function and what you could expect in this trial, what was expected of you and your willingness to follow the instructions of the law and base your verdict only on the evidence that comes before you. all of you when you walked into the courtroom once you knew that it was a case that involved smoking, the overwhelming majority of you had a notion that whoever smokes has made their choice, and you all knew that, that was your thinking coming in. this trial and the evidence you heard is indeed about the choices that milton williams 2785 made. and you knew when you walked in that he made a choice to smoke. you knew when you walked in that it was up to him to quit, to be responsible. but i suggest to you that what you did not know was the reason why he made this choice and why milton williams and a generation of americans made the bad choice they did. and i suspect that what you did not know is the role that the tobacco company in this case in particular and the tobacco companies in general had to do with the bad choice that milton williams made. that i suspect you did not know. this trial, while it is very much about the choices that milton williams made is as much about the reasons they made it and the choices exercised by the defendant tobacco company that resulted in the bad choice that cost milton williams his life. before i get into the details of the case i want to take this opportunity on behalf of mr. kaiser and virginia williams to let you know we appreciate your attentiveness. your lives were interrupted for a couple of weeks, your routine was interrupted, you missed work, probably cost you some money, to listen to this 2786 case, to resolve this case, to bring your sense of fairness in what is right and your intellect, not just your intellect, not just your ability to judge the facts and the evidence, but to bring to the courtroom your inherent sense of what is right and wrong. for that we thank you. because just as you have the opportunity to see us act up -- act up, mr. kaiser does not act up, i act up, but we had the opportunity to watch you. nobody fell asleep. everybody was attentive. and there is a lot of material to synthesize. we heard about koilocytes and hpv and if you think that mr. kaiser and i are on top of all that that you heard this morning and understood the halo effect and the koilocytes, i'd like to think we are on top of it, but the fact of the matter is it is highly technical. i will discuss with you the import of that testimony, which i think you got, but we appreciate your attentiveness. the judge told you in the first issue, the threshold issue, which we talked early on, is this matter of class membership. because the first issue you must decide -- can you turn on the elmo, please? 2787 well, it appears we are having some technical difficulty. so rather than use up my precious time, which is limited, i'll talk to you without the benefit of the elmo. the first question you are going to be called upon to answer, and i would put the verdict form up if we could get it up, is: was milton williams addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine? the first part of this case, this trial, involves three questions, three questions in order for milton williams to become a member of the engle class. before you get into any issues about how much fault was on milton williams and how much fault on the tobacco company and before you even consider awarding him a nickel, you must first determine if he is a member of this class of people. and you determine that by answering certain questions, three questions. and that is pretty small and pretty blurry. this is the verdict form you are going to get. first question: was milton williams addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine? that is an easy one. that is a very easy one. 2788 and the reason that is an easy one is because the defense in this case do not contest it. they told you in opening statement, and i have the transcript of what was told to you, "we do not contest that he was addicted as that term was used today." no issue on that one. they are conceding he was addicted. a pack or two a day for 40 years. we appreciate their generosity in acknowledging he was probably addicted after 40 years. so they give you that one. that one's a yes. there is no dispute on that one. now, i'm going to skip the second one and i'm going to go to the third question. the third question was: was pharyngeal cancer a legal cause of milton williams' death? see that. was pharyngeal cancer a legal cause of milton williams' death? and i submit to you there is no dispute on that. he died from pharyngeal cancer. nobody suggested otherwise, not their medical examiner from montana, nobody that you heard. he died from throat cancer. the answer to that is yes. the question that is in dispute in this case and that i'll talk to you about is number 2. 2789 was addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine a legal cause of milton williams' pharyngeal cancer? that is the question. that is the question that bears on whether or not cigarettes and smoking killed him or hpv or bad teeth. because the burden is on us to prove to you that the addiction to cigarettes, they admit addiction, but we have to then take and prove to you by the greater weight of the evidence, not beyond a reasonable doubt, this is not a criminal case, just the more persuasive effect of the evidence, just tip the scale by evidence that is more persuasive than theirs, we must then demonstrate to you that the addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine, they all contain nicotine, was a legal cause of milton williams' pharyngeal cancer. in other words, if he did not die from smoking, if he died because his teeth were bad, he died from hpv, he died from alcohol abuse, if he died from something totally unrelated to smoking, then that answer is no and we are not a class member, it is over, because we have not proven causation, we have not proven that the cigarettes killed him, something else killed 2790 him. that is why you heard all this testimony about hpv and risk factors and alcohol, because the idea is and the defense is he is addicted but they have not proved that the smoking killed him. how do we know it was not alcohol that killed him? how do we know it was not hpv that killed him? how do we know it was not poor dent -- these are risk factors, these are things that can cause cancer of the throat. so how has the plaintiff satisfied their burden of proof? what have they put forward to tell us that it was the smoking rather than these other risk factors? that is the significance of it. all of that is designed to raise doubt. the defense is raising doubt about whether or not the nicotine in the cigarettes killed him. it was something else, not the nicotine. now, you heard from dr. goodwin. and this is where we come in, so i'm going to spend time talking about our medical testimony and their medical testimony. because you are going to have to decide which doctors to believe. this is where you come in. and you are going to have to stack up the testimony of dr. goodwin and carmen 2791 gomez, who you heard this morning, versus dr. bennett. dr. bennett's role is to come in and say we cannot say what it is was. i cannot say it is hpv. i cannot say it is smoking. i cannot say it is poor dentition. i cannot say it is alcohol. we do not know. we cannot say. and if we cannot say then the plaintiff has not proven their case. the burden of proof is on us. and if we cannot say then they have not proven what they need to prove and defendant wins. now, you heard from dr. goodwin. and he said, i can tell you what it is. it is a combination of smoking and alcohol. i can say, maybe dr. bennett cannot, but i can. to justify his conclusion that we cannot say -- i'm getting to dr. bennett -- he talks about hpv and he talks about the koilocytes, all this thing about the koilocytes. the purpose of that raised by the defense is so that you will think, maybe it is not the smoking. you know, it is hpv, there are koilocytes there, you know, that is a sign that suggests hpv. maybe the cigarettes did not kill him, it is hpv. and if that is the case they have not proven their case. we have not made the link between the cigarettes and the cancer. and 2792 that is why you heard carmen gomez. you are going to have to decide, were they koilocytes or not? now, they cannot be -- one of those doctors is wrong, okay. dr. bennett says it is a koilocyte suggestive of hpv. carmen gomez this morning said it is not. so you have got two different opinions. what is interesting is, even if you believe every single thing that dr. bennett says you still cannot conclude it is hpv. and he does not say it is hpv, even if it is a koilocyte. i tried to get him to say it, because like i said, it is suggestive of hpv. and he said, the only objective proof i have, the only objective proof is this micrograph. and he drew the lines that showed what he thinks is hpv. we know it is not. the better of the two doctors, the more qualified of the two doctors you heard this morning. but you get to judge the credibility of the witnesses. you get to judge. when you go back in the jury room, you decide. who do you think knows more about pathology, their medical examiner from montana or the girl that works down the street at the sylvester cancer clinic 2793 working with a team of doctors right here every day? you heard her testify. did you get the idea that maybe she knows a little bit more about it than he does? did you get that idea? did you get the sense that maybe she spends a little more time on pathology than dr. bennett? we know that is all she does is pathology. dr. bennett does 300 autopsies a year. when does he have time to look at slides? i assume he takes a weekend off here and there. there are 52 weekends in a year, that is 104 days. that only leaves 260 days, working days, he does 300 autopsies. that man is doing more than an autopsy a day. how much time do you think he spends looking at slides and staying on top of the material? do you really think he knows better than carmen gomez? do you really think he is more qualified? it is a joke. it is not close. but you will have the chance to judge their credibility. you would think that they would be able to find a well-qualified pathologist somewhere east of the rocky mountains. mr. jack williams: objection, your honor, 2794 personal attack. the court: overruled. you may proceed. mr. finger: he is from billings, montana. there was testimony that we have excellent pathologists in boston, philadelphia, new york, chicago and, you know what, with all due respect to dr. bennett, when you folks think of topnotch doctors, it does not matter what the field is, what comes to mind? you do not think new york, boston, philly? does anybody, when they are thinking about a topnotch doctor, does anybody go, you know what, i gotta check out billings, montana? you know what, that is where you are going to find your topnotch doctor, that will be the first place that comes to mind, right? wrong. but what you have in billings, montana is the expert witness whose job it is to come in and testify something else killed him. he testifies for automotive companies, and what does he say? he gave you an example. the wrongful death case, automotive company is sued, the seatbelt did not work, his testimony in favor of the automotive company is it was not the 2795 defective seatbelt, he had a heart attack. patch, the patch. it was so powerful. pharmaceutical company gets sued, the patch is too powerful, it resulted in a death. his testimony: oh, no, no, no, the patch did not kill him, it was a heart attack. then lo and behold, what does he do here? no, no, no, it is not smoking. i cannot say that. it was hpv maybe. but the one thing i can say is, we cannot say it is smoking. he is the something-else-killed-him expert. that is who you hire to come in and say it was not what you are getting sued for, something else killed him. well, we brought you the head, dr. goodwin, we brought you the head of the sylvester cancer clinic, who happens to specialize in head and neck surgery. now, he is the head of this and he said, without any doubt at all, it is a combination of tobacco and alcohol, it is not hpv. hpv, he said, is more common in whites than blacks; dr. bennett disagrees. it is more common in nonsmokers than smokers; dr. bennett disagrees. it is more common in younger people than older people; dr. bennett disagrees. 2796 you gotta decide, one of these doctors is wrong. somebody is making a mistake, i suggest to you the better doctors are the ones we brought in from the sylvester cancer clinic as opposed to their medical examiner from montana that they have used 12 times. i think this is trial number 13 that he comes in and says it is something else. in the other cases, we know what he does for them in other cases because we know in these cases many of them involve lung cancer. and what he does in those cases, we touched on them in cross, he will come in and say, oh, that cancer in his lung, it did not start in his lung from smoking, it metastasized. it came from some other place and it was not caused from smoking. in other words, if somebody has liver cancer that does not come from smoking. so if the cancer in the lung has spread from the liver, they have not proved causation. there is addiction, it caused harm, but it did not kill him because we know that this cancer is in the liver, it spread to the lung. they use him to say, oh, it did not go to the lung, it spread. and then you have not proven causation and 2797 everything is wonderful, the defense wins because the smoking did not cause the harm. that is how they use him. well, you decide. you decide which doctor you liked. the one thing that dr. bennett cannot talk about is treating people. he has not treated anybody. dr. goodwin did. dr. goodwin has treated 10 cases of head and neck last year. the last time dr. bennett saw a head and neck case richard nixon was president of the united states the last time he ever treated somebody like that. that is why he always talks about what the literature says. the reason he has to rely on the literature is he does not treat people. he does not know how they present. he just relies on the literature. that is the expert they are counting on to suggest to you we have not proven our case. it may be hpv. and on that subject, the issue, you know, we brought out the fact that during the course of virginia williams' 14 hours of deposition they never asked, they never asked if she was ever tested for hpv. and on redirect examination dr. bennett was 2798 asked, well, mr. finger had the opportunity to ask you that, mr. finger did not ask. well, there is a very good reason i did not ask. i do not need the answer. i've got the head of the sylvester cancer clinic saying i exclude hpv. i do not need to ask -- mr. jack williams: objection, your honor. that is not in evidence. mr. finger: that was the testimony. mr. jack williams: there was no testimony to that effect. the court: ladies and gentlemen, as i mentioned to you earlier, what the attorneys say is not evidence. they are giving you their view of the evidence. but you must rely on your own recollection of the witnesses and exhibits together and discussion during deliberations with your colleagues to determine your view of what the evidence is. mr. finger: we did not ask because we are satisfied with dr. goodwin's testimony that he excludes hpv and it is alcohol and tobacco. and if they want to suggest to you that maybe it is hpv, they should have asked and you would not have to wonder. we are happy with the evidence 2799 that we have. i do not need to ask. now, you may be wondering, well, how about the alcohol? you know, i mean, i understand tobacco is involved, but if there is alcohol involved too, how can we say that the cigarettes was the cause? because even dr. goodwin said it is a combination of the cigarettes and the alcohol. does not the fact that there is alcohol involved, does not that suggest that that answer to question number 2 should be no? because that does not talk about alcohol and we know alcohol is involved in this cancer. and the answer to that question is found in the instructions that judge eig read you. what is the cause? see, we are in the word business, us attorneys. and the question is: was addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine a legal cause? and the operative word there is is it a legal cause. and we define what is a legal cause. and that definition resolves that issue about the combination of alcohol and tobacco. and what we are told is, and i'll read you the instruction, let me put it under here. "in order to be regarded" -- the judge just 2800 read you this. and it is on page 8. "in order to be regarded as a legal cause of death," and i highlighted the important language, "cigarettes need not be the only cause. cigarettes may be a legal cause of death even though they operate in combination with," and then they say, "the act of another," we are not talking about another person, "some natural cause," we are not talking about that, "or some other cause," that is the alcohol, some other cause, "if the cigarettes contribute substantially to producing such death." dr. goodwin said it is primarily tobacco in combination with the alcohol, primarily. that means that the cigarettes contribute substantially. it does not have to be only the cigarettes. it does not have to be solely the cigarettes. if the cigarettes operate in combination with something else, in this case alcohol, but the cigarettes contribute substantially, and we know from dr. goodwin it does because he said more likely, it is more the tobacco and the smoking, then we have proven it. that is a legitimate cause. in case anybody is thinking, well, how about 2801 the booze? if you think it is the tobacco and the booze, the combination is enough. that is all we need to prove. because i wanted to address that. dr. goodwin's testimony -- and we have the benefit each day of the transcript so i can read you verbatim of dr. goodwin, chief medical officer, sylvester comprehensive cancer center, leadership and administrative responsibilities on the medical side, and most of the teaching is done while they care for patients. and what he said is that the hpv is much less common -- was much less common five to ten years ago, even more [sic] common before that. and when asked: "if we went back to 1996, of hpv, tobacco and alcohol, which would be the more serious risk factor? "tobacco. "the second, in '96 or '95? "would be alcohol." and the two of them acting together have a synergistic effect. in other words, when you put the two of them together, it is not just 1 and 1 equals 2. the two of them together make it even more than an additive effect, 1 and 1 2802 equals 4. it is called a synergistic effect, the two of them together are even more than just adding them together. dr. bennett, by the way, disagrees with that. i guess dr. goodwin is wrong. you know what, if you believe dr. bennett then carmen gomez does not know what a koilocyte is. she is totally incompetent. everything she told you i'm positive, totally incompetent. she is wrong. and dr. goodwin, who testifies as to the people he treats, hpv, they are white not black, they present late, the tumors respond better to treatment. his tumor did not respond well to treatment. hpv tumors do. unless dr. goodwin is wrong. but if you think that guy knows what he is talking about, if you think he knows more than dr. bennett then we have proven our case. you decide which doctors have more credibility. by the way, carmen gomez, you did not hear her say that she is testified for anybody anytime. this is the first time she ever sat in a courtroom and rendered expert testimony. and, yes, she was asked, oh, you hate cigarettes. and i guess the conclusion is she is a liar. see, she hates cigarettes that means she is lying 2803 to get the tobacco company. i assume that was the point. do you think she lied? do you think that? do you think that? it is a joke. this issue is a joke. they fly some guy in from montana who is mostly a medical examiner -- mr. jack williams: objection. the personal attacks need to stop. the court: i respectfully overrule the objection. mr. finger: they fly someone in from montana and they ask you to believe him over doctors that have spent their life treating patients and looking at cells and slides. i suggest to you the doctors we presented are more credible and we have satisfied proving that the nicotine was a cause of the pharyngeal cancer. it was nicotine and tobacco and we have proven it. interestingly, dr. goodwin says most of the patients who present present at stage iii or iv. they make a big issue out of, oh, he waited late and he had a tumor the size of a sweet potato in his throat. you know, it is interesting, they sent him home. it was not emergency surgery. 2804 that tracheostomy was not an emergency. do you really think that he went there, had a tumor the size of a sweet potato in his throat and they said, you know what, you can go home. call us when it turns into a watermelon. it is only a sweet potato now. get back to us when it grows. do you think maybe they are exaggerating how big it was? and the interesting part of this, dr. goodwin says most people do not even develop symptoms until late. they want you to believe milton williams is at fault because he waited too long for treatment. he has nobody to blame but himself. he waited too long to get treatment. he should have gotten in sooner. except we know from dr. goodwin that most people when they present with this type of cancer do not present until it is a stage iii or stage iv, if you believe dr. goodwin. he may be wrong, but if you believe him then we know that the symptoms do not develop until it reaches this stage. so, no, milton williams did not wait too long. he did not wait until it was the size of a sweet potato and he could not breathe. i suggest to you that that is absurd. and i suggest to you 2805 that what milton williams did and how he presented is entirely consistent with dr. goodwin's experience, unless dr. goodwin is wrong. but i submit he is not wrong. dr. goodwin's opinion: "did you arrive at an opinion in this particular case as to the cause of mr. williams' oropharyngeal cancer? "yes. i believe the cause was tobacco and alcohol as a secondary factor. i do not see anything in this case to suggest hpv as a cause." and that koilocyte, we know from carmen gomez, is not a koilocyte. now, they cross-examined her this morning, well, you testified in depo somebody could take a look at this and think it is a koilocyte. and she goes, yeah, but not people with my experience. maybe a resident might take a look and think it is a koilocyte, but people with my experience who -- she is modest, she does not want to toot her own horn -- who lectures all over the world on this, they know right away, it is like a familiar face, she knows right away it is not a koilocyte, she spends every day of her life looking at these slides, not trotting 2806 around testifying as an expert for various industries and not doing autopsies. she knows a koilocyte when she sees one. now, dr. bennett may think it is, and she said, a resident may get it wrong, he does not know, at best. if you want to give him the benefit of the doubt, he does not have enough experience and he is making a mistake. if you do not want to give him the benefit of the doubt, he is saying what they want him to say. but i suggest to you in either case he is wrong. and carmen gomez, did you get the sense that she knows what she is talking about? did you sort of get an idea? she sounds pretty smart. i think she knows what she is talking about. i suspect and i suggest that you did, because she does. what we brought you were two doctors. carmen gomez never testified before in a case, and dr. goodwin, i think this is the third time he is testified in a tobacco case. they have used dr. bennett 12 times in tobacco cases alone. we brought you professional doctors who happen to be witnesses. they brought you a professional witness who happens to be a doctor. and that is 2807 the difference. dr. goodwin, everything fits, nonhpv. i see nothing here to suggest hpv, no koilocyte. oh, poor dentition, the teeth. the teeth. maybe what killed him is an infection or throat cancer came from the teeth, okay. now, dr. goodwin talks about that. see, he treats people, he sees them, he knows what causes these things because he treats them, he sees them. he just does not rely on the literature, what he reads. the teeth. dr. goodwin. he makes a distinction. there is a difference between cancer of the oral cavity -- the mouth, the lip, the tongue -- and the oropharynx, the base of the throat. and he associates no risk factor with this type of cancer. he says, yes, there is some literature suggesting that it is. i do not see it. i do not see it. and he dismisses the teeth. lymph nodes, they make big of, oh, he had lymph nodes, he should have run into the doctor sooner, he had these big lymph nodes. well, we know from the doctor, you can have enlarged lymph nodes, it does not put you on notice that, i may have cancer. you can have enlarged 2808 lymph nodes from a cold, from a fever, from an infection. and it does not suggest to anybody, i may have throat cancer. my conclusion, dr. goodwin and dr. gomez are credible, more qualified than dr. bennett and that testimony allows you to answer question number 2 yes. now he is a class member. once you answer questions 1, 2 and 3 yes, he is now a class member. and now we get into the history. now this form. now we get into number 4, "were the defective and unreasonably dangerous cigarettes placed on the market by rj reynolds tobacco company a legal cause of milton williams' death?" now, what is interesting about that question is that it presupposes that the cigarettes were unreasonably dangerous. the question is not, "are the cigarettes unreasonably dangerous? it says, "were the defective and unreasonably dangerous cigarettes placed on the market by rj reynolds a legal cause?" and why are they telling you that it is defective and reasonable [sic]? why are they 2809 telling you the only issue for you to decide is if the defective cigarette caused the harm? why are they telling you that? because you have these findings, these engle findings that now come into play. once you make him a member, once you go yes, yes, yes, now these findings that the judge told you about, they now come into play. and what the judge told you and what comes into play is that smoking cigarettes causes pharyngeal cancer. that should come as no surprise. you heard that from dr. goodwin already. and you heard that from dr. bennett. so that does not tell you anything you do not already know. this is what the judge read you, that nicotine in cigarettes is addictive. that is a fact. all of these six things are facts. when i spoke to you two weeks ago, i said, would you be able to accept these things as facts without any evidence because the judge tells you it is a fact, you do not get to question it? you all said you would. so when you go back in the jury room, once you find he is a member of the class, every one 2810 of these is a fact, we do not have to prove anything. it is a fact. going into that jury room, number 3, "rj reynolds tobacco company placed cigarettes on the market that were defective and unreasonably dangerous," that is a fact. we do not have to prove it. it is not in dispute. that is a fact. that is their starting point, it is defective. "rj reynolds tobacco company concealed or omitted material information not otherwise known or available knowing that the material was false and misleading or failed to disclose a material fact concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes or both." there it is. they hid the truth. fact, that is a fact. that is a fact that is not open to dispute. they cannot dispute it. they cannot tell you they did not do that because you have been told you must accept it. so all they can do is attack milton williams. the best defense is a good offense. they cannot deny these facts so they defend the case by saying milton williams chose, it is 100 percent his fault, none of these things matter. 2811 they are going to have to look you in the eye and say, you see these things, none of them matter because milton williams made a choice so it is one hundred percent milton williams. so even though he did these terrible things, we still win because it caused no harm. none of this affected milton williams so we still win. that is the defense. that is what they have to sell you on. that is what dr. proctor was here testifying about. what was the purpose of proctor's testimony? number 5, let us go to number 5. "rj reynolds tobacco company and other tobacco companies agreed to conceal or omit information regarding the health effects of cigarettes or their addictive nature with the intention that smokers and the public," not just milton williams, "smokers and the public would rely on this information to their detriment," to their harm. so they concealed the truth and then they got together with their friends to conspire to make sure that the truth does not come out and that smokers do not find out. that is a conspiracy, number 5. an agreement to conceal 2812 or omit information regarding the health effects of cigarettes, health effects, causes cancer, or their addictive nature, with the intention, what was their intention? that smokers and the public rely on this, this misinformation, the false information to their detriment. they did not care that people were going to die. mr. jack williams: objection, your honor. mr. finger: well, what is the effect of conceal -- mr. jack williams: objection. the court: hold on. there is an objection pending. mr. jack williams: can your honor see the screen? mr. finger: i can see the screen. mr. jack williams: no, i'm talking about the screen of what mr. finger just said. the court: well, let us come -- mr. jack williams: the defendants not caring, that is a personal attack. mr. finger: i think that is -- the court: let us come to sidebar. (the following discussion was held at sidebar:) 2813 the court: what is your objection, mr. williams? mr. jack williams: that is an unfair personal attack on a party. he cannot say reynolds tobacco company does not care and what it cares about. that is not -- that is going beyond the finding. the finding does not say anything about what reynolds cares about, meaning people. the court: is not that the entire heart of the case? mr. finger: it is a reasonable inference based upon what they did. and what they did, my argument is if they really cared about the product they would not give a product that kills them. it is a reasonable inference that people that cared do not do that. the court: why would plaintiff not argue that? mr. jack williams: how can plaintiff say what reynolds cares about, your honor? he is talking about today. the court: no, they did not care. he is not talking -- if it was today then i would sustain their objection. but i believe he is talking 2814 about during the time period of the conspiracy. mr. finger: i said they did not care. the court: i overrule the objection. (the sidebar discussion was concluded and the following was held in open court:) the court: the court overrules the objection. mr. finger, you may proceed. mr. finger: i submit to you, ladies and gentlemen, that a reasonable -- you know, the judge -- let me talk about inferences for a minute. i want to touch on this. the judge told you, judge eig told you -- and remember, everything that this circuit court judge tells you you must accept as true. he went over this, i went over it, because i am counting on you folks to follow the law to the letter. you do not have the option of not following the law, what this circuit court judge tells you. you decide what the facts are, but you must follow the law. and what the judge told you is that you may draw reasonable inferences from the evidence. that is very important, because you do not always have direct evidence, but you can draw a reasonable inference. you can infer something from the 2815 evidence. if i have my little boy and i leave him at home and i say, look, i do not want you to have anything to eat. i do not want you to spoil your appetite. and i come home a half an hour later and i see there is a jar of peanut butter that is on the -- and a jar of jelly on the -- and i see a little bit of jelly on the corner of his mouth. now, i did not see him eat a peanut butter and jelly sandwich. i cannot say i saw him eat that sandwich, but i can draw a reasonable inference that he had a peanut butter and jelly sandwich. but i did not see it. i saw -- i never saw him eat the sandwich. but a reasonable inference is he had a peanut butter and jelly sandwich. and when they spend millions and millions of dollars in advertising to get people to smoke, a reasonable inference is it has an impact. now, we cannot prove that milton williams ever smoked on account of any ad, cannot. i cannot say that any one thing they did caused him to smoke, but what i can tell you is a reasonable inference you can draw from the evidence, and you will see the evidence, i'll discuss it, is when they 2816 spend hundreds of millions of dollars on advertising it has an impact on people and public opinion and it affects effects their judgment and it affects their actions. because this case, this case is not just about what milton williams did, but about what they did to induce him to do something. milton williams chose to smoke. we told you that at the outset. we have been up front with you from the beginning. he bears some responsibility. this trial is about how much responsibility they bear. they tell you zero, it is one hundred percent milton williams. well, you gotta ask yourself: why did milton williams in jacksonville in 1956, why did he smoke? we know now why people do not smoke, but let us go back in time to those wonderful years of yesteryear. it is 1956. milton williams is 14 years old and he is in jacksonville. and the airwaves are bombarded with ads for cigarettes. pall mall ads are one of them. and jingles, do not miss the fun of smoking. what they left out from the jingle, and they know full well, is that it is not all fun. they knew when they were 2817 advertising and marketing this product that it was going to work. they had smart guys. these are advertising executives. they know what they are doing. they were not throwing money away. and i'll go over the evidence. you will see how much money they spent on advertising. advertising works. the reason it costs 3 million dollars for a 30-second spot during the superbowl is because people watch it and they are impacted. advertising works. they are not throwing their money away. and it worked then. milton williams made a very bad choice, a fatal choice, cost him his life. the question you must answer is: did they have anything to do with it? did they impact this choice? and we know they did. we know for a fact because the judge told you that they hid the truth. i read you the engle finding. they concealed the truth. when he made that bad choice, they were hiding the truth. if i go in to buy a car -- let me give you an example. i go to buy a car and i see this nice car. and i say to the salesman, you know, that is a beautiful car. i'd like to buy that car, i said, but i like an eight-cylinder car. 2818 i like a little more pickup. and he goes, this is the finest eight-cylinder that you are ever going to see. and i love this car. it is nice and shiny, the leather smells good. my voice is dropping? that does not happen too often. and i decide to buy it. i haggle with them over it. they throw in the floor mats. they always throw in the floor mats, you know, when you are haggling to close the deal, they always say, i'll throw in the floor mats to try and close the deal. so i get the free floor mats and i drive in the car. and it is like, i'm driving the car on i-95 and it is like the pickup is not there. it just does not seem to accelerate the way it should. and i go to my neighbor, i have a neighbor who is a mechanic and i say, there is something wrong with this car. it does not drive like an eight-cylinder. and he looks under the hood and he goes, there is a very good reason. it is six-cylinder car. i've been defrauded. now, i made a choice. 2819 i did not have to buy that car. i chose to buy that car. i made a choice. i made a bad choice. why? because i was given false information. i was not given the truth. now, am i at fault for that choice? the answer, yes, i am. i bear some responsibility. i did not test drive it. i could have test driven it, but i did not. i trusted them. i made a bad choice. now, am i at fault? yes. but are they at fault? yes, yes, i would say that salesman is at fault too. and when they concealed the truth and kept a generation of americans from knowing the truth, they bear some measure of fault. those engle findings are fraud. they concealed the truth. do you think that that generation that milton williams was a part of was dumb? i mean, was that a stupid generation? because we all know now, we know how bad smoking is. everybody in the courtroom when i spoke to them knew how bad it is. and for the most part, people do not smoke. why? because everybody knows how bad it is. we in 2012 have the benefit of knowledge. the truth is out. the cat's out of the bag. 2820 they cannot lie anymore. they cannot cover things up. people know the truth. and when people are armed with the truth, they make an intelligent choice. the reason people do not smoke now is they know how bad it is. in 1956 people did not know how bad it was because they were hiding the truth. they did not allow the american people to be informed so that they could make the same choice they do now. they want to blame milton williams for his bad choice. how about this for a novel idea? why do not you tell the truth and let us see if milton williams starts smoking to begin with. because if they had told the truth, and we heard evidence he is an intelligent man, they brought out the fact he is an intelligent man, well, i submit to you that if that intelligent man knew then what we all know now we would not be here debating how often he should have quit, how hard he tried. we would not be debating that because he would not have started in the first place. but he did because they lied to him. and they concealed the truth and this intelligent man fell into it. basically the defense is, if you are stupid 2821 enough to believe the stuff we are telling you about these cigarettes, do not blame me. and they are blameless. they look you in the eye and they say they do not bear one ounce of responsibility, it is one hundred percent milton williams. let us take a look at some of the evidence and see if they did anything wrong. defense counsel in opening statement acknowledged -- what he said is, "the next item that is not in dispute is that of the thousands of tobacco company executives, some of them said some inappropriate things. i'm not going to stand up here and defend them. some of them said some stupid things. they were wrong and they held on to technicalities for too long. technicality like what? like it causes lung cancer? it is addictive? are those the inappropriate things? play the waxman hearing tape. let us take a look at another inappropriate moment. (video clip was played.) voice: let me begin my questioning on the matter of whether or not nicotine is addictive. 2822 let me ask you first, i'd like to just go down the row, whether each of you believes that nicotine is not addictive. i heard virtually all of you touch on it. and just yes or no, do you believe nicotine is not addictive? voice: i believe nicotine is not addictive. yes. voice: mr. johnson. voice: congressman, cigarettes and nicotine clearly do not meet the classic definitions of addiction. there is no intoxications -- voice: we will take that as a no. and, again, time is short, if you -- (no audio sound). voice: -- have this for the record. voice: i do not believe nicotine or our products are addictive. voice: i believe nicotine is not addictive. voice: i believe that nicotine is not addictive. voice: i believe that nicotine is not addictive. voice: and i too believe that nicotine is not addictive. (video clip concluded.) 2823 mr. finger: seven tobacco company executives, it is not addictive in 1994. plaintiff's exhibit 103, you are going to get a lot of exhibits, but i'm going to call out some numbers, some i think are more significant than others. plaintiff's exhibit 103, it is a july 17th, 1963 memo from the tobacco companies, one of their memos, an internal memo. "moreover, nicotine is addictive. we here then are in the business of selling nicotine, an addictive drug." thirty-one years before they appeared before congress they knew it was addictive. that was very inappropriate. lying to congress, that is very inappropriate. is that what they meant? when i sit down, they are going to have a chance to talk to you about what they did. let us see what they have to say about what they did. see how much of their closing argument they spend talking about their conduct. they will not. they are just going to talk about milton williams. they cannot talk about their conduct, because have you the engle findings that said 2824 they hid the truth and the fact that they conspired to keep people ignorant so that they would smoke. and they knew it was addictive and they knew it was harmful. they knew it was harmful since claude teague wrote his report that you heard proctor -- by the way, a digression, robert proctor, the historian, is here to talk about what they did. they make a big deal, do you know anything about milton williams? he goes no. robert proctor is not here to talk about milton williams. robert proctor is here to talk about them. and nobody knows more about them than professor proctor. that is why he is made a million dollars. he gets paid a lot. because i suggest to you, nobody, but nobody knows more about what they did for 50 years. and it is all the truth. and you know what, if every single thing that proctor said was not true why would not they call a historian. proctor is not the only professor of the history of science out there. we have got a lot of fine colleges and universities. if what he said was not true why did not they call a professor to say, what do you have to say? call your witness. show the jury 2825 proctor is wrong. they cannot, because he is right. they have known since 1953, claude teague, the teague memo. this is number 22. "the increased incidence of cancer of the lung in man which has occurred during the last half century is probably due to new or increased conduct with carcinogenic stimuli. the closely parallel increase in cigarette smoking has led to the suspicion that tobacco smoking is an important ideological factor in the induction of primary cancer of the lung." 1953. they knew. and did they come forward and share that with people so they could make an intelligent choice and not buy their product? no, they kept it hidden. they kept it hidden until the year 2000. they did not come clean, grudgingly, according to proctor, until the year 2000. in '94 they are still saying it is not addictive. their own scientist, claude teague. so what do they do? what do they do? we heard about the studies. in the '50s there are studies. scientists are starting to catch on, it causes cancer, it is harmful. 2826 what do they do? they hire a public relations outfit called hill and knowlton to devise a strategy to head off this information. we cannot let this information out. people will stop buying our product. what are we going to do? so they hire a public relations firm and they devise a strategy and the strategy is -- and they talk about -- this is exhibit 31. and the title they say, this information is confidential, requires treatment as such. they do not want this coming out. and they describe some of the tobacco guys and what they had to say when they talked about this. and they said, it is very interesting, the opinions, one of the men said, it is fortunate for us that cigarettes are a habit they cannot break. is not that great? that is in 1953. it is a habit they cannot break. 1994, not addictive. there they were, not addictive. 41 years before, it is a habit they cannot break and they are swearing in front of congress not addictive. i think that was very -- that was probably one of those inappropriate things, lying for 40 years and 2827 keeping the truth hidden. i would agree, i think that is extremely inappropriate, especially when you know the consequences. because the consequences of this inappropriate conduct, hiding the truth so that people cannot make an informed choice and decide not to smoke, the consequences are that people get cancer and die. and you heard proctor testify about millions -- let me get you the statistics. what are the consequences about that, that inappropriate comment, that stupid comment? what were the consequences? let me see what dr. proctor said. dr. proctor said, "from the '50s until 1997 the approximate number of people that have died from smoking is 100 million people in the world. in the 20th century 6 million people die yearly, and in the united states 440,000 people die every year of smoking." how many of those people would not die if they knew the truth? we do not know. that was inappropriate. that was really stupid. but it is good business because they sold lots and lots of cigarettes. and if a few hundred 2828 thousand or several million people have to die, that is business. mr. jack williams: objection, your honor. mr. finger: that is the evidence. the court: overrule the objection. mr. finger: that is business. why do you think they did it? why do you think they kept it hidden? business, money. and they are blameless. they are blameless. it is all milton williams. they did not do anything wrong. why did milton williams take that first cigarette? you think maybe their marketing campaign had something to do with -- in that memorandum they write, "in the past, industry has given little twists to the facts of science to convert them into sales propaganda without much risk. the cigarette industry has indeed been doing this for years, we can therefore readily understand its assumptions that the same technique will work now in devising propaganda." propaganda. this is in 1953. they are devising propaganda. well, you know what, we all hear the word propaganda, but i want to look it up. what is the definition of propaganda? propaganda are ideas, facts or allegations 2829 spread deliberately to further one's cause or to damage an opposing cause. and they did. they did. and the propaganda is that the jury's out on the smoking, there is a dispute as to whether or not smoking causes cancer. they knew it did. they knew from claude teague it did. but they are smart. they have good public relations guys. and the best way to gain the confidence of smokers and the public is to convince them, we are really concerned with your well-being. we want to get to the bottom of it because we do not want to hurt anybody. in opening statement defense counsel told you to focus on three things when you are focusing on milton williams conduct; choice, control and responsibility. remember that? and i could not agree more. let us talk about choice, control and responsibility. what choices did the tobacco have? what control did they exercise? and what responsibility to the public did they have? let us talk about those three things as it applies to rj reynolds tobacco company and their co-conspirators. 2830 well, they come out with the frank statement. this is the frank statement. a frank statement, not like frank as a name, frank as in honest, let me be frank, a frank statement, an honest statement because there is this controversy that it is causing cancer and we want to be up front with you. we want to let you know we are really concerned with your health. we do not want to hurt you. "we are pledging aid and assistance to the research effort into all phases of tobacco use and health. we believe the products we make are not injurious to health," well, we know they know it is. this is what they are saying, we do not think it is injurious but we want to get into research efforts into all phases of tobacco use and health. and then they form this tobacco industry research committee. and they go on to say, "in charge of the research activities of the committee will be a scientist of unimpeachable integrity of national repute. in addition there will be an advisory board of scientists disinterested in the cigarette industry." disinterested, neutral people. 2831 and the head of it is this clarence cook -- clarence little. and he has great credentials. he has great credentials, looks good on paper. but they know one thing. they know -- he is a geneticist. he is already convinced that cancer is genetic. it is not caused by anything. his research is if you got cancer it is in your genes. so they pick somebody who goes into his job predisposed to find that cigarettes are not causing the harm because it is genetic. and this tobacco institute research committee, an idea created by hill and knowlton. hill and knowlton is their public relations arm. it is very interesting. this is exhibit 37, a 1954 memo, "since the committee had no headquarters and no staff, hill and knowlton was asked to provide a working staff and temporary office space. as a first organizational step, public relations counsel assigned one of its experienced executives to serve as executive secretary for the tobacco industry research committee." so this neutral committee designed to get to the bottom of this allegation that cigarette smoking is bad, this neutral committee is 2832 staffed and run by their public relations committee. that is very neutral. and, oh, by the way, coincidentally the committee, this neutral committee, is in the empire state building and one floor below is hill and knowlton, another coincidence. and then they start to put out the propaganda. now we see the propaganda. and they publish a newsletter. now i'm jumping forward to 1960. tobacco and health. scientists report air pollution plays lung cancer role. it is air pollution. inhalation tests failed to cause lung cancer. virus suggested. it is a virus. october 1960, cancer linked to air pollution. april/may '61. scientists say socioeconomic stresses may set the stage. it is not -- smoking does not give you cancer. it is stress, socioeconomic, money, not smoking. this is their neutral committee. notice the trend in these articles. these newsletters are going to doctors all over the country, doctors and hospitals all over the country. studies link viruses in cancer. it is a 2833 virus. review of lung cancer literature concludes causes are not known. we do not know what does it. lung cancer rise reflects aging, better diagnosis. you are just getting old. it is not the cigarettes. lung cancer rate low, half are nonsmokers. judge, can i approach the bench? the court: you may. (a discussion was held off the record.) the court: ladies and gentlemen, we are going to take a five-minute recess. we are still in the middle of the argument. please do not discuss the case among yourselves or anyone else, do not do any independent research. and do not form a fixed conclusion until you have heard all the evidence; okay, you have heard that, my instructions on the law, okay, you have heard that, and the arguments of the attorneys. you are at half of one. so you are almost there. but please do not discuss the case among yourselves or with anybody else. (jury exits courtroom at 3:10 p.m.) the court: okay. we are in five-minute 2834 recess. (a recess was taken from 3:10 p.m. to 3:18 p.m.) the court: all right. i'm not sure if the jury is ready or not. the clerk: i'll check. coffee break. the court: we will take another three minutes then. (a recess was taken from 3:18 p.m. to 3:24 p.m.) the court: we are back on the record in the matter of williams versus reynolds. anything else before we bring back in the jury? mr. gaitor, if you bring back in the jury. (jury enters courtroom at 3:26 p.m.) the court: ladies and gentlemen, we are in the middle of the first part of the plaintiff's closing statement. mr. finger: may i proceed? the court: you may, sir. mr. finger: everybody awake? all right, folks. we are getting through the material. there is been a lot of material in 2835 seven days, a lot of material to cover. but i'll try to get through it and synthesize it. in 1964 the surgeon general was about to come out with a report suggesting that cigarette smoking was hazardous to your health. that was the watershed year. you know what is interesting is that the surgeon general's report in 1964 came about at the urging of president kennedy in 1962. and there was a move afoot to look into the hazards of smoking. and at a press conference president kennedy was asked, what is your position? what is the administration's position on this new information that cigarette smoking is causing cancer? now, we know it was not new information. we know they would known for more than a decade. but the truth was starting to leak out notwithstanding their best efforts to hide the fact so that people would continue to smoke, notwithstanding the fact that they knew that people were going to die. president kennedy -- and dr. proctor talked about this. president kennedy said, i do not know about that. i do not really know enough 2836 about that. i'm going to commission a committee. and he had the surgeon general, i think his name was terry luther, put together a committee and they looked into the health hazards. and in 1964 we have the surgeon general's report that links cigarette smoking to cancer. what strikes me as peculiar is that the defense has made much of the fact that milton williams should have known that cigarette smoking is bad. in fact, everybody has known since king james that cigarette smoking is bad. i'm sure all of you when you walked into the courtroom knew that king james said it was bad. mr. jack williams: objection. the court: i sustain the objection in terms of please do not personalize it -- mr. finger: i'm sure that the public, i'm sure that the public knew that john quincy adams was down on smoking. i suspect that the public did not know. king james in 1604, when king james said whatever king james was going to say, people were illiterate. they could not read and write. i'm not sure if the printing press had even been 2837 invented. maybe some scribe spread the word writing it out in a quill, i do not know. but i suspect that not many people knew about what king james knew. but what is more interesting is they make much of everybody knew it was bad, milton williams knew it was bad. and to be sure, there came a time when milton williams knew it was bad. i'm not going to look you in the eye and say he went to his grave not knowing it is bad. we have never shirked our responsibility once. i'm going to talk about milton williams and i'm going to lay that to rest right away what our position is on him and what he would do. and i'll look you right in the eye and tell you he was responsible, what he did right, what he did wrong and what we are willing to admit responsibility for. they will not. they will not look you in the eye. they are not going to accept responsibility for anything. that is the difference between them and us. our case, i submit to you, is up front with you. you will decide from the evidence and from the argument of defense counsel who is levelling with you, because you are going to bring your 2838 sense of what is right and what is wrong and who is been honest and who has not. you get to judge the credibility of witnesses, the credibility of witnesses we call and the arguments we make and the arguments they make. and i will stack our credibility up against them in this trial, because i'm not going to tell you milton williams deserves no fault. he does. but you know what is interesting, if the president of the united states in 1962 did not know about the hazards of smoking, do you think milton williams did? the president of the united states is the most informed person in the world. he has people giving him information, daily bulletins to keep him abreast of information. john f. kennedy, the president of the united states, did not know about the hazards of smoking in 1962, but they would lead you to believe milton williams should have. come on. you know what milton williams is guilty of? milton williams is guilty of human frailty, it is not going to happen to me. you heard the testimony read to you, the sister-in-law, the mother would tell him he should not smoke and he would blow her off. not me. yeah, yeah, yeah, 2839 i'll quit. not me. you know what, milton williams should have tried harder, concede that. milton williams deserves some fault, concede that. milton williams -- and we will talk about the damages. we have not tried to make more of milton williams in death than he was in life. you heard the testimony; there were times he was bad to virginia. you heard the machete incidences. they like to trot that out. we know that milton had a tendency to drink too much and we know that there were some violent episodes. they want you to believe that that is representative of 33 years of marriage. that is not fair. but i'll talk to you about that later. this is about how much fault they deserve. because we admit it. no question about it. how can i look you people in the eye and say, milton williams, he tried as hard as he could? i'm not going to suggest to you he never knew it was bad. he died in 1997, of course he knew it was bad. but human frailty, ah, i'll be okay, it is not going to happen to me. and you know what, seven out of eight times it is true. you heard 2840 dr. bennett say that. seven out of eight smokers, they do not get sick. he was the eighth. and he died. and so i ask you to understand human frailty, not to forgive it, but to understand it. but against his mistake, against milton williams' poor judgment that arose in an environment, a false environment created by a tobacco company more interested in corporate profit than the health of the public, in that environment i ask you to stack what milton williams is guilty of versus what they are guilty of. what they are guilty of is fraud and concealment. they kept the truth hidden. and they conspired with the other tobacco companies to make sure people stayed in the dark. and i submit to you that that is far worse than milton williams saying i'll be okay and smoking when he had the patch, far worse. what they did was on purpose. milton williams, he did not do anything -- he did not do anything fraudulent. so when you go back there and you are going to decide percentages, consider that, stack them up against each other, what they did and what 2841 milton williams did. and then you ask yourself, is it one hundred percent milton williams? i think you will not. now that you have seen the facts -- when the trial started, it was all about he chose, he made his choice. well, now you know why. in 1964 the attorney general's report [sic] was coming out. it is just come out as january 29th, 1964, and we have a letter here from the ceo of philip morris reacting to the surgeon general's report. and he says, "we must in the near future provide some answers which will give smokers a psychological crutch and a self-rationale to continue smoking." these answers must point out the weaknesses in the report. we have got to attack this report. we have got to give them a crutch. we have got to keep them smoking. how do we do it? "humor and satire, while it should not be done in the industry's name, someone ought to be contacting all the cartoonists." we want to make fun of the surgeon general. that is a way. that is a way to undermine what he says. that is a good idea. labeling action. "we need to take the initiative in securing a mild federal labeling 2842 act to thwart the efforts of the various states." this is very important. a mild federal labeling act. they knew that there was a move afoot to require the warning label, caution -- it is not a warning, it is a caution, cigarette smoking may be hazardous to your health. that was mandated by federal law in 1966. choice, control, responsibility. remember those three words? they made a choice to use their public relations firm and their contacts to influence the labeling law because congress was going to pass a labeling law and they wanted to influence them into being mild. we want it to be mild so that people will not take note. and it was. cigarette smoking may be hazardous to your health. that had no effect. and you will see in the documents people did not pay attention to that. someone addicted to smoking would go, you know, this could hurt you. it is not going to get anybody to quit. they are going to say, could hurt you, maybe it will, maybe it will not, i'll have another cigarette. may be hazardous. what addicted person is going to say, i'm going to assume it 2843 is? person's natural reaction is to say maybe, ah, maybe not. and that is because they had the money and the influence and the power to influence congress. they chose to exercise their power and they had control over congress. choice, control, responsibility. and the responsibility that they had to the american public went by the wayside when they chose to exercise the control that money and influence brings to influence congress into a mild or -- or an innocuous labeling law. choice, control, responsibility. they exercised them all to the detriment of millions of people who died. the gallup organization ran a poll. this is '68. kaiser talked about it briefly i think in his opening. right after -- this was from february of '64 to march of '64. this is within six to eight weeks of the surgeon general's report. there is big news that everybody knew, and the question was: when you think of cigarettes, what comes to mind? 33 percent said cancer. i mean, this on the heels of breaking news. when a fair question is asked, what comes 2844 to mind, 2 out of 3 people do not mention cancer. and proctor talked about the form of the question. now, if you ask somebody, do you think cigarettes cause cancer, you are more likely to get a yes answer than if you say, what do you think about when you think of cigarettes? because once you inject the word "cancer," you are suggesting that can happen. but when a fair question is asked, what comes to mind when you think of cigarettes, 2 out of 3 people did not mention cancer. and this is six weeks after that earth-shattering news by the surgeon general. so it was not so earth-shattering, at least in public opinion. so what did they do? the surgeon general has now come out and it is hazardous and they launch a media blitz and they spend millions and millions of dollars. and we see ads. we see lots of ads. guard against throat scratch. enjoy the smooth smoking of fine tobacco. smoke pall mall, the cigarette whose mildness you can measure. mildness, mildness is a euphemism. it is a 2845 way of suggesting it will not hurt you, it is mild. guard against throat scratch. mildness is a pleasure with pall mall. it is mild. it is mild, it is mild, it is not going to hurt you. and we heard the jingle: do not miss the fun of smoking. and it became a jingle. "we know that smoking is a lot of fun. do not miss the fun of smoking." you think milton williams had a lot of fun? was this part of the fun? they did not mention when they were advertising do not miss the fun of smoking, they did not mention that part of the fun -- mr. jack williams: objection. the ad on the screen is not in evidence. mr. finger: well, it is going to be. that is one of the ones we agreed to, judge. the court: all right. well -- mr. finger: i'll take it off, but, i mean, that is one of the things we agreed to come in is the ads. they did not mention this was part of the fun of smoking. think this was a lot of fun? not only is this fun, not only do you get the 2846 pleasure of a hole in the tracheostomy, but it affords the family a chance to get together. this is part of the fun, a family get-together. do not miss the fun of smoking. is this a lot of fun? they did not tell the american public that. is that part of the fun? that was inappropriate to suggest it is fun when you know it is addictive and it is going to cause people cancer. that is very inappropriate. maybe that is one of the inappropriate things. they will have a chance. when you are listening to their closing argument and they spend it all attacking milton williams, you sit there and say, when are you going to talk about what you did? you ask them, when do we get to hear your position on what you did? what are the inappropriate things? and i want to hear your explanation for why these inappropriate things had no effect. let them explain why none of these things matter. maybe it is because nobody pays attention to ads. nobody buys anything based on ads. the ads do not mean anything. milton williams did not rely on an ad. they created an environment where smoking was the thing to do. people did not give it a 2847 thought because they did not know the truth. exhibit 69 is a federal trade commission report in 1967. want to touch on a few things. they address labeling, the labeling, "caution: cigarette smoking may be hazardous to your health." and the report by the federal trade commission to congress in '67 says "there is virtually no evidence that the warning statement on cigarette packages has had any significant effect." choice, control, responsibility. the control they had over congress to implement a mild label was effective. it had no control. it had no effect. it had no effect. choice, control and respons -- did they show any responsibility to the american people? what they should have said is, let us warn them. let us be up front. let us tell them the truth. but they shirked their responsibility because had they told the truth sales would have plummeted. we cannot have that happen. it is the american way. making profit is the american way. there is nothing wrong with making a profit. capitalism is what makes this country great. any other form of government, socialism 2848 communism, does not work. capitalism works. corporations work, but they have an obligation. they have a responsibility to the people to tell them the truth. if anybody that wants to start smoking now has no right to sue any company, because the truth is out and it would be a frivolous, ridiculous lawsuit to sue them now because you have got no excuse. everybody knows the truth. but in 1956 and in the '50s and '60s when they were hiding the truth, who could blame anybody for smoking? so what did they do? let us talk about some of the ads. "during a single month of january 1967 87 network television programs were sponsored in whole or in part by cigarette products of the six major manufacturers. an estimated 1.1685 billion viewers watched 60 programs during the week commencing january 11, '67." this is worldwide. "this means that on the average each of the 197 million inhabitants of the united states viewed 5.9 cigarette-sponsored programs during the week." and here's what they had to say, "cigarette advertising" -- this is federal trade commission 2849 report to congress: "cigarette advertising reaches virtually all americans who can either read or understand the spoken word. cigarettes are advertised on both network and spot television, on radio and magazines and newspapers, restaurants, drugstores, advertising decals, entrance doors, wall clocks." "teenage boys surveyed averaged 4.3 hours of radio listening daily." "whatever effect this exposure of youth to cigarette advertising may have, it is a fact that in this country the general trend is towards starting smoking at an ever earlier age." he started smoking when he was 14. that is not an accident. and then they talk about effective marketing tools. "the associative theme: associating cigarette smoking with persons, activities, places and things likely to be admired, respected or emulated." sports figures. appeals directed to vanity. be discriminating. an array of positive images. all elements of escape from reality. they know what works with people. these are 2850 smart people. these are marketing people. they know what works. they know what appeals to people. they are not wasting their money when they spend millions and millions of dollars. you will have a chance to look at exhibit 69. see how much money they spent. in 1966, two years after the surgeon general's report, a confidential memo, blalock to yeaman. addison yeaman was in-house counsel for brown & williamson tobacco company. and he talks about, "the key word is confusion. anything we can do to confirm such a situation could work to our advantage, provided the current methods of testing are shown to be fraught with numerous variables and therefore give rise to misleading results." confusion, the key word is confusion. that is very inappropriate to try to confuse the public. i think that is -- maybe that is what he means. that is very inappropriate. i do not know, when i sit down, they will tell you what they did was inappropriate. i'm interested to hear. but whatever they did it had no effect on milton williams. they are going to tell you, 2851 whatever we did was inappropriate, it had no effect on milton williams and we do not deserve one ounce of responsibility. well, i think otherwise. and i think you think otherwise. otherwise they wasted billions of dollars in advertising. the teague report, 19 -- we are up to 1972. this says, the same teague, claude teague from 20 years earlier, the chemist that made the link that it was cancer forming. now claude is talking about addiction. "nicotine is known to be a habit-forming alkaloid, thus a tobacco product is in essence a vehicle for delivery of nicotine designed to deliver the nicotine in a generally acceptable and attractable form. happily for the tobacco industry nicotine is both habituating and unique in its variety of physiological actions." is not that wonderful? it is addictive. is not that great? we are going to get them addicted. now, they may get cancer, but once we get them addicted, we are going to sell a lot of cigarettes. happily, happily it is addictive. claude's come a long way, in 20 years, in 20 years from first -- claude's on board. claude's 2852 on the team by 1972. in 1953 he is saying, this is bad, it causes cancer. in 1972 he is saying, happily it is addictive. i guess claude has come around. claude's on board now. in 1972, a letter, this is exhibit 67, this is a memorandum from the president of the tobacco institute, that is that phony front -- the tobacco institute was created out of the tobacco research committee that they -- in the frank statement. the committee they set up that was staffed by the public relations people, that bogus committee, out of that they had this tobacco institute. the tobacco institute was the propaganda arm of the tobacco industry designed to influence public opinion and designed to get the public thinking that cancer is not caused by cigarettes and to get a positive slant on the tobacco industry. they used the term "propaganda," these are the ministers of propaganda. the president of the tobacco institute gets a memo from the vice-president, fellow by the name of fred panzer, who says that "for nearly 20 years this industry has employed a single strategy to defend itself from politics and 2853 public opinion. while the strategy was brilliantly conceived over the years, helping us win important battles, it is only fair to say that it was not, nor was it ever intended to be a vehicle for victory. on the contrary, it has always been a holding strategy consisting of creating doubt about the health charge without actually denying it." the strategy, this is in 1972. he is referring to a brilliantly conceived and executed strategy, 20 years. twenty years we go back to the '50s and they are talking about the initial strategy, the hill and knowlton strategy. "a brilliant strategy designed to create doubt about the health charge without actually denying it." we do not want to come out and deny it. that would be inappropriate. we will just plant doubt. and it is brilliant. and it worked. because people did die and they continued to smoke. the tobacco institute research, are they really trying to help people? are they really trying to help people? or are they trying to create doubt so they will continue to sell their products? 2854 in 1973 we got another document from claude teague. this is "effects of ammonia and its salts on smoke quality." claude teague in that writes that "the nicotine impact is enhanced by using ammonia." so not only -- it is not as if the nicotine is bad enough, now we can give them an extra jolt. now, i do not know if pall mall ever used ammonia. i do not think proctor said -- does not know, but the point is, they are taking the position they are trying to get to the bottom of it. we are concerned with the health effects. we have a committee we are going to set up because we do not want you to get sick. and their research guy, their scientist is saying, you know, if you add some ammonia the nicotine gives it a little extra jolt. come on. that was very inappropriate. i think that was inappropriate, when you are telling people you are concerned with their health. let us jump forward, 1978. brown & williamson internal memo. this is a letter from h.d. steele, who was in the brown & williamson marketing department, to m.j. mccue, brown & williamson marketing department. "i need to explain present attitudes toward nicotine. very 2855 few consumers are aware of the effects of nicotine, i.e., its addictive nature and that nicotine is a poison." it is addictive nature, remember, i do not have to play that congressional hearing, cigarettes are not addictive, cigarettes are not addictive, cigarettes are not addictive, seven of them stood up there and said cigarettes are not addictive. very few consumers are aware of the effects of nicotine, it is addictive nature. do you think they knew it was addictive? now, you can believe two things. those ceos that testified before congress are really dumb and they really do not know it is addictive and they were telling the truth because they do not know or they were lying. those are the only two choices. well, we know they were lying, and we know why, because we want people to continue to buy cigarettes and they are willing to lie to congress to accomplish it. but of course that has no impact, because milton williams chose to smoke. none of this matters. none of this influenced public opinion. milton williams did not grow up in a cocoon. he did not grow up in a cave. he grew 2856 up in a society molded by an industry, with enormous funds and enormous research and resources and the ability to wield tremendous control and influence in the media. and they picked hill and knowlton way back in the '50s because it was the most powerful influential public relations firm in the country. they had connections in newspapers. they had connections in magazines. they had connections on capitol hill and congress. they had connections with every branch of media, that is why they used them. and they used it well. they did good by the tobacco companies. the problem is that the strategy involved them covering up the truth. they were good at it, they were successful, and a generation of people died on account of it. and they are not stupid people. they are sophisticated businessmen who knew how to manipulate public opinion and make a disgusting, reprehensible habit that they knew was going to cost people lives, they knew how to cast it in a positive light, make it acceptable, without actually coming out and flat out lying. doubt, confusion, that is their mantra. confusion, you 2857 need to create confusion, and they did. and it worked. this is a letter in 1980, senior vice-president for tobacco institute for public relations, a letter from the editor of the tobacco institute newsletter. i showed you some of the newsletters. and they are talking about a meeting of some anti-smoking people, commenting on an anti-smoking meeting that they did not attend. they were not there. and at that meeting a fellow by the name of pollin, p-o-l-l-i-n, was quoted as talking to these anti-smoking people and saying that "cigarette smoking is the nation's leading drug problem in youth despite the rise in marijuana." this is now 1980. pollin's predecessor was quoted as saying "cigarette smoking is more addictive than using heroin, hooking two-thirds of the people who have ever smoked." and then the question that the writer puts to the senior vice-president, "did ti -- did tobacco institute miss a chance to attend and present information at nida" -- national institute of drug abuse, nida, it was a meeting 2858 of individuals on the topic of drug abuse. "did ti miss a chance to attend and present information at nida's 1979 meeting which developed the addictive language." in other words, he is saying, did we blow it? should we have been there to counter this? the point is they knew not only was it addictive, they were afraid that not only was it addictive, but it was addictive such -- analogous to heroin and hooking two-thirds of the people. they did not like that out there. we should have been there to head that off. they targeted young adults, exhibit 76. you look at exhibit 76 they talk about successful younger adult brand strategies in the past. and what is interesting is they say, "younger adult smokers have been the critical factor in the growth and decline of every major brand and company over the last 50 years." young smokers. they need to get young people to smoke, because once you get young people to smoke they become addicted and they have them forever, so they focus on the young. "rjr," rj reynolds, "should seek to better understand to capitalize on the factors and 2859 strategies which have succeeded for younger adult brands in the past." we need to focus on young people. we need to get them hooked early. that is 1984. the same year -- 10 years before they appeared in front of congress. so now you have got to ask yourself, are they really blameless? did they have nothing to do with milton williams' choice? let us go back to the verdict form. let me go to number 4. "were the defective and unreasonably dangerous cigarettes placed on the market by rj reynolds a legal cause of milton williams' death?" that is an easy one. all this business about who did what and whether or not milton williams relied on what they did and whether or not their concealment and their fraud affected milton williams, i submit to you does not address this question. were the defective and unreasonably dangerous cigarettes, we know they are defective and unusually dangerous because the findings say they are, were they a legal cause of milton williams' death? the answer is they clearly are. that question does not call for you to decide how much fault you want to put on milton 2860 williams. that is a simple question. when you go back in the jury room, focus on the question, just answer the question. you will get a chance to decide. you will see how the verdict form unfolds. you will get a chance to put percentage of fault on milton williams. go through it and just answer it question by question. were the defective and unreasonably dangerous cigarettes placed on the market by rj reynolds a legal cause of milton williams' death? that is a simple one. the answer is yes. he did not die from anything else. we talked about that earlier. he did not die from anything other than the cigarettes. we know they are defective. we do not have to spend any time telling you why. that was proven a long time ago. and that is what killed him. is there any dispute that it was the cigarette smoking that did it? we talked about dr. goodwin. i'm not going back over that. the answer to that is an easy one. the more interesting question is number 5. "did milton williams reasonably rely to his detriment on information known to rj reynolds company that intentionally concealed or omitted 2861 a material fact that was unknown to mr. williams and not otherwise obvious to him concerning the health effects or the addictive nature of smoking cigarettes such that but for his reliance he would have acted differently and avoided his death." court reporter: i'm sorry? mr. finger: i'm going to read number 6, because 5 and 6 kind of go together. 5 is the fraud and the concealment. 6 is the conspiracy. "did milton williams reasonably rely to his detriment on rj reynolds company's agreement with others," and we have heard philip morris and all the other tobacco companies, everybody in that frank statement, the other conspirators, "to conceal or omit material information that was unknown to mr. williams and not otherwise obvious to him regarding the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes, and, if so, did mr. williams reasonably rely to his detriment on information," that word is information, "information made available in furtherance of that agreement that concealed or omitted material information such that but for the information he would have acted differently 2862 and avoided his injury?" okay. what do those two mean? did he rely on it? this fraud that we talk about, because as the judge told you, the mere fact that they concealed things and they perpetrated a fraud and the mere fact that they conspired to do it does not mean it affected milton williams. they could do that and it could have no impact on milton williams. they will spend their entire time telling you that that does not matter, that is what happened. we did these things, but it did not affect milton williams so it does not matter. you should answer that no. that is what they will argue. so how do you decide if he relied on it? and we come back to what i talked about at the beginning, reasonable inferences. judge eig told you you can draw reasonable inferences from the evidence. so i cannot tell you that milton williams ever started smoking on account of any ad that was deceptive, i cannot tell you that if they had told the truth and they had not concealed the truth that milton williams would not have started smoking, because we do not 2863 know. it is very hard to say. what would somebody have done if they knew the truth? i can tell you this, people now know the truth and they are not smoking. and i suggest to you if the truth had come out then milton williams, an intelligent man, would not have started smoking. but i cannot tell that to you. milton williams is dead. and i cannot put him on the stand and say, milton, if you would have known how bad it was would you have still started smoking? i cannot do that. i do not know. i cannot tell you that. he is dead. he died 15 years ago with a hole in his throat. and now what is left of him are ashes in virginia williams' urn. but you can draw reasonable inferences from the evidence and you can say, you know what, i think the concealment of the truth affected him. i think there is a reason why he started smoking. i think it is reasonable to believe that if he knew the truth he would not have started to smoke like millions of people now do not smoke. i think these ads had an impact. i think the reason that 14-year-old took the cigarette is because of these ads that did not mention these health hazards. 2864 i'm going to draw an inference from what you did that it did affect him, because i have no direct evidence. but we know what they did and we know why they did it. and we know it was successful. we know that their marketing strategy to get people to smoke a product that we know is defective, we have been told it is defective, and that we know has killed millions of people, those are facts, proctor testified to it, you did not hear anybody say that it does not kill that many people, they knew about it. does it matter? the court: that is an hour and a half. mr. finger: does it matter? sure it matters. sure it does. and you can infer that he relied upon it. i submit you are going to answer all of the questions yes. and now we get to the issue of how much. this is the hard part. very difficult. you are going to compensate her for loss of companionship and for mental pain and suffering. this is very difficult, to put a number to this. how do you determine what the loss of a wife's husband is to her? how do you measure love? 2865 for all of the technical jargon we heard, koilocytosis, risk factors, in the final analysis your verdict will be predicated upon an emotion. you cannot go into publix and buy a gallon of love. you cannot go into home depot and say, give me a bucketful of love. so how do you measure it? well, you listen to the testimony of virginia and you consider what we have. and we know that there were times milton williams was bad. you can consider that. you can consider it, because ultimately this is about whether or not this woman loved him. you may not care for him. i'm not suggesting you should. this is not about what you think of milton williams. this is about whether or not her love and affection for him is genuine. and if it is, it does not matter that you do not like him. all that matters is how she feels. and if you believe her feeling is genuine then you should award her money damages. you are responsible. but how do you quantify them? but first let us deal with whether or not her feelings for him are genuine. we know there 2866 were bad times. she filed for divorce at one time. the marriage was rocky. the incident where he threw the candlestick holder and there was violence, no question there were bad times. but there is no evidence that that represents 33 years of marriage. and it is not fair to suggest that it does. she said that there were a lot more good times than bad times. and when she slept next to him when he was in the hospital not missing -- or missing the fun of smoking, do you think she did not love him? when she was putting food in that feeding tube, do you think she did not love him? when he died and she slept next to him, do you think she did not love him? maybe she should not have, but do you think she did not? do you think that woman is exaggerating? we did not see a lot of tears when she was on the stand. she did not breakdown. she is had 15 years to heal. but when they cremated that man with a hole in his throat, i submit to you that for 15 years it left a hole in her heart. that heals because time does heal. so we did not see emotion on the stand, but it leaves a scar. and when she says there is these pa days with 2867 pam and they talk about it, we have these pa days, i submit to you it is genuine and she loved the man. she did not stay with him because she was trapped. the rj reynolds company asks you and they say, is there a limit to love is blind? they are going to decide that she exceeded her limit. where do they get the nerve to suggest that this woman should not have loved him so much? i submit to you she did and it was genuine. you will decide. when she changed his diaper, i submit that was genuine. this is the man she married. this is the man she fell in love with. and she was with him when he died and i submit to you she loved him till the end. and she had to watch this man, young, good looking, virile in uniform, she had to watch him disintegrate till the point where she had to change his diaper like a baby. you think that did not hurt? you think that was a sham -- do you think in 1997 she was just going through the motions because someday i'm going to have a lawsuit 15 years from now and i want them to think i really loved him? do you think that is what was going on back 2868 then, or do you think she really loved him? she had a good job. she was not trapped in that marriage. she had a better job than milton. she could have taken off and left with the kids. so she was not trapped. it was not a situation where she had to stay. she stayed because she loved him. they paid $400 an hour to bring dr. bennett down here. i'm going to suggest to you that you award virginia $40 an hour, a tenth of what they are paying dr. bennett. she is been without him for 15 years. that is a lot of hours. and i'm going to suggest to you that you give her $40 for every hour that they took milton williams away from her. it comes to over 5 million dollars. it is a lot of money. and i'm going to ask you to award more than that, because she is still alive, she is not done living. how much longer she is going to live, i do not know, none of us know. use your common sense. you figure out, she is healthy, vibrant. if you want to give her $20 an hour -- they are paying dr. bennett, the medical examiner, 400. do you want to give her $20 an hour? do you think that is fair? that is still 2.6 million 2869 dollars. and i'm going to ask you to assess 15 percent fault on milton williams. where do i get that? if he was successful with the patch, dr. goldman, remember dr. goldman in the beginning of the trial, he said aided attempts to quit are successful 15 percent of the time. if milton williams had stuck with that patch, he had a 15 percent chance of quitting, of being successful. i suggest to you that when you stack what milton williams did up versus what they did he is no more than 15 percent at fault. i'm going to suggest to you that you award virginia williams 5.2 million dollars and you assess 15 percent fault on milton williams and 85 percent fault on the tobacco company. the percentages and the numbers are entirely up to you. this is a suggestion. this is what we think it is worth. this is what we think her love for that man is worth. so in the final analysis when it comes down to how you perceive what is right and what is fair, i'm confident that when you analyze the evidence and you clear away the clouds and let the light shine through on the truth you will 2870 see that this is more than just a choice milton williams made. and you will bring your collective wisdom to bare and not just your intellect and your wisdom, but your inherent sense of what is right and wrong. and your inherent sense that what is gone on here to milton williams and the public is wrong. and when they do that, they must be called to bear, they must be called to account and they should compensate the victim. that is fair, that is right and that is just. and we trust your good judgment. we will await your verdict. mr. kaiser: ladies and gentlemen of the jury, good morning. i have a whopping 24 minutes left to talk to you so please indulge me during that time. the court: take a full 25. mr. kaiser: 25, the judge has been gracious to give me an extra minute. i do not want to beat a dead horse. i want you to rely on what mr. finger said in his closing arguments yesterday because he spent a great deal of time talking about the different issues, but i do want to comment on a couple things. number one, class membership, because i really want to talk to you how inane the argument you just heard was about class membership. and it is simple. the issue is: was milton williams addicted to the nicotine in cigarettes and did the addiction cause his death? you have already been told by two doctors, dr. goodwin, dr. goldman, absolutely, absolutely. his addiction caused his cancer and his death. now, what the defense wants to do is they want to come up with this new and novel argument and basically say addiction is just a word, it does not mean anything, because anybody can quit. so now we are in alice in wonderland. addiction is just a word, anybody can be addicted but anybody can quit. under that argument there is no such thing as a class, because in that scenario it does not matter if anybody's addicted if they can quit. well, then there is no class. and that is simply inane. because you are not going to see on the verdict form, by the way, if milton williams could have quit then his addiction did not cause his death. you do not see it. it is addiction. they concede it. he is either addicted or he was not. he did not quit, he could not quit, that is not the issue on class. that is an issue on fault. that is an issue on fault. and we will get to that. but for class membership was he addicted, did it cause his death? you have already been told absolutely and it is not an issue about whether or not he was able to quit because in that scenario there is no class. there is no class. so that argument is disposed of, that argument is disposed of. interestingly, mr. burton was adamant that we just have not proved our case. and he told you for an hour we have not proved our case, but he jumped to comparative fault. he wanted to jump to comparative fault. and interestingly, on his chart, on his chart it was comparative fault, but to whom? all you saw was mr. williams. who was he comparing fault with? you do not see that. and that is been the whole tenor of their argument. let me give you an example. when mr. williams spoke to you yesterday, he told you -- and of course this came out with dr. proctor's testimony first -- this king james counterblast in 1604. christopher columbus, john quincy adams, that was public knowledge that everybody knew that smoking was bad. and reader's digest before milton williams was alive, we have that. and we have all these examples of this huge amount of public knowledge. and, you know what, that would ring true if tobacco like rj reynolds did not exist. see, they want you to believe they do not exist in the equation. that is why neither of these defense counsel were able to comment on their contacts that hill and knowlton had with the media. why did not you hear them talk to you about their contacts with radio and television and media executives and all those people that put their message out? why did not you hear anything like that? why did not you hear them comment about their side of the story and their white papers that they sent to hundreds of thousands of people, including congressmen, scientists and doctors to respond to the information that was negative to their sales? you did not hear them talk about that. why did not you hear them talk about their newsletters for their denialist campaign talking about baldness causing cancer, virus causing cancer that they sent to hundreds of thousands of people over a period of years and years and years? why did not you hear them comment about that? because they do not want you to believe that they existed. it was all the other information. why could not you hear them comment with their historian in response to dr. proctor? no, dr. proctor is wrong when he says the information the tobacco companies put out created doubt. their denialist campaign was working. so when you consider the equation, as much as they would like you to believe that they did not exist, they did. why did not they hit the issues head-on and show you their documents, their documents, in 1963 where they said nicotine is addictive, we are in the business of selling it? why did not they show it to you and explain what they meant by these inappropriate comments? why did not they put up the documents and explain what they meant in 1972 when they said, our strategy was brilliantly conceived and executed? why did not they talk about that? because they did not want you to believe they existed. why did not they tell you in 1964 their memo they put out about we need to find a psychological crutch for people to continue to smoke and not quit? why did not they do that? because they did not want you to know they existed during that time. that is the problem. so these are nonissues. we have proven by a greater weight of the evidence in this case class membership and we have proven their liabilities so that we get those engle findings, and you have to abide by those findings. and i'm going to tell you what that means. right off the bat, number one, they are negligent. how are they negligent? does not matter. that fact has been proven. so in answer to the question, did their negligence cause milton williams' death, he smoked their product, you better believe it did, yes. strict liability, we do not have to prove how their product was defective. the product you were told was unreasonably dangerous, and they knew it. how so? does not matter. that is a fact that is been established by the engle findings. milton williams smoked their product as intended, got sick and died. answer, yes. reliance does not apply to those two questions. reliance applies to concealment and the conspiracy to conceal, that is all. and remember how mr. finger discussed those. it was the climate that they created when they existed. it was the climate that they created where smoking is glamourous, smoking is neat, smoking makes you independent, smoking is for kids. that is the climate they created when milton williams started. and what you have to decide is is there evidence that you heard in this record where if milton williams had known that it was bad in the climate like today exists would he have smoked with his intelligence? that is what you have to decide. and that is only on concealment and conspiracy to conceal. that is it. as far as this causation, there is no question the evidence that you have heard, it is not hpv, it is not poor dentition, it is not late to the doctor, it is smoking; it is the 4 million or so doses of carcinogens that mr. williams had in the smoke that was bathing his throat every time he was inhaling that dose of nicotine that was being sold to him. that is what was causing his problem, not hpv where you heard dr. goodwin talk about it. and you know how they are no longer embracing dr. bennett. dr. bennett was their expert who relied on all sorts of information and he spent countless hours pouring into these documents and he came up with the conclusion that there are risk factors that i found. what does that show you? zip. nothing. all he could tell you is there are risk factors. hpv risk factor, the man had children with different women. that is a risk factor? where are there instances of oral sex with multiple sex partners in this record that you can draw on and say there is the evidence and that is why he had hpv in his throat? you do not hear that. what you do know is he smoked and he drank and the combination is not additive, it is not additive, it is much worse than being additive, it is not 1 plus 1 equals 2, it is synergistic, 1 plus 1 equals 35. and remember the concurring cause instruction, does not matter one or the other, they both combined so that they were substantial causes with smoking. so let us move on to the germane issue here, damages. that is the issue for you to decide in this case. and in this case how do you assign the value of ms. williams' loss? and the way that mr. finger told you how to do that was, basically this is how it is: he gave you a figure, $40. mrs. williams, and she certainly did not want this, but she was given a job by rj reynolds, yes, rj reynolds that existed at all times. and she was given a job to watch her husband die. she did not want that job. she did not apply for that job. and this happened right during the time when they were middle age, 55 years old, had a lot of life ahead of him. this job did not take schooling. this job did not need a college degree, this job was full-time. there were no days off, and it was a 24-hour job. and who in their right mind would have ever applied for such a job? certainly not virginia williams, but she got it. that was the job she was dealt with. and she had another job at the same time. she was still a social worker. so now she is got two full-time jobs. and her job when she got that job when her husband got sick was to watch him die and watch him wither away and watch him lose his dignity. and that is what she saw for seven months and she still suffers to this day and she will continue to suffer because she is lost his companionship and she suffered mental anguish. and she loved that man. and she told you she loved that man. we have not walked away from the fact, you know, there were some bad times. i can count on my one hand how many bad times there were and still have fingers left if there were bad times. but for 33 years there were a lot of good times, and do not let anyone fool you into believing that there were not. and she loved that man. and she watched that man wither away. and she took care of that man and within a week after he was diagnosed he had that operation with that hole in his throat and could not talk and they communicated by notes. and a week after his diagnosis he had a peg tube put in his stomach so he could be fed because he could not eat again, and she did that. she made sure he had his nutrition until he died. and on his deathbed she was helping change his diapers because he no longer could control his body functions. and this woman did not leave his side. and this woman to this day has his ashes in an urn in her room in the house because she feels that she is with him even now. so that is love and she loved the man. this case is not about milton williams. this case is about them. it is about her. it is about everybody together. and it is about compensating this woman for her loss. and that is why when you look at it, they paid dr. bennett $400 so they could deny responsibility in this case, $400 an hour for him to come in here and say, yeah, i found some risk factors. well, we are asking pay her 10 times less than that, $40 an hour for their responsibility for her loss. and you know what, you might say, no, she deserves more than that. but figure it out, $40 an hour for the time she suffered for her mental anguish, for her pain, for her loss of companionship, and that adds up to about 5.4 million. you know what, there is more, because this woman still has life to live. and you might want to figure out how much more life she has to live and it is going to be even more than that. now let us talk about fault, because we have got damages. and the first thing about fault, and you have heard in this case is, number one, rj reynolds wanted milton williams to smoke their product. they wanted milton williams to smoke their cigarettes. we already heard the evidence about how they advertised their product on every media you can imagine. the blast of cigarette ads was there. on television, on radio, anywhere you could think of. they basically pioneered mass marketing in the industry and got their message out. they wanted milton williams to smoke their product and they wanted milton williams to smoke their product for a long, long time. you know why? the proof is in the pudding, they were advertising to kids. who else would want to see their favorite athlete on a tv commercial or on an ad? who else would want to see their favorite athlete or actor or actresses these famous people that kids could relate to in advertising? who was watching television during this time period? mostly young kids. and you saw from the ftc report, you can see it again, "the advertising was so pervasive billions of people were exposed to ads. you could not help but see ads." they wanted mr. williams to smoke for a long time and they did not want him to stop. when you go back in that jury room, look at the 1963 battelle hippo memo. 1963 they knew their product was addictive. they knew nicotine was a poison. did they tell him? no. did they take the nicotine out of the cigarette so it could not sustain addiction? no. they said nothing. they knew in the '50s cigarettes were bad. did they tell him? no. they wanted him to smoke, they wanted him to be addicted. and they were even messing around with ammonia to make the jolt even a little more. instead of maybe these people should not smoke, maybe these people should smoke in moderation, maybe we should not addict them. and you know what happened? milton williams started smoking their brand, pall mall nonfilter, one of the most popular brands at the time. maybe he got the message from their advertising because that is what he started smoking. milton williams started smoking when he was 14 years old. milton williams when he was 14 did not go and read the scientific publications from which claude teague referred. he did not go to his local library and take out those roffo studies that were in spanish and read them. no, he did not. he did not take the german studies that were available to the public and read them in german. no, he did not. when he was 14, he did not do that. there might have been a scientific consensus, but not milton williams' consensus. 14-year-old kid, cannot drive, cannot vote, cannot get the death penalty if they kill someone, you know why? because kids at 14 are not expected to make wise choices, that is why. and so milton williams at 14 did not make a wise choice. he made an ill-informed choice because the tobacco industry that existed was not telling him anything. and so milton williams did everything they asked of him. he smoked at a young age. he was addicted. he continued to smoke their same brand for years and years until he died. he was a loyal smoker. and what they are saying now is, milton, you screwed up. you trusted us. why did you believe our despicable lies? that is what they are asking now. put it all on milton because he relied on us. for being a loyal consumer, that is what he gets. when you consider the evidence, ladies and gentlemen, there is no question we proved this case by our burden. and all we ask now is that you compensate virginia williams for the loss of her husband. thank you.